


















































April 1, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 611 
 April 1, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people all throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, many of 
them are from Whitewood and of course Esterhazy, but many 
also from Regina itself. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
rise today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people have signed from all throughout southern 
Saskatchewan plus the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And once again I 
rise today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina. They’re from Whitewood. They’re from Grenfell 
and Balgonie, from Stockholm, from Lebret, from Radville, 
from Wolseley. They’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present names of individuals throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Arcola and Carlyle, but also Regina, Manor, 
Kisbey, and a few other communities. I so present. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well, 
presenting petitions on behalf of concerned citizens about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this are throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, particularly the southern part of the province and 
the city of Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today too to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by a number of people in 
Regina, and also I notice that Liberty is on this list as well. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Hodgeville, Morse, Success, Gull Lake, Vanguard, and a 
number of them from Swift Current. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
In addition, the petitions for private Bills have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of the St. Paul’s Hospital, Grey Nuns of Saskatoon 
praying for an Act to amend and consolidate their active 
incorporation; 
 
Of the Sisters of Charity, Grey Nuns in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend and consolidate 
its active incorporation; 
 
Of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
in the province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to  



612  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

amend its active incorporation; and 
 
Of Luther College in the province of Saskatchewan 
praying for an Act to amend the active incorporation. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Public Service Commission 
regarding employees and positions cut in the recent 
budget: (1) what is the total number of jobs and/or 
positions eliminated in the recently delivered provincial 
budget; (2) please provide a breakdown of the number of 
jobs lost by branch, department, or arm of government; (3) 
please provide a breakdown of jobs by department and 
community as well as the total payroll lost per community 
as a result of these eliminations; and (4) what percentage 
of total jobs in each community does the elimination of 
these positions represent? 
 

Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure here today to introduce to you and to all members of 
the House, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Yogi 
Huyghebaert. Yogi ran as the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
candidate in Wood River constituency in the last election. 
 
Among other things Yogi has experienced, he was the squadron 
leader of the very famous Snow Birds for an unprecedented two 
tours of duty, Mr. Speaker. He is retired now but he’s so busy, 
he told me a few minutes ago, that he was going to have to go 
back to work so he could get weekends off. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 
welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Leader of the Third Party in welcoming Yogi to the 
legislature here today. It’s good to see him. I didn’t recognize 
him up there in the gallery at first, but also say hello to all of 
Yogi’s family who campaigned so hard for me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Regional Science Fairs 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I’d like to congratulate all the budding young scientists across 
Saskatchewan for their participation in regional science fairs. 
 
Eleven science fairs will be held across Saskatchewan this  

spring. Foam Lake Composite School hosted the Parkland 
regional competition on Saturday. This competition sparked a 
tremendous amount of interest on behalf of the students in the 
Parkland area. This was demonstrated by the high quality of 
projects submitted. All the students who were involved seemed 
to be keen and extremely enthusiastic about their entries. 
 
It was my pleasure to present the plaques and certificates to the 
overall winner, Robin Blazeiko from Foam Lake, for his project 
on well water oxidization. 
 
My compliments to the chairperson, Graham Farrell, and the 
co-chairperson, Nevin Halyk, and all the staff and students at 
Foam Lake for their wonderful hospitality. I would also like to 
congratulate SaskEnergy and the executive of the Saskatchewan 
association of science fairs for encouraging widespread 
involvement in schools across the province. 
 
It is projects like these that give valuable incentive in 
developing the imagination and skills of Saskatchewan 
students. I encourage the Department of Education to continue 
funding for this worthwhile competition. Congratulations to all 
participants, and especially those who were declared winners in 
the various categories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan Awards 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
speak about winners today. 
 
Many of the new jobs that are being created in Saskatchewan 
come from tourism. And the Prince Albert region is doing its 
part to help create employment in this industry. 
 
I’m pleased to report that recently at the seventh annual 
Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan awards, awards 
were presented to the Prince Albert region, and the Prince 
Albert region was well represented. 
 
My compliments to the Prince Albert Credit Union who won 
the Most-For-Host award which is given to a business which 
has done the most to train staff to provide service through the 
TISASK (Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan) 
training program. 
 
My compliments also go to the first nations and Metis people, 
to the Indian Friendship Centre, who won the Metis and first 
nations people’s culture award. 
 
I also want to congratulate other Saskatchewan winners as well. 
Rookie of the Year was picked up by Rose Bush Acres Heritage 
Co-op in Watson. The individual Hospitality Excellence award 
went to Dea Roland of the Country Inn & Suites in Saskatoon. 
The TISASK President’s Award of Merit was won by Beatrice 
Magee of Gull Lake. She operates a country vacation farm and 
was recognized for dedication to promoting tourism. 
 
Other winners include SaskTel, Museums Association of 
Saskatchewan, Western Development Museum, Lakeside  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

Leisure Farm Bed and Breakfast in Meota, Charlie Baker of 
North Battleford, and the media award was picked up by 980 
CKRM and MX 92.1 in Regina. 
 
The Speaker:  I’m sorry, the member’s time is expired. 
 

Cypress Hills Timber Wolves 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today for two reasons. Firstly as a proud father of a 
hard-playing novice hockey player, no. 22; and secondly to 
congratulate the team he plays for  that being the Cypress 
Hills Timber Wolves. A few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, these 
boys played a hockey tournament in Regina, and of course, they 
handedly won the tournament. 
 
From there they went on to Saskatoon where they also played in 
a tough tournament but handedly won every game and took the 
tournament there also. But, Mr. Speaker, this past weekend they 
were in Calgary and played teams from Lethbridge and 
Edmonton, many from Calgary, and I think one or two B.C. 
(British Columbia) teams but they handedly won the Calgary 
tournament also. 
 
This team of boys from small towns in the south-west  
Consul, Eastend, Shaunavon, Kincaid  this team has yet to 
lose a game in their first season. And I would ask that . . . well I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it really shows when given an opportunity, 
what people in rural Saskatchewan can really put together. And 
I would ask that the Assembly congratulate these boys today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Newspaper Inquiry 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I note with interest that in 
response to a request by John Solomon, the Member of 
Parliament for Regina-Lumsden, the House of Commons 
Industry Committee will conduct an inquiry into the recent 
take-over of Saskatchewan’s biggest daily newspapers by media 
giant Hollinger Inc. 
 
Although a great deal of attention has been paid to the sad saga 
of 25 per cent job loss at the Regina Leader-Post and the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix following the take-over, it is the issue 
of corporate concentration in a key and vital industry that is 
potentially the most troubling for Saskatchewan people. This is 
an industry where, for the good of democracy, many voices 
must be heard and not as a chorus singing the same song. 
 
Mr. Solomon and the Commons Industry Committee are to be 
commended for their initiative which I am sure has the support 
of all members of this Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Business in Elbow 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today too, I would 
like to recognize and congratulate a new business that has 
opened in the village of Elbow in the constituency of Arm  

River. Bill Buckton, an Elbow area resident, has gone into the 
bussing business. He presently owns one bus and is licensed to 
operate it within Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, he is also 
applying for a licence that would permit him to travel out of this 
province as well. 
 
Mr. Buckton reports that since November of 1995 when he 
began chartering his bus he’s been kept extremely busy with 
sports trips for skiers and hockey teams. Having a number of 
the local hockey teams advance into the provincial play-offs 
certainly has been a boon to his new enterprise. Mr. Speaker, 
this is just another example of how that entrepreneurial spirit of 
Saskatchewan can flourish when it is free from government 
interference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PAMI Wins Defence Contract 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Minister of 
Economic Development announced that PAMI, the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute in Humboldt, won a defence 
contract from the federal government. The contract will involve 
testing and evaluation of replacement components for armoured 
personnel carriers. These small, tank-like vehicles which 
provide safe transportation for Canadian troops during 
peace-keeping missions require replacements of some parts. For 
some time we have been aware and proud of the work of PAMI 
in evaluating agricultural machinery. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this contract demonstrates the ability of 
PAMI to diversify. It provides stability for PAMI workers. It 
will make use of the former Dana Radar Base, and it is one 
more example of a Saskatchewan operation diversifying to fit 
the needs of today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Residents to Attend Olympic Games 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be very hard 
for me to be prouder than I am this day. Very few people get to 
go to the Olympics. The best of the best only. In Regina 
Coronation Park we have not one of the best of the best, but 
two, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today’s news is joyously announcing the dedicated 
commitment to her sport has earned Andrea Schwartz a chance 
to compete in Atlanta on Canada’s swim team. This news is 
hard on the heels of Andrea Schwartz’s recent win as the 
SaskSport Female Athlete of the Year. Well deserved and well 
done, Andrea Schwartz. 
 
The other best of the best, Mr. Speaker, from Regina 
Coronation Park constituency, is Bree Burgess. She’s been 
chosen to attend the Olympic Youth Camp in Atlanta during the 
’96 Summer Olympics. Bree Burgess is the only Saskatchewan 
resident chosen by the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic 
Association and the Canadian Olympic Association. I join 
Bree’s parents, Lori and Spence Burgess, in simply being happy 
and very proud for Bree, the best of the best. 



614  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World’s Largest Bunnock 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, because we are not allowed to 
bring exhibits into the Assembly, I’m going to try to describe it, 
and it is not April foolery. Picture if you will, a horse ankle 
enlarged 98 times, then at the base of this 32 foot high 
structure, imagine a tourist booth promoting information about 
our rural districts and our province. 
 
I have just described the world’s largest bunnock, situated in 
the town of Macklin at the junction of Highways 33 and 14. 
Bunnock means bone in Russian. Bunnock is a game played 
with 52 bones representing soldiers, guards, and throwers. 
 
The statue of the bunnock reminds townspeople and tourists 
alike that Macklin hosts the world championship bunnock 
tournament every August  a tournament that last year 
attracted 176 teams, drew approximately 2,500 people to 
Macklin, and generated approximately a quarter of million 
dollars in economic activity during one weekend. 
 
There are many challenges to this game. On August 2 to 4, all 
are invited to witness first-hand, skills never before imagined 
by the ordinary sports fan. Just one hint of the special nature of 
the game of bunnock — originally the game was a favourite 
pastime at the second day of a wedding. All members are 
welcome to see the appropriateness of this game for the day 
after. Or better yet, enter a team and enjoy the weekend 
festivities. It’s fun for everyone. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
questioned the Minister of Labour in this House on March 26 
about a recent tender put out by SaskTel. I pointed out that the 
lowest bid using union labour is $60,000 or 20 per cent higher 
than the lowest bid from Alliance Energy Ltd. which uses 
non-union labour. 
 
The minister responded by stating, and I quote: sometimes bids 
put in “are almost vexatious in nature.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have received a copy of a letter that the president 
of Alliance Energy addressed to the minister, and I would like 
to send copies to every member of the cabinet. Mr. Speaker, 
this letter assures the minister and his government that his 
company tender was, and I quote: “prepared in good faith and 
with a willingness for our firm to do the work.” 
 
Will the minister explain why he has such an obvious prejudice 
against firms using non-union labour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to thank the member for his 
question. I appreciate that he’s sending around an explanation 
note. I would point out that the particular bid and the contractor 
which the member refers to was not qualified under the terms of 
the bid that was put out, or the tender that was put out. The bid 
came back in, did not meet the qualifications of the request for 
the bids, and therefore was not taken in as part of the 
competition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The bid was fully 
compliant with bid bonding and all the rest of the normal 
practices. The only thing lacking was the union-only preference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister indicated in Thursday’s 
budget that Crown corporations and government agencies will 
invest over $630 million this year on capital projects. Given the 
fact that the example I just highlighted showed union 
preference will result in a 20 per cent increase in costs, will the 
minister explain how many tax dollars will be unnecessarily 
wasted if his government continues to use union preference as 
the rule instead of fair and open tendering? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I point out to the 
hon. member that this government is not in the practice of 
wasting taxpayers’ dollars. In terms of safeguarding the public 
purse, this administration and the administration in the ‘70s 
before it have the soundest record in financial management of 
any province in Canada or any political party or any 
government in Canada. 
 
I question the hon. member’s figures when he starts talking 
about hundreds of millions of dollars involved in the bidding 
process. I point out again to the hon. member that earlier this 
session he pointed out that we have wasted some hundred 
million dollars or more, when in fact the reality is all of the 
projects that fell over the past construction season under the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement only amounted to 
about $15 million in total. 
 
So I’d tell the member, quit bandying figures about that don’t 
have any basis to them. Get on with the job like we’re doing  
preparing Saskatchewan for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the 630 million comes from 
the budget address, page 7, if you’d care to check it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alliance Energy is 100 per cent Saskatchewan 
owned. Its employees are all Saskatchewan residents, pay 
Saskatchewan taxes, and feel they should be given the 
opportunity to work on government projects if they had the 
lowest qualified bid. Alliance Energy president, Paul McLellan, 
writes and I quote: 
 

It is with this in mind that we tendered this project, and not to 
be an annoyance as you inferred. I feel that you owe our firm 
an apology, given your comments. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

Will the minister stand and apologize in this House today for 
his comments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I accept that 
the member opposite gets the figure from the budget. I think 
people should be happy that there’s that much construction 
going on within Saskatchewan this year, plus all the private 
sector work that’s going to be going on. 
 
We should all be proud, we should all be positive about that. 
What the member has to do, Mr. Speaker, is sit down and do his 
homework because not all those projects fall under the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement. The projects that fall under 
the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement is a process that 
is working well. We want to look at it from time to time. We 
believe it will work well. And certainly a contracting firm like 
the one he mentions in the private sector that’s non-unionized 
has lots of opportunities to do work not only for government, 
but also the private sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance Depots 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government may have paid the 
people of rural Saskatchewan the ultimate insult on budget day 
by referring to the closure of highway maintenance depots and 
putting the safety of rural people at risk, as “streamlining”. In 
total, 26 of these depots will close, including Craik, which is in 
the constituency I represent, of Arm River. It will leave vast 
stretches of highway at the mercy of the weather. 
 
Will the Minister of Highways, and in his absence, the Premier, 
explain why he and his government have chosen economics 
over the safety and well-being of the people of rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member is sadly 
mistaken when he . . . in his interpretation of what’s happening 
in Highways in this budget. What is happening is there are huge 
efficiencies that are being recommended by our officials in the 
department. That is, by better use of equipment, better use of 
buildings; that the savings can be used to do what Highways 
should be doing, that is building roads and putting pavement 
down. 
 
So I want to assure the member and the people of Saskatchewan 
that any savings and efficiencies that occur in the Department 
of Highways as a result of the changes in the budget will remain 
in Highways to build roads and put pavement down, which I 
think is the role of the Department of Highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Highways and members of the NDP cabinet obviously have  

never driven in the rural areas during a severe storm like many 
parts of Saskatchewan are encountering today. If they had, 
maybe they would be understanding why there’s such a big 
concern among the families in our villages and towns, including 
the farmers. And I guess in the NDP cabinet they don’t include 
the Premier because we all know that he travels in a bubble. 
 
This government has allowed our rural roads to deteriorate to a 
point where many can easily be classified as hazardous. Now 
this same government is closing down highway maintenance 
depots which will make roads impassable in severe winter 
conditions. 
 
Will the minister explain what study has been done to show that 
closures of these depots will not threaten the safety of our rural 
residents, and will he table a copy of that study today in the 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that if he had the time this afternoon, he 
might want to get a hold of his federal counterparts who have 
taken hundreds of millions of dollars out of the transportation 
system of this province by cancelling and taking away money 
through the Crow benefit. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that if he were not 
being sanctimonious today in his own self-righteous way of 
saying spend more money but cut taxes — and we hear every 
day the member from Wood River saying spend more in health, 
and other members saying cut taxes. And what we know is that 
that is hypocrisy at the height — we know that if you were in 
government, what you would do; very similar to what’s 
happened in Ottawa. You’d be cutting health care, you’d be 
cutting education, and you’d be running a deficit all at the same 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it looks 
like the on again, off again talk of municipal amalgamations is 
back on again. At the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention the Premier told delegates, I 
don’t know where this notion of amalgamation got going; 
perhaps it was something that I accidentally said. Well you 
remember, Mr. Premier, their reaction to that comment. 
 
Well the Minister of Finance accidentally said it again on Friday 
just after she accidentally cut the funding to municipalities by 
25 per cent. My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, this is 
no accident. Isn’t this funding a deliberate attempt to force 
municipal amalgamations? Haven’t you already gone back on 
your word to the SARM convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 
question is simply no, we have not gone back on our word. The 
funding for the ‘96-97 budget remains as promised in last 
year’s budget of 1995. In the current year, we’ll be working  



616  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

with the local governments, with the municipal round table, to 
examine efficiencies and ways and means in which to eliminate 
overlap and duplication. We want to do it in a consultative 
mechanism, consultative basis, and a partnership basis with our 
local governments. Many — most of them — recognize the 
need to do this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
Saturday’s newspaper we see the Finance minister lecturing 
municipalities on how they have to become more efficient and 
change. 
 
Madam Minister, municipalities are already the most efficient 
form of government  they have to be after the amount that 
you’ve offloaded to them in recent years. Smaller municipalities 
are already cooperating with one another, and in the case of 
cities, as Doug Archer points out, the mayor of Regina: who is 
Regina going to amalgamate with? There simply isn’t room to 
absorb another 25 per cent cut here, Madam Minister. That’s 
going to mean tax increases and it’s going to make your no new 
taxes look like a bad April Fool’s joke. 
 
Madam Minister, where do you get off lecturing municipalities 
about cutting administrative costs after you and your 
government just recently expanded cabinet and have given each 
one of your MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) a pay 
increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I thank the member opposite for the 
question. What I would say to the member opposite is this is 
nothing unusual. Why do you not ask your Tory counterparts in 
Alberta why they virtually eliminated funding for municipalities 
over a certain size? Wait to see what your counterparts in 
Ontario do to municipal funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was pretty simple. We went to Saskatchewan 
people and we said, how do we handle the federal cuts to 
health, education, and social programs. They said to us, protect 
our health, education, and social programs from the federal cuts 
and lessen funding to other areas. And they also said that they 
anticipated there was need for change at the provincial level 
where we’ve saved $50 million in administrative cuts. And they 
also said they wanted to see some change at municipal level. So 
we will work with municipalities to make the changes required 
to take this province into the next century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Union Job Action 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
Madam Minister, could you provide us with an update on the 
job action by SaskTel employees which we understand were in 
a position to go on strike as of last Saturday, and have been 
talking about things like working-to-rule and job actions and  

those things preluding possibility a complete strike. 
 
What are you doing to ensure that the public safety is not 
compromised through the disruption of telephone services. 
What steps are you taking to deal with the current job action? 
And what steps are you taking to prepare the people of 
Saskatchewan for the possibility of a full-scale strike which 
might affect things like 911, fire, and ambulance services in our 
province, especially with this spring storm that’s blowing 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for 
his question, Mr. Speaker, and provide him with the 
information he’s requested. 
 
It is true that last week SaskTel employees gave their required 
48-hour strike notice. They were in a strike position as of 5 
o’clock on Saturday afternoon. The management at SaskTel 
have been having discussions with the union that represents the 
employees. We feel that things are proceeding well. The best 
route to resolve this is to be back at the negotiating table. There 
are talks that are going on at the present time. 
 
We feel that a full-scale strike can well be averted and there are 
contingency plans in place by the management of SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a supplemental for 
the minister. Minister, it’s obvious from your answer that what 
you’re saying is you’re doing absolutely nothing. If you had any 
plan, you’d be outlining it for us. 
 
Now we agree with things like SaskTel should be having the 
opportunity to negotiate for their salaries and so forth and so 
on, and that you have to protect the taxpayers from increased 
costs and things like that, like wages and pensions. And we 
agree that you have to take some time to talk about these things. 
But you don’t have to do them at the expense and the peril of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it seems to me that it’s pretty hard for you to be telling 
unionized employees that you can’t afford wage increases when 
you and every one of your NDP MLAs have just taken a $4,400 
pay increase for yourselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, isn’t this really a double standard? Doesn’t 
this compromise your bargaining position? How can you go to a 
bargaining table and bargain in good faith and tell people they 
should take less while you’ve taken so much more? 
 
And if you’re going to be telling SaskTel employees that you 
can’t afford pay hike increases, which is obviously why you’ve 
got a strike, shouldn’t you be setting the example first of all . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The member has had an extremely 
long preamble and I’ll ask him to just put his question directly. 
Order. I’ll ask . . . order. I’ll just ask the member to put his 
question directly now. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I did present my  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

question which was, very simply: don’t you think you ought to 
set the example by showing that you’re going to repay your pay 
increase so that you can bargain in good faith? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 
haven’t noticed, this government wants to take a very proactive 
approach in resolving management-labour disputes within the 
province. The last thing anyone wants to see  the public, the 
employees, the corporation itself  the last thing anyone wants 
to see is a strike situation. We try and be proactive. We try and 
provide mediation, conciliation to get the parties back together 
at the negotiating table. And that’s the best place to resolve 
disputes. 
 
The disputes, I predict, will be resolved. There is nothing that 
we are going to have happening that will put Saskatchewan 
people at peril either physically or financially. We’re managing 
the situation. SaskTel and the union are discussing the situation 
with each other. 
 
We feel the situation is well in hand, and I would point out to 
the member that the best place to negotiate is not on the floor of 
the legislature; it’s to leave it to the parties involved, in this 
case, the CEP (Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 
Union) local that represents SaskTel employees and the 
management of SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Re-engineering Project 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions also have to do with SaskTel. In this month’s edition 
of the Briarpatch, employees say recent problems at SaskTel 
have been caused by what they call the greenhouse approach. 
 
In other words, employees were forced to work in a stressful, 
segregated condition sanctioned by Symmetrix’s $2 million 
re-engineering program. And it’s not just the left-leaning 
Briarpatch magazine that listed these concerns. The Western 
Report published a similar article in late February, also talking 
about the greenhouse approach. 
 
Will the minister confirm that the SaskTel workers are not 
necessarily striking over wages and benefits, but because the 
workplace atmosphere at SaskTel is completely intolerable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I point out to the member opposite 
in response to his question that there are a great deal of 
workplaces today that are stressful for the employees who work 
within them, not the least of which are issues of deregulation, 
the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Free Trade 
Agreement. 
 
In fact the NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) . . . 
the Prime Minister of the country, who represents the party 
opposite, the Liberal Party of Canada, said that, during the 
election campaign, he’d tear up the agreement. Right after the 
election, what did he do? He signed the agreement. So don’t 
look to us for causing stress within the workplace. 
 

As I mentioned to the questioner in the previous question, is 
that we are trying to be proactive to reduce stress in the 
workplace, to have greater harmony through bringing the parties 
together and having a better understanding. If anyone’s done a 
great deal to cause stress within the workplace, it’s the cousins 
of the members opposite in Ottawa who have foisted on places 
like Saskatchewan and other provinces a whole new set of rules 
that are causing problems in the workplace. We’re trying to 
resolve those problems in the interests of Saskatchewan people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I agree with the minister 
opposite, but most cases upper management doesn’t cause the 
stress as we are seeing in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through an access of information request, we have 
learned that SaskTel paid professional consultants $164,493 last 
year alone to conduct focus groups  over $160,000 of a 
glorified public opinion poll. Obviously the government didn’t 
trust the $2 million consultants, so they even wasted more 
taxpayers’ money on these focus groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with SaskTel now having to do its part in 
balancing the provincial budget, why did the government have 
to spend over 160,000 on focus groups when they’d already 
spent $2 million on a destructive re-engineering process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I’d like to thank the hon. member 
for his question. I’d like to provide the information as best I 
can. 
 
This is a decision of management, the SaskTel board. There are 
mechanisms set up to try and find the best ways of dealing with 
the situation that the Crown corporations find themselves in 
today. As I say, many of the situations are far beyond our 
control because of decisions made at the federal level with 
deregulation, the Free Trade Agreement, that are in effect, and 
we have to deal with those. 
 
But we’re not going to sit back and allow those things to hold 
us down, those initiatives that have been taken by other levels 
of government. What we’re doing is we’re preparing for the 
future to deal with times that can put people and companies 
under a great deal of stress. We feel we’re managing it well. We 
feel that the SaskTel board is competent. We feel that SaskTel 
management is competent. We feel the SaskTel employees are 
competent. We’re going to work this through together to 
prepare for the next century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, when the Finance minister 
delivered her government’s fifth budget last Thursday . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



618  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

Mr. Aldridge:  She boasted that there were no new tax 
increases. Of course this myth was quickly proven wrong by 
municipal leaders from throughout the province. The minister 
also boasted about the fact that last year’s trial reduction of the 
aviation fuel tax resulted in an 80 per cent increase in business 
for Saskatchewan aviation fuel dealers as well as more jobs. 
This one case clearly demonstrates how lifting the stifling 
blanket of taxation can have economic benefits for all involved. 
 
Will the minister explain when she and her government plan to 
bring forward a plan that will spell out additional business and 
personal tax relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I thank the member opposite for the 
question, and if people in Saskatchewan expected a budget that 
would bring tax relief, they got one. The Star-Phoenix believes 
so; in their editorial they say:  
 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are certainly getting what they asked 
for from their provincial government. They got a modest tax 
break; their social programs were left intact; and the 
government has cut its overall spending. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to draw people’s attention to is 
exactly what’s going on here with these members opposite. This 
one here is going to dramatically cut taxes. Don’t worry about 
that. This one here is going to dramatically increase funding for 
health beyond what we’ve done. This one over there is going to 
dramatically increase funding for education. Now when it’s the 
Liberal Party, one possibility is they haven’t spoken to each 
other yet, so they don’t know that they’re contradicting each 
other. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the more realistic answer is these people 
would take us back to the Devine era  cut taxes, spend more 
money, and run deficits. We balanced the budget; we’ll 
continue to balance the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, when asked to comment Friday 
on the fact that a family of four in Saskatchewan earning 
$50,000 a year is paying the highest personal income tax in 
Canada, do you know how the minister responded? She pointed 
to a budget table indicating that a person earning $75,000 pays 
the third highest amount of taxes in the country. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this might be April Fool’s Day, but I can 
assure the minister the average person in this province does not 
make an annual salary of $75,000. Will the Minister of Finance 
come down to earth and make a commitment to tax relief for 
the average Saskatchewan resident? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, what the budget tables 
show, and what the Saskatoon paper had in a headline: 
Saskatoon, the cheapest place in Canada to live  whether you 
make 25,000, 50,000, or whatever. 

But again, the members opposite don’t have anybody to blame 
now for their problems. They can’t blame the member from 
Greystone for their problems. They’ve got to get their act 
together. If this one wants tax cuts and this one wants massive 
spending increases, tell the people of the province it also means 
deficits. 
 
This government is committed to protecting our social 
programs; to tax relief as we can afford it; and to continuing to 
balance the budget and pay down the debt of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, what the government opposite 
forgets is that because they’ve stifled economic activity in this 
province, they’ve driven down the real estate values; hence 
Saskatoon is a cheap place to live. That’s the one and only 
reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister stated in delivering the 
budget last Thursday that, and I quote: “One of the best ways to 
create consumer confidence is to ease the tax burden”. 
 
If the minister truly believes this is the case, and her reduction 
in the aviation fuel tax proves this theory, why will she not 
provide something more than a promise of another study? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, as I say, when it’s a Liberal question, you’ve got to 
start by correcting the facts. First of all, Nesbitt Burns in their 
commentary on our budget — and I had a conference call with 
them this morning as well — says economic growth in 
Saskatchewan for 1996: 2.6 per cent, well above the Canadian 
average. 
 
I would also say to the members opposite that in this budget 
there was, as there has been in every one of our budgets since 
1991, targeted tax changes to promote jobs. One in this budget 
affected truckers; the truckers association saying this is a good 
win for us, we’re pleased the government understood our 
situation. It will be a sustainable opportunity for companies that 
service the trucking industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to targeted tax 
reductions. But we’re also committed to preserving our social 
programs and balancing the budget. What the members 
opposite have to do is face the fact they have contradictions  
massive tax cuts, massive new spending. The only way to 
square it is deficits. We will continue to balance the budget and 
protect our social programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 
great deal of pleasure that I’m able to rise today on behalf of the  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

minister responsible for SaskEnergy to bring news to the House 
about SaskEnergy’s 1996 rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know, SaskEnergy utilized the 45-day 
public notification and review process for their 1996 rate 
proposal. That process included four public meetings and a 
1-800 toll free line to gather customer input on the rate 
proposal. 
 
I’m pleased today to announce that the government has 
approved SaskEnergy’s rate proposal  a proposal that will 
decrease and realign natural gas rates for all utility customers. 
The rate adjustment, which is effective retroactive to January 1, 
1996, is mainly due to the $13 million in lower natural gas costs 
to SaskEnergy for 1996. Customers will be credited with the 
gas cost savings for January, February, and March, on their 
April natural gas bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this adjustment will cut the average annual natural 
gas bill to homes and farms by 2.4 per cent or 15 to $23 
depending on their natural gas consumption. The decreases to 
homes and farms include both a reduction in charges for natural 
gas and a 40-cent increase in the basic monthly charge. 
 
This rate adjustment also includes a decrease of 7.7 per cent for 
small commercial customers. Those customers, Mr. Speaker, 
include, among others, restaurants, convenience stores, and 
churches. 
 
I’m also pleased to announce a decrease of 13.7 per cent to 
large commercial customers. Those customers, Mr. Speaker, 
include, among others, hospitals, nursing homes, and schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also announcing a decrease of 16 per cent 
to small industrial customers, including small manufacturing 
firms, large office buildings, and hotels. 
 
This is the second year in a row that SaskEnergy has reduced its 
rates. Mr. Speaker, the rates for all customer classes have be 
realigned to move their prices more in line with the actual cost 
of providing the services to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I noted previously, this decrease is mainly due 
to lower gas costs to SaskEnergy. The corporation buys gas 
from independent producers and the natural gas costs are the 
largest component of SaskEnergy’s total annual costs. 
 
As members of this House will know, natural gas is one of the 
commodities that experience the greatest price fluctuations on 
the market, resulting in rapid price increases or decreases. 
SaskEnergy’s rate-setting process therefore is becoming 
increasingly market responsive with price changes being passed 
on to the customers through rate adjustments. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s natural gas rates 
remain competitive with the other provinces in Canada, and I 
am confident that SaskEnergy’s rates will further encourage 
investment in Saskatchewan and continue to enhance our 
competitiveness. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
begin by thanking the minister for sending the advance copy of 
the ministerial statement well in advance, and I wish other 
ministers would do the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess whenever we have good news and there’s 
cuts in any of the utilities, we all have to join in in 
congratulating whoever and for whatever the reason the cuts 
show up. I guess today there would be a few different groups 
that would deserve some of the thanks. 
 
And that would be the official opposition, to begin with, for the 
months of continued pressure, of continued pressure, Mr. 
Speaker. I recall raising this very issue in the House on different 
occasions, regarding other jurisdictions throughout Canada that 
in fact had made this same move or similar move months ago. 
And it was in fact the Saskatchewan utility that held off for 
some time, and perhaps they shouldn’t have. But nonetheless, 
we do appreciate whatever cuts there can be for the consumers 
of the province. 
 
And we wait with bated breath for the day when SaskPower, 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), SaskTel, STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company), and other utilities 
and corporations will follow suit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In our party we 
have said, as you well know, that we will give credit where 
credit is due and try to straighten things out where they need 
change. 
 
So to give credit where credit is due, I wouldn’t really want to 
look at the official opposition nor would I want to look at the 
government. I would rather look at the well-head price of gas, 
which has gone down. And we’re glad that the system is built in 
such a way that it can, at some time, perhaps a long time, at 
least after a long while, get back to the consumers. 
 
Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, the minister alludes to the 
fact that these reductions might increase for us the potential to 
get new industry. Well in the same breath he said these rates 
vary up and down. He’s glad that now they’ve gone down he 
can pass the saving on. The reality is though that the well-head 
price of gas could go back up very quickly and he will have to 
raise it. So there is nothing in this process that will encourage 
anybody in industry to come to Saskatchewan because this is 
not the problem with our province. 
 
Most certainly we think that the minister has done the right 
thing, to reduce this cost at this time. However, we would 
remind the government that if they had placed into place a 
utility rate review commission, such as we had recommended 
last year and introduced legislation on, then in fact we would 
now have this saving already passed on to the people two 
months ago. 
 
And we might also point out that while we see a 2.4 per cent 
decrease for farmers, and we’re happy about that, there’s also 
then tied a 40-cent increase, so we’re not really sure what the 
bottom line is here. But we do see, of course, that the cost of 
power has gone up by an average of $10 per bill for farmers,  



620  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

which more than ate up any saving in the gas. 
 
And of course then again, I have people phoning me and telling 
me that their natural gas bills, because we’ve had such a 
stressful, cold winter, have sky-rocketed. So the small decrease 
has really not helped very many people because we’ve had to 
burn so much gas just to stay warm. 
 
I’d also like to remind the minister that in this program he has a 
unique opportunity to pass on the opportunity for people in 
areas to use gas that don’t, at the present time, have it. And yet 
they’ve totally ignored the opportunity to put gas into those 
places that haven’t got it. I refer to Frontier, Saskatchewan, 
where a large groups of farmers would like to have natural gas 
delivered to their farms. And the minister has totally ignored 
those people and their request to have those lines put in at a 
reasonable cost, so that they too can become consumers and to 
help to make this process work. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we would remind the minister that the people 
of Saskatchewan need attention. We would remind the minister 
that the well-head costs should be something that are reflected 
in our prices. And we would congratulate him for reflecting 
those things that have gone down, but we encourage him to do a 
better job of being more reflective of the needs of the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the  

Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that first reading of a Bill respecting the 
Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for  
Public Employees 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that first 
reading of a Bill respecting Pensions for Public Employees be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be  

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you. I rise to table question 
no. 28. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 28 is tabled. 
 
The answer to question 29 is converted to motions for return 
(debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to join in the budget debate here this afternoon and talk 
about the events that have unfolded with respect to the budget 
and people’s thoughts on it. 
 
Saskatchewan people have sacrificed a lot to balance the budget 
in Saskatchewan. We all recognize that. They’ve had to bear the 
brunt of numerous tax increases  sales taxes, fuel taxes, 
income taxes, deficit surtax fees, and the like. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the budget is balanced and we have to and we 
do give credit, as the member from Cypress said, we do give 
credit where credit is due. It is balanced and we certainly agree 
with balancing budget. We don’t agree with how it has been 
done, but the fact that it is done I think is important. 
 
People in Saskatchewan now, however, pay much more for 
power, for telephones, for natural gas, for vehicle insurance  
way more than they did a few short years ago. The bottom line, 
Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan people are paying more for 
everything and receiving less in programs and services than 
ever before. 
 
The average Saskatchewan family of four is paying 5,300 more 
dollars today in government taxes, utilities, and fees than they 
were four short years ago — $5,300 more for a family of four in 
this province. That’s a pretty hefty increase, Mr. Speaker. And 
it has hurt. It has hurt the people of this province. 
 
But in the end, Saskatchewan families were willing to sacrifice 
now to secure their future and the future of their children later. 
That is why Saskatchewan families deserve a big pat on the 
back  because they have balanced the budget; they have paid 
the price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

Mr. Boyd:  They also deserve something else from this 
government that they refuse to give them, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s a reward for their efforts. 
 
Taxpayers in this province have been promised many rewards 
from the NDP members across the way. They’ve been promised 
tax relief since the NDP were in opposition, and there has been 
no tax relief. Instead, there has been tax increase after tax 
increase heaped on families that cannot afford it any longer. 
 
This budget states that the NDP are going to review 
Saskatchewan’s tax system to assess its fairness and 
effectiveness, and that the government will report its findings 
back next year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s disappointing that the government wants 
to review and review and review again, and not take any action 
on tax relief for Saskatchewan families. After all, the NDP 
government has been in power now for about five years. 
Wouldn’t you think that a tax system review should be 
completed by now? Once again the bottom line is that tax relief 
is desperately needed and another review is simply nothing 
more than an excuse for the government to put it off for another 
year. 
 
Taxpayers have been promised by the members opposite that 
any cuts to government spending would come at the top. That’s 
what the Premier said in his $30,000 televised infomercial. 
That’s pretty hard to see that when the Premier and all of his 
NDP colleagues refuse to forgo a $4,400 windfall this year, and 
the increase was never intended to be paid to them. An increase, 
Mr. Speaker, that is unjustifiable and they know it. 
 
Instead of doing the right thing and not accepting the money, all 
42 government MLAs are taking the money, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re running with it. But as the saying goes, you can run but 
you can’t hide. And I assure you members opposite, that when 
the voters of Saskatchewan get an opportunity to mark an X 
once again, we will be reminding them of it every single 
opportunity we can. 
 
They will remember, Mr. Speaker. I think instead of playing 
fast and loose with the numbers as the Premier has tried to do 
by saying it only amounts to about a 600 or an $800 increase 
instead of 4,400, they’re really simply standing in front of 
television cameras and spouting lame excuses why the NDP 
need the money, their members. I suggest government members 
take a close look at what they’re doing. 
 
(1430) 
 
They’d better, Mr. Speaker, because I think Saskatchewan 
taxpayers are. It’s pretty hard for the average working person 
out there to understand how the same MLAs who are saying 
sorry, we have to cut jobs in this province, programs, and 
services, and by the way there’s no tax relief in sight, at the 
same time all of those NDPs are slipping the money into their 
own pockets. People are cynical, Mr. Speaker, and they have 
every right to be. 
 
One individual wrote a letter to the editor in the March 28  

edition of the Star-Phoenix. And, Mr. Speaker, there was very 
harsh words. And I want to quote from the letter that was 
printed in the paper. The quote is the following: 
 

With regard to the NDP MLAs’ recent theft of public 
money, I suggest that every taxpayer in this province hold 
back $4,300 of provincial tax and nonchalantly explain 
that, because it is a “bump” and “one-time thing,” it 
somehow doesn’t matter. 
 

The statement pretty well sums it up. The NDP have begun to 
think that the rules are different for their MLAs than they are 
for taxpayers. And that is a dangerous thing. That’s the slippery 
slope to losing the next election, I would suggest to you people. 
They have completely lost touch with the average person out 
there and the average taxpayer in this province. 
 
You see taxpayers actually were willing to believe you, Mr. 
Premier, when you promised cuts would start from the top. 
Everyone, I think, was supportive of that. Everyone believed 
that you were going to actually do that. Unfortunately the 
Premier knew all along that he was dangling a carrot in front of 
the public in order to sell his upcoming budget. Taxpayers 
didn’t expect what the Premier meant when he said that tax cuts 
would start below his caucus and proceed down from there. 
 
The Premier almost promised to cut the size of his cabinet 
during his televised address a month or so ago. A few days 
later, when questioned by reporters, he had no idea when those 
cuts would take place. He threw out 12 months or 18 months or 
24 months. He threw out so many numbers, Mr. Speaker, that 
everyone thought he was just joking in the end. Once again he 
knew exactly what he was doing when he nonchalantly threw 
out his promise to look at cutting the size of cabinet. 
 
Unfortunately for the NDP across the way, taxpayers aren’t 
interested in playing your little games any longer. They’re not 
interested in empty promises. They’re interested in a 
government that acts on the promises that they’ve made. Mr. 
Speaker, taxpayers are interested in the truth, and unfortunately 
this government has not given them that. The members opposite 
have made many, many promises as well. 
 
Recently the Finance minister raised the hopes of the business 
community in Saskatchewan and the general public by stating 
that a reduction in the provincial sales tax will be coming in the 
not-too-distant future. The business community was excited 
about that and hopeful that her statements meant a possible cut 
in this budget, Mr. Speaker, not some distant budget. 
 
I guess individuals attending the meeting should have asked her 
for a definition of what she thinks not-too-distant future is, 
because later we all found out that there is no such plan in 
place, and a reduction won’t come for years, Mr. Speaker — I 
suspect a couple of months before the NDP call the next 
provincial election. And all of a sudden all of the reviews will 
be completed, and there will be some sort of tax relief at that 
point. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, this budget is not a good budget, but is 
not a terrible budget either. From history we have learned that  



622  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

the philosophy of the members opposite is to tell us that we’re 
all going to get a big kick in the head and instead when they 
kick us in the shins, we breathe a sigh of relief. 
 
For instance, the NDP promised, Mr. Speaker, a 2 per cent 
increase to universities the year prior and during the election 
campaign. And then after the election, all campaign promises 
are off and instead we probably have to slash education 
spending is what they said. And then they freeze university 
operating grants this year and then cut them next year. 
 
Or how about the promise to increase K to 12 spending by 2 per 
cent as well as the Education minister’s promise to cover all 
costs of any boosts to teachers’ salaries and benefits. Well 
instead of a 2 per cent increase, K to 12 gets $2 million which 
won’t even cover the increase in teachers’ salaries and benefits. 
And the K to 12 system will have to slash teachers as a result of 
that budget — and programs — once again. 
 
I remember a time when the member from Riversdale  and 
I’m sure you will as well, Mr. Speaker  while he was the 
leader of the opposition, sitting on this side of the House, said 
in the legislature, don’t let anyone tell you that the money isn’t 
there for health and education. The money is there. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, where is the money today? Where is the 
promise that you made to the people of Saskatchewan? Where 
is the so-called increase that you were promising with respect to 
education funding, the K to 12 education institutes, universities, 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology)? Where is your promise today? 
 
Just a little reminder of a couple of things the Premier said, 
before sitting in the Premier’s chair, about education funding. 
The funny thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the member was making 
those comments after universities received a little over 2 per 
cent in funding at the time. Here’s one comment: 
 

. . . I think every one of us in this House understands that 
these cut-backs to higher learning university education by 
the government opposite are not only an attack on 
education and the opportunities . . . (for the) youth . . . (of) 
tomorrow, but it’s really an attack on one of our largest 
economic engines in our economy in Saskatchewan. 
 

Hansard May 7, 1990, made by the now Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or how about this one that he made: 
 

. . . what do you suggest the president of .the University of 
Saskatchewan do? Should he increase the 
professor-student ratios? Should he increase the tuition . . . 
by 10 per cent . . . (or) 20 per cent or 40 per cent or (even) 
higher? What courses or college should (be eliminated?) 
. . . What precisely do you think Dr. Ivany should do in 
order to pick up the funding shortfall due to your budget 
decisions a few weeks ago? 
 

Again, May 9 . . . or pardon me, May 7, 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member added that the NDP would give  

education a top priority — March 21, 1990. And I think this 
one’s probably my favourite, Mr. Speaker, although there are 
many, many to choose from. The member said the former 
government was cutting back on their own responsibilities for 
education and loading up on the local property taxpayers, and 
that’s wrong. How about standing up and facing your 
responsibilities for the children of tomorrow? That was one of 
the comments that the Premier has made. He made that back in 
1990, April 19. 
 
Well how about it now, Mr. Premier? The sky was going to fall 
because the university received an increase of a little over 2 per 
cent at that time in funding, close to 3 per cent. And you said 
nothing about the short five . . . that 5 per cent, anything less 
than 5 per cent was unacceptable. The members across the way 
should remember the same questions from the member of 
Riversdale posed a few years back. 
 
How about standing up for your responsibility for children, for 
taxpayers, and for everyone else in this province? How about 
fulfilling your promises that you’ve been making for the last 
number of years? How about cutting from the top? How about 
handing back the $4,000-plus bonus that each one of you are 
going to receive? How about leading by example? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Premier and his colleagues would just take 
the lead and prove to Saskatchewan families that they are 
serious about their commitments, I’m sure they could salvage, 
even yet, a bit of their credibility, although I think it would take 
a lot of work. The members opposite wanted so badly for this 
issue to go away because they know that they are getting just 
slammed in the public on this issue, Mr. Speaker, and they 
know it. Everywhere we have travelled in the last few weeks, 
people come up to us and constantly address us about their 
concern about this, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that the NDP 
MLAs are finding exactly the same things in their own 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP made all kinds of promises prior to the 
budget. There’s one promise however that I’m pleased to see 
that the NDP has kept, and that’s to hold the line on some of the 
taxes here that we are faced with, like sales tax, the fuel tax, and 
income tax. I hope this means that the members opposite have 
finally realized that, no matter what, Saskatchewan taxpayers 
cannot afford another penny to the provincial government. I 
hope this means that members opposite finally understand the 
meaning of diminished returns because we are there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I hope that this also means that the members opposite won’t be 
reaching again into the wallets of taxpayers through massive 
utility rate increases, because the general public gets a little 
nervous when the members opposite say there will be no tax 
increases since the promise is usually followed by a big hike in 
telephone rates, in natural gas rates, power, or vehicle insurance 
rates in this province. 
 
The important point to remember, Mr. Speaker, is that while the 
government says there will be no new taxes, all of us will feel, 
in this budget, a tax increase regardless. Municipalities will be 
feeling the pinch, Mr. Speaker. Education will be hurting, Mr.  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

Speaker. Municipal governments will struggle to maintain a 
frozen level of funding and get prepared to deal with a $20 
million reduction next year. 
 
For example, think of what the slash means to the city of 
Regina alone. Right now Regina receives about $11 million in 
revenue sharing from the province. SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) has already said that a $20 
million reduction next will mean about a 30 per cent decrease in 
their funding  30 per cent decrease. 
 
So municipal governments will have nowhere else to go but to 
the property tax base to fill the gap in. But then, Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP will be happy because their service district Act will be 
in place, and a new level of government bureaucracy it creates 
can now take over running these municipalities, and they can 
say, we didn’t make any of those decisions; someone else did it 
before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s sad to see the members opposite reneging on 
promise after promise. I want the members opposite to know 
that though I understand that there are challenges in government 
— NDP members have often spoken about federal cut-backs, 
federal transfer cut-backs, and I know the effect that they are 
having on the people of Saskatchewan — however, much as I 
appreciate how hard it is to meet the challenges in government, 
I also know that a government’s priorities reflect in its policies. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government’s policies are, as my 
daughter would say, way harsh  way harsh on jobs and small 
business and on Saskatchewan people. 
 
The NDP have no trouble binding the hands of school boards 
with increased costs through workers’ compensation, labour 
standards, and other pro-union legislation, and refusing to cover 
the costs of new contracts with teachers. The STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) says the NDP budget will, 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker: “do serious damage to the quality of 
children’s education.” That’s from their own news release of 
March 28. 
 
If that’s the case this year, just imagine what further damage 
will be done to the K to 12 system or post-secondary education 
institutes in next year’s budget. Further teacher lay-offs, cuts to 
university programs and quotas, possible elimination of entire 
colleges, bigger classrooms with higher teacher ratios  that is 
what we can expect from this budget. That’s the budget that 
was supposed to protect education; at least that’s what they 
promised. 
 
And now we can expect that our university students graduating 
this year again will head to other provinces to find work 
because there’s none here in this province. 
 
The NDP have no trouble telling small businesses to create 
jobs, but they almost make it impossible for businesses to 
survive. NDP hikes to the PST (provincial sales tax) are way 
out of line. Union-preference tendering is unfair and costly. 
You’ve got far too many nuisance fees to businesses. And again 
pro-labour legislation forced on our province has cost 
Saskatchewan people jobs. 

Mr. Speaker, there are just a few examples the members 
opposite are . . . of saying one thing and doing the other. Maybe 
there is a legitimate excuse, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 
editorialists are right, and maybe the NDP do suffer from mad 
cow disease. That would explain a lot of things around here, 
Mr. Speaker. That would explain a lot of things around here, 
Mr. Speaker. That would explain a lot. 
 
The bottom line here is, is that the government has failed to cut 
from the top down. They’ve failed to provide a short-term or a 
long-term job creation strategy. And, Mr. Speaker, down the 
road, we’ll all have our taxes increased as a result of this 
budget. 
 
(1445) 
 
It all comes down to priorities, Mr. Speaker. And as far as I’m 
concerned, the government has its priorities in the wrong place. 
It’s evidenced in this budget, in the NDP policies and 
legislation. It’s how they say one thing to everyone and do 
exactly the opposite in every way. 
 
That is the reason why, Mr. Speaker, more than ever that is the 
reason why, Mr. Speaker, even though the budget had some 
good points about it  and I pointed them out  that’s why I 
cannot support this budget being brought forward. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following 
amendment, seconded by my colleague from Cannington, the 
following amendment to the motion: 
 

That the words be added after the word “finance”: 
 
And that, in considering the 1996-97 budget estimates, this 
Assembly demand that MLAs’ take-home pay be reduced 
by an amount equivalent to the one-time windfall MLAs 
will receive in 1996 as a result of delay in the 
implementation of the McDowell report, which amounts to 
approximately $4,000 for each Regina MLA and $4,400 
for each non-Regina MLA. 

 
And I would move that following amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I’ve not had the opportunity to review 
the amendment beforehand. I’d just like to take a moment to 
reflect on its acceptance. 
 
Order, order. On reviewing the wording of the amendment, 
there is one word which is troublesome, which I will provide 
the hon. member the opportunity to change if he wishes, and 
that’s the word “demand.” If he would change the word to 
‘require.” 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Yes, I would be prepared to accept that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:50 p.m. until 3 p.m. 



624  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  33 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Lingenfelter 
Shillington Anguish Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Koenker Trew 
Scott Nilson Serby 
Stanger Hamilton  
 
The Speaker:  Order. I will ask all members to come to 
order. And we know that the votes are not debatable, and nor is 
interference in the process of taking the vote. I’ll ask the 
cooperation of all members. 
 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Sonntag Jess 
Flavel Murrell Thomson 
Aldridge McLane McPherson 
Belanger Bjornerud Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to spend a few short minutes of the time of the 
legislature today to talk about the budget that was presented . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The Speaker is finding it impossible to 
hear the hon. member for Regina Northwest engage in his 
debate and I’ll ask for the cooperation of all members of the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly 
pleasant to see when the opposition do not wish to hear good 
news and they’re more concerned about other issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the budget that was presented 
here last Thursday in this House by our hon. Finance minister. 
Mr. Speaker, we are talking about a budget that has set the 
cornerstone for the protection of cornerstones in the province of 
Saskatchewan for the next four years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This has not been an easy budget, Mr. Speaker, for the province 
to determine, in terms of this government, to put forward this 
budget. In order for us to have a balanced budget, in order for 
us to protect those cornerstones that are important to the people 
of Saskatchewan  health, education, and social services, Mr. 
Speaker — Mr. Speaker, a budget that was presented here on 
Thursday is one that the people in my riding, Saskatoon 
Northwest, will like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no new tax increases. To the people of 
Saskatoon Northwest this is very important. Also, Mr. Speaker, 
these people have spoken what they want protected, as I said  
health, social services, and education, Mr. Speaker. This  

government went out and consulted with the people in terms of 
dealing with these difficult decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too tried to get the people of my constituency to 
participate in this consultation process. And we sent out the 
questionnaire to 500 people within the riding, Mr. Speaker, to 
find out their feelings of what’s going on. This is taking 
democracy to a new step, to a new level in terms of discussion, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  And couched in that discussion that has 
taken place in terms of the consultation process, Mr. Speaker, 
which was outlined by the Minister of Finance, was the federal 
offloading that has taken place in this province, Mr. Speaker, to 
the tune of, this year, of $114 million. And by the year 1999 to 
the year 2000, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of $242 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we did not take an attitude, Mr. Speaker, of going out and 
hacking and slashing and making these hits direct to  in terms 
of the federal offload  to health, social services, and 
education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We took a different approach. We didn’t take the Mike Harris 
approach. We didn’t take the Ralph Klein approach. And when 
one looks at the model in Alberta, we see now that Ralph Klein 
has blinked and said: I’ve gone too far. He has gone too far in 
health care, and rescinded some of the action that he has done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We protected those cornerstones, Mr. Speaker. In health, we 
provided the shortfall in funding and made sure there wasn’t a 
cut of $47 million, but we put $47 million of new money in 
there just so our budget stays even and the people have the 
health care system they deserve in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Social services, Mr. Speaker  52 million new dollars to cover 
off the shortfall left by the federal government, Mr. Speaker 
$52 million; again, new money. Post-secondary education, 
Mr. Speaker  $11 million of new money that we have 
provided to protect these institutions up against the buttress of 
what the federal government was doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yet, though, we hear from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, the 
question of tax relief. The Leader of the Third Party went on 
and on about tax relief; the Finance critic of the official 
opposition went on and on about tax relief. Mr. Speaker, if 
we’d had the $114 million that we had today, if we could hang 
on to the $242 million we will lose in 1999 and the year 2000, 
we could provide meaningful tax relief to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We could further lower the debt in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, and do it without suffering the pain that we’re 
doing right now. As I say, this has not been an easy budget but 
we have protected the cornerstones, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In protecting the programs, in finding the new money for this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we went out and we dealt with problems 
that we had to deal with in terms of dealing with the 
administration costs of government and the way government is 
run. We found $50 million to cut from government without  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

cutting programs, dealing with the question of employees and 
how to restructure and redefine government and how we can 
best provide those services to people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, job loss is tough, but we took an approach, Mr. 
Speaker, that was humane and it was compassionate. We 
instituted programs that protected our employees, Mr. Speaker, 
as best we can when dealing with the question of job loss. We 
provided . . . working with our employees, particularly those 
who represent those employees, the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees Union  working with them to develop a system by 
which we could do this, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we will have 582 
fewer positions, as outlined in the budget, Mr. Speaker, but 
with that, with a package of early retirement, with a package 
that understands the sensitivity of those people that need to 
move. 
 
I know in one case, in a case in Melfort, Mr. Speaker, there was 
an employee of the Department of Agriculture and it was 
difficult for her to move. But we work within a system, Mr. 
Speaker, where this person now could move over into the 
Department of Justice and fill a vacancy, Mr. Speaker. Doing so 
allowed us to do the budget reduction, it allowed us to solve a 
problem in Justice, and it also showed the spirit of cooperation 
that now exists within departments to deal with the serious 
issue of reducing government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is an important task. And I give full credit to our 
employees and their representatives of dealing with this issue, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud of how we went about doing it. As 
I said, job loss in not easy, but we picked a very humane way by 
which to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about that question of the 
elimination of the jobs, the other factor that was involved in the 
government decisions was to make sure the public impact was 
minimal, to make sure that services are provided to the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And this has been the 
overarching theme in terms by which we make sure that 
government works effectively, that services are provided. 
 
I think a fine example is that where we found the efficiencies of 
approximately $6 million out of the Department of Highways. 
And that money is being put back into maintenance and 
construction, Mr. Speaker, which is vitally important to the 
province. In light of the changes that are coming in this 
province regarding the grain transportation system and the 
difficulties our road system will have, it’s important that we 
invest as much of our resources that we can, Mr. Speaker. But 
they are limited. 
 
And we are faced with another problem, with another 
download, in terms of the change in the western grain 
transportation payment by which this province will lose $300 
million a year. We could build a lot of roads, Mr. Speaker; we 
could improve a lot of roads, Mr. Speaker, for $300 million a 
year. But we don’t have that, and we will have to deal with that 
as a province. 
 
But I tell you here and now, this government will fight to its 
utmost to remind Ottawa, the federal government, of its  

responsibilities to this province. We will not simply lie down 
and let the federal government do what it’s going to do to this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We’re fighting back now with this 
budget. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, this province has been ready 
in terms of the action we have taken in the last four years, in 
terms of our budget approach . . . allowed us to prepare for this. 
It has allowed us to have the ability to deal with these 
unforeseen circumstances. We’ve been able to get control of 
our own financial resources, which are vital. 
 
And if there’s an underlying theme about this budget, it’s taking 
control. It’s paying the debt down. By the end of this term, $2.4 
billion of the debt will be paid down. We will be in control, Mr. 
Speaker, to make further decisions that are positive for the 
people of Saskatchewan. We will not be at the mercy of the 
banks and the bond people in terms of what we do, Mr. 
Speaker. So this is important. 
 
So as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re pleased with this 
budget we put forward. It shows the compassion that we need 
as a government. It shows the four-year plan and where we’re 
going to be. And people know that we have the credibility of 
meeting those targets. 
 
So I’m very pleased to have the opportunity today to speak on 
behalf of the budget, and I will be supporting the motion 
supporting the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
had an opportunity to be in Prince Albert this weekend. And 
during that time, I just took some time to go and speak to some 
business people, people who belong to the chamber of 
commerce, some professionals in education, some professionals 
in health. I took opportunity to speak to my neighbours and to 
some elected officials from municipalities and from the health 
board. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the question I posed to 
them was of course about the budget. I wanted to get their 
feedback. I wanted to get some feeling whether they felt that the 
consultation that we had gone through was something that had 
been worthwhile. Did we react in a way that they were 
expecting us to as a result of the consultations? 
 
(1515) 
 
And I can say, Mr. Speaker  and I’m very pleased to be able 
to say  that in general people that I spoke to were very 
impressed with the budget delivered by the Minister of Finance 
last Thursday. They were largely impressed for three reasons, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first reason was because we shielded the health, the 
education, and the social service programs from the impact of 
the federal budget. And the second reason was because they 
saw that we provided no tax hikes in this budget. And thirdly, 
they were impressed by the fact that we set up a balanced  



626  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

budget and promised to balance it in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shielding the health, education, and social services 
programs from the federal gouge was not an easy task. In fact if 
we had passed it on to the people of Saskatchewan, those 
people who are most vulnerable in Saskatchewan, those that are 
receiving social assistance in some form or other, would have 
received $51.9 million less. That would have been a drastic cut 
to them, to the people who are most vulnerable. 
 
If we had passed on the cuts, the federal cuts, to health care, our 
health boards and our health program in total would have 
received $47 million less this year, if we’d passed that on. 
 
If we’d passed on the cuts from the federal budget, our 
education system would have received $15.1 million less, Mr. 
Speaker, less than they did. 
 
The people that I talked to were impressed by the fact that we 
listened, that we took to heart that education, social services, 
and health were crucial to our way of life and that we 
back-filled the gouging that was left by the $114 million 
shortfall of the federal Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that they were impressed by the fact 
that there were no tax hikes. In fact they were quite impressed 
by the statements that they heard about the continuation of the 
aviation fuel tax reductions. They like to see the continued 
reductions to the manufacturing tax that we brought in last year. 
They were appreciative that every citizen who pays income tax 
will have their deficit surtax reduced $150 this year, a full $150, 
and applies for a two income family. That would come up to 
$300. 
 
People in the trucking industry are interested that we’re 
responding to making things more equitable for them, 
particularly those who are working on interprovincial trucking. 
This news that there is no tax hikes and that we are continuing 
with the tax reductions is very reassuring to our business 
community. 
 
The third thing that people were impressed with was the fact 
that we were able to do the back-filling to keep our social 
programs; that we did not increase taxes and yet at the same 
time that we were able to balance the budget. 
 
We were able to balance the budget with a surplus, Mr. 
Speaker, a surplus of $358 million. Not only was the budget 
balanced without the sale of the Cameco shares  because 350 
of the $358 million comes from the sale of the Cameco shares, 
and that will go directly to paying off the debt  but there is a 
built-in $8 million cushion to balance the budget just the way 
. . . without the sale of the Cameco shares. 
 
We are projecting, Mr. Speaker, four more balanced budgets 
with modest surpluses to pay back debt that was incurred during 
the heavy spending ’80s. That, Mr. Speaker, is very reassuring 
to our youth, who do not look forward to paying back, or 
having to pay back, as a result of the heavy spending that was 
incurred during the ’80s. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when they looked at those three things, people 
told me that they were pleased, they were amazed. Some even 
said, how did you do it? How did you do it without massive 
lay-offs, as we’re hearing in Alberta? How did you do it 
without having a strike, as happened in Ontario? How did you 
do it by having no tax increases? 
 
That was a very significant and penetrating question, Mr. 
Speaker  how did you do it? And I want to explain just 
briefly how it was done. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention that the decisions 
taken during the last four years of this government  that is, to 
keep the budget on track, to stop spending more than we were 
taking in  played a large part of it. The health reform 
initiatives that we undertook in the last four years played a large 
part of it. The planning for the future, the economic 
development and job creation plan, the Partnership for 
Progress, played a large part of it because without that we 
could not have absorbed the federal cuts, we may have had to 
increase taxes, and we might not have been able to balance the 
budget. 
 
A lot of the credit goes to the people in Saskatchewan, the 
commercial enterprises in Saskatchewan, because retail sales 
are up in Saskatchewan. Manufacturing and agriculture value 
added is up, sales in energy and mines are up. The commercial 
aspect of Saskatchewan deserves a lot of the credit for this 
budget as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The number of people working in Saskatchewan is up. As a 
result, our gross national product is increasing at a steady rate 
and our tax revenue is up. That was one of the ways that we did 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another reason that it worked is a credit to all of 
the people of Saskatchewan, a credit to the Premier, a credit to 
the Finance minister, a credit to this government, and that is 
when we made the plan we stuck to it and we stayed on track. 
And we did not follow the advice of the Tories. We did not 
follow the advice of the Liberals who told us to sell Cameco at 
$24 a share. But we stuck to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how we did it provides a strategy which contrasts 
markedly with the strategy and the ideas of the Tories and the 
Liberals. We balanced the budget. We saved the programs, not 
on the backs of those most vulnerable and not at the expenses 
of the programs which really define our countries. 
 
When you contrast what happened in Alberta where they 
eliminated the school boards pretty well unilaterally, where they 
slashed health jobs, where they still are continuing to have 
health premiums about $800 a year per family, and where they 
are encouraging a two-tier health system, Mr. Speaker, that 
speaks volumes for this government. When you compare with 
what happened in Manitoba, in Tory Manitoba, where they 
forced a wage roll-back through an unpaid holiday system to 
balance their budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these things I believe are important to pass on to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to pass on to everybody that  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

we know, to point out the different ways that things have been 
done in Saskatchewan than were done in Alberta, Tory Alberta, 
in Tory Manitoba, and particularly how differently we’re 
handling our budget than was handled by the federal Liberals. 
 
The federal Liberals decided that they should reduce their 
federal deficit by an 11 per cent cut. And to do that, to make 
that cut, 75 per cent of the cut that they made was to the health, 
education, and social services fields. They capped the Canada 
Assistance Plan two years ago. They made changes to the 
unemployment insurance program. They offloaded social 
services . . . an area of social services, the area regarding the 
payments to aboriginals who live off reserves. And more 
recently this cut to the Canada Health and Social Transfer 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you that there is not a heck of a lot of 
difference between the Liberals at the federal level and the 
Tories at the provincial level when it comes to commitment to 
keep health, social services, and education in place. The Sask 
Tories, we will recall, are the ones that caused the problem in 
the first place by burgeoning this debt to a $10 billion figure 
which results in an $850 million interest payment year after 
year after year. 
 
What they were doing was wielding power without 
responsibility. That seems to have been the prerogative of Grant 
Devine; that seems to have been the prerogative of Brian 
Mulroney; it seems to be the prerogative of Tories throughout 
the ages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan and in Canada, the Tories 
drained the treasury. They were consuming the wealth without 
producing it, and the Liberals now are using that as a excuse to 
weaken our social programs. When you look at it, the Liberals 
in office in Ottawa today are nothing more than Tories in clean 
shirts; gentlemen who live by reducing funding to social 
programs while the Ottawa mandarins and the Ottawa Senate 
remain fully funded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I consider it my civic duty to talk about that and to 
remind people in Saskatchewan, and to pass on to our children 
and our grandchildren, the stark difference between the action 
of this New Democratic government and the Tory government 
previous and the Liberal government in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve explained a little bit about how we changed 
the program, how we balanced the budget, about how we did it 
without increasing taxes, and about how we did by back-filling 
the holes left by federal Liberals. And I want to just take, in 
closing, take a minute, by saying why we did what we did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a lot at stake and we are all stakeholders. 
There’s a lot at stake in our country and the vision of our 
country and the vision of our province. What is at stake is what 
kind of a country it is that we want to live in. What do we want 
Canada to be like? Do we want it to be more like the United 
States of America? Do we want it to be more like Kuwait? Do 
we want it to be more like Mexico? Or what is it that we want? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want Canada to be more like Canada. I  

want Canada to be the country that will continue to be called 
the best country in the world. And what is it that made us the 
best country in the world? It was our education program. It was 
our longevity, dependent on our health program, and it was our 
standard of living, Mr. Speaker, which means that we provided 
for all, even the most vulnerable. 
 
Now to get that, you have to have a commitment. You have to 
have a commitment to education, health, and social services. 
You cannot use the right-wing philosophy which has a 
commitment to the market-place and is expecting the 
market-place to do everything. In the case of market-place, the 
market-place sets out an agenda where those who are poor, 
those who are vulnerable, those who are disadvantaged, make 
do with what they can afford, or they do without. That’s the 
market-place unfettered. Our government believes that 
education, health, and social services, should not be at the 
vagaries of the market-place. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that Canadians in general have rejected 
the idea that market forces should determine what goes on in 
such areas as health, education, and social services. So that, Mr. 
Speaker, is why we did it. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I am 
going to be supporting this budget. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
why I am proud that we did it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I take this opportunity with great pleasure to rise and give my 
thoughts on the budget that has been tabled this past week. 
 
And you know I am torn between the advice my mother gave 
me some time ago when she said that if you can’t say anything 
nice about something, don’t say anything at all. And I know that 
if I was in that situation, I probably would only be able to speak 
for a minute or two and the whip of the official opposition and 
the House Leader said, no you’ve got to carry this longer than 
that. So unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to give a 
few critical comments as well as some good ones. 
 
First of all, the good ones, because they are shorter. One thing 
that I think it is very important to say and to quite happily state 
publicly, that it is important to recognize that this budget is 
balanced and that the history in the past number of years of 
hitting targets are indeed something that have happened in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say that particularly in counterpoint to the decade that we 
had before this government took office. And I for one have to 
say that in 1981 or so, I was just about had it in terms of the 
family of Crown corporations and the arrogance and the amount 
of out-of-touchness that the previous government had gotten. 
So that when Grant Devine came forward with a business team 
and friend of mine who lived down the street from me in 
Melfort, Saskatchewan, the former member from Melfort, Mr. 
Hodgins, I actually forgot the fact that my mother and father 
had raised me to be a Liberal and I voted Conservative. 



628  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

An Hon. Member:  Shame. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Exactly what my mother said. 
 
And I had great hopes that this was a new type of people that 
would take common sense in business and bring it to the 
provincial economy. And I have to say that I was absolutely, 
terribly devastated by what happened subsequently. 
 
I cannot imagine that any government with any credibility at all 
could stand up and table a budget that says they’re going to 
have a 500 or $600 million deficit, and then after an election, 
when the figures actually come out, that it’s 1.2 billion. I can’t 
imagine that there would be something like a 5 or $600 million 
whoops that happened. 
 
And it didn’t just happen once. It happened year after year after 
year. And I was totally embarrassed and ashamed. And my 
mother has forgiven me and I hope other people have as well, 
for making that one mistake. 
 
And it’s what motivated me to let my name stand in 1991. 
Because I absolutely believed that there had to be a change. 
And I couldn’t buy into the philosophical direction that 
previous NDP governments were taking this province. Because 
I did look across and see that Alberta has been an expanding 
province, and I looked back 75 years when this building itself 
was built and our forefathers believed that Saskatchewan would 
be the centre of the western universe, and how much that we’ve 
declined under subsequent NDP governments. And so I wanted 
to put my stamp and to offer suggestions about what could 
happen if we had some credible people in government. 
 
What has happened in this budget is just a continuation of a 
four-year plan of picking the pockets of Saskatchewan with 
absolute abandon as to what’s going to happen and the 
consequences from it. We simply have to understand that we 
cannot simply — although as I’ve indicated earlier, it’s 
important to run numbers that are believable and consistent — 
we cannot simply look at the numbers. We cannot simply 
govern a province with a calculator, with no regard to what 
those decisions are making to real people. 
 
And what has happened in many ways has been devastating to 
rural Saskatchewan, not because the numbers have been 
balanced, but because it’s been done without any plan and any 
vision as to what is necessary. And there’s a number of areas 
that are particularly troublesome. And I too this weekend went 
home to see what the people were thinking about this budget. 
And they did give you credit for balancing the budget. But they 
sat down and asked me, can you see a plan in what’s going on? 
And I had to honestly say, other than the straight numbers, there 
is no plan. 
 
And what happens is we lose track of what the impact of that 
straight number-crunching means to people. And I had the 
opportunity to talk to a lady who had her mother in Parkland 
Regional Care Centre in Melfort, which as many members will 
know, is a very specialized regional hospital in the north-east 
that provides particularly quality care for advanced stages of 
dementia and Alzheimer patients. And this lady told a little  

story, and I’m going to quote pretty liberally, if you excuse the 
pun, from it. Because I think it shows the story about what these 
kind of decisions mean to real people, and we as legislators 
must never allow ourselves to remove ourselves from that 
absolute commitment to the people we represent. 
 
And the lady’s name is Mrs. Anderson from Aylsham, and she 
talks about her mother and the difficulty she had finding a place 
for her mother to be looked after. And she talks about the 
Parkland hospital and she says, and I quote: 
 

This unit serves the whole North East area of 
Saskatchewan. During the course of 1991 I visited 4 other 
locations that have special care facilities, namely Nipawin, 
Arborfield, Carrot River, and Tisdale. I was told over and 
over again that the level of care required by my Mother 
was too advanced for the services they were able to 
provide. This left only Parkland for us . . . it is not easy to 
find a place for people with advanced stages of dementia. I 
wonder if your Health District receives extra funding 
because of the fact . . . it does serve this large area and will 
provide care for these advanced dementia cases . . . 
 
Primarily, (she goes on to say) you must understand how 
volatile these people are. I’ve been sitting in the common 
room with my mom and several other residents and 
witnessed many potential dangerous situations. Times 
when two male residents that are especially physically 
strong invade one another’s space resulting in instant anger 
and a strong lashing out . . . times when residents who are 
pushing themselves around in wheelchairs, come too close 
to someone toes or legs . . . and again . . . the instant 
lashing out! 

 
You see, these people seem to have lost their inhibitions 
. . . they have little control of their feelings, and actions 
. . . in their condition it seems that for every simple action 
there is immediate and quite often negative reaction! You 
have no idea how frustration is locked into their very 
being. 
 
Over and over I have watched my Mom, who I always 
thought was a rather gentle woman, when threatened lash 
out exactly as I’ve described above . . . 

 
. . . if a loved one can invoke a fear response like this 
imagine what happens to the staff from time to time. 
 
I think that staff reduction has resulted in a lack of 
adequate supervision . . . 

 
She goes on to say and to compliment the Parkland people 
about the job that they were doing providing for her mother, 
that it was exemplary, and it gave her mother back some 
dignity. And she winds up by saying this in her note to me. She 
says: 
 

. . . there are two choices . . . Do you believe that these 
people are entitled to live out the remainder of their life 
sentence with some degree of dignity? . . . or . . . would it 
be cheaper and more expedient to make further cuts to  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

staff, thus increasing the need for increased drug therapy 
and increased use of restraint to control these people . . . 
this is the way it is done in many other institutions and 
private homes. 

 
And she closes by saying this: these are choices that we have to 
make. And she winds up by saying this: 
 

Remember, if you do this, that you indeed may be striving 
to maintain and enhance an Alzheimer’s Unit that except 
by the grace of God may be needed for you or me in the 
space of a very short span of time! 

 
And that’s exactly the kind of human story that, I submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that we forget about when we just make fiscal choices. 
Fiscal choices may indeed be something that are difficult to do, 
but we cannot  we cannot  abstract ourselves for those 
human needs that are being made. And we have done that too 
much, Mr. Speaker, in the way we’ve approached our fiscal 
responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe when I listen here and hear the 
Leader of the Third Party, with his self-righteous nonsense 
that’s been going on in the month since this Assembly has 
convened, and I cannot believe that he truly can understand that 
the people of this province do not understand the mess that this 
province has been left in. That’s true; I can’t accept that there’s 
that much naïvety. But at the same time, I also can’t accept the 
flippant blaming that’s going on, by the government, of the 
federal government. 
 
I always seem to remember that I only have two pockets in my 
pants, and I’m one taxpayer. And if the money comes out of the 
left pocket or the right pocket, it’s still coming out of my 
pockets. And the federal government has inherited the same 
kind of amount of messes from subsequent overspending, and 
we have to clear the debts  no question. And it is absolutely 
ludicrous to think that Saskatchewan would be extracted or 
isolated in isolation from that. 
 
Our job as legislators in this province is to do the job for what 
we have been entrusted, and that’s the governing of this 
province. And we will have to take responsibility for our own 
actions. And that’s where we seem to forget, that we lose track. 
 
I remember a couple of days ago where I think the member 
from Regina Victoria or Regina Coronation  I get these 
wrong, and I know I can’t mention names, but I’ll try hard  
where he suggested that members in this House are numerically 
challenged. And I know that that’s to be true because members 
opposite have difficulty even understanding the most simple 
mathematical formulas. 
 
For example, we have documented on more than one occasion 
with the pipeline project in Humboldt, with the project for 
SaskTel fire alarm system, where the fact that this government’s 
union-preference policy increases costs anywhere from 20 to 30 
per cent. That’s true. We’ve tabled those documents. We sent 
them opposite. It’s there. That is the bald-faced, bold reality; it 
costs that much more when you have that kind of a policy. 

By the Minister of Finance’s own statements in the budget 
speech  I believe on page 7  she said, and I quote: there 
would be $630 million of capital projects in this province this 
year. Six hundred and thirty times 25 per cent is 150 million, 
somewhere in that order, of money that’s being spent 
needlessly. Now we have to address those kinds of issues; it’s 
that simple. It’s a very simple mathematical equation that no 
one seems to recognize as being a reality that we’re facing. And 
we can’t face it. We can’t afford that kind of preference. It just 
won’t work. 
 
And you know, when the Premier said, well we’ve got to ask 
the people of this province to sacrifice because of the nasty 
feds, you know, we said okay, let’s see where it’s going to 
come from. He said it’s going to come from the top. Well it’s 
interesting that, from the top, out of an 80-person office, there’s 
two people being cut. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray:  To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale for the courtesy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you and 
through you to my colleagues in the Assembly, on behalf of my 
good friend, the MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy, 48 grade 7 and 
8 students seated in your Gallery. 
 
This group is from Radville High School and they are here 
attended by their teachers, Lori Bjorklund  I hope I’ve 
pronounced that correctly  Brenda Norick, and Lori Larsen. 
They’re also accompanied by their chaperons Beatrice Gilmore 
and Bev Pirio. 
 
Now you may be interested to know that your MLA’s daughter 
broke her ankle while she was practising her figure skating over 
the weekend, but I understand she is resting comfortably. And I 
look forward to spending a few minutes meeting with you on 
my colleague’s behalf. 
 
So I would ask all members to join me in extending a warm 
welcome to this group from Radville. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, it 
seems passing strange to me that when the Premier is talking  



630  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

about the downsizing and the sacrificing that we all have to 
make, that he makes a great sacrifice of two people out of an 
80-person office. And I really understand how that’s really a 
severe hardship. And at the same time 544-odd civil servants 
are wondering about the status of their jobs — because it isn’t 
very good — I wonder how the government can sit and justify 
spending two and a half million dollars for hiring 42 executive 
positions. 
 
I wonder how they can justify hiring a Liberal lawyer, Harold 
McKay, at $11,000 a month. Because the point in this thing is 
not that it’s a Liberal lawyer or not, is the taxpayers shouldn’t 
pay $11,000 a month for a job that the professional civil service 
and the department should be doing. It’s almost an admission of 
incompetence. 
 
And I don’t understand how the government can justify these 
kind of cuts and expenditures and then justify hiring a radio talk 
show personality for $70,000 a year just to get the PR (public 
relations) crunch going out to sell this absolute ludicrous 
message to the people of this province. I don’t know how you 
justify that to the lady whose mom is in Parkland hospital and is 
worried by the fact that this budget will likely mean the end to 
that program. 
 
(1545) 
 
How do you justify those things to those people? How do you 
condemn that woman to a life of being sedated and restrained 
rather than being cared for in a compassionate way. It goes 
against everything that your history is bound on because you’ve 
gone totally on a fiscal agenda rather than a human agenda. And 
that is where the tragic flaw in your logic has come about. 
 
We look at what’s going to happen in rural Saskatchewan. And 
Parkland hospital is at great jeopardy. I know that, the people 
working there know that, and the people whose parents are 
there know that. 
 
And what they don’t understand is how on one hand we can 
glibly go and spend this money for the special friends of 
government and not look after the real needs in a front-line, 
care-giving institution. I can’t explain it to the people in my 
constituency while that’s going on. I don’t understand that. I 
can’t explain these kinds of things. 
 
And so what we find lacking in this primarily is a lack of 
vision. Right now we’re told that in education there is no 
agenda, there is no amalgamations going to be forced of school 
districts. There’s no amalgamation going to be forced on 
municipal government structures  nothing forced. Sort of do 
what you like. 
 
And it reminds me of the way health care was approached. 
There was no plan except tightening the screws, tightening the 
screws, tightening the screws, tightening the screws, closing 
hospitals in rural Saskatchewan, and give the people no choices 
to form health districts, which they did do. But there was no 
vision. The Murray Commission report had an excellent vision 
for this province and yet we did not look at it and study it 
seriously. 

And now we’re faced with repeating the same silly errors. What 
we’ve got to do now is step back and pause a while and say, 
where is the vision? Where are you heading with 
amalgamations of rural divisions? Where are you heading with 
amalgamation of school districts? Do they make any sense? 
Will they be discussed in this legislature and a plan tabled so 
that we can discuss it? Will there be a plan that’s tabled so that 
we can discuss it with the people in our communities? Or are 
we going to have, over and over again, where there’s just 
closures? 
 
I got a letter over the weekend from a young lady from 
Pleasantdale, and I’d like to quote from it as well. She says, and 
I quote: 
 

My name is Norma Quaroni. 
 
I’m in grade 3 and I don’t want our school at Pleasantdale 
to close. If you (the government) shut our school down 
Pleasantdale will not be the same community any more. 
 
Pleasantdale school has some of the best teachers. They 
put lots of extra effort into helping us be like a big family. 
It’s a small school with a big heart. I have just as many 
opportunities as pupils in bigger schools. Bigger schools 
are ok. But not always better. Some have big drug 
problems. At Pleasantdale the teachers teach in such a way 
they make school fun. Mr. Viczko is awesome. He is a 
principal who does lots of extra cool things to make the 
school run good. 
 
I think I’m getting a good education. We have great 
programs for Remembrance Day, Christmas and the spring 
tea. Pleasantdale School is full of courage and 
understanding. They give us hope and help us . . . to learn. 
This year K-1-2-3-4-5 raised $430 dollars for Telemiracle 
in 3 days. We have dancing, skating, gymnastics, piano 
lessons and other sports. I ride on the bus almost an hour 
getting to school. My little brother will be 4 when he goes 
to kindergarten this fall. How long would he have to go on 
the bus if we had to go to Melfort or Naicam? It would be 
too far to go for us to be in sports or after-school lessons. 
Are you going to take that away from us? I like going to 
Pleasantdale School. Please don’t close it. From Norma 
Quaroni(age 8). 
 

And there is again the problem. We keep forgetting about the 
human reality. Here’s a young girl who knows, and her family 
and her parents know, that she’s getting good education. 
 
And we have dictated that bigger is better; that amalgamation 
and centralization and regionalization and all the good 
buzz-words are better. They’re not, Mr. Speaker. They are 
taking us further and further away from our roots as rural 
people in this province and that’s what made this province 
something special, and that’s what continues to make it 
something special. But we are in great jeopardy by having this 
fiscal conservatism, balanced-book mentality of jeopardizing 
the very roots on which this province was formed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that rural Saskatchewan  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

has to offer. All over the world you see the trends for 
regionalization and urbanization and all the rest of it, and to 
some extent we are actively encouraging that by the policies of 
this government. We are forcing people to leave their rural 
homes and move to the cities. But they’re not just moving to 
Saskatoon or Regina; they’re moving to Calgary and Vancouver 
and Toronto  all over the place. 
 
And you tell me that the quality of life in these large centres is 
better? It’s not. You know it and I know it and the members 
opposite know it, but what we don’t admit is that the policies of 
this government are forcing the depopulation of rural 
Saskatchewan. They’re killing opportunities for the people that 
are the backbone of this province, that made it special. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government needs a new vision. It needs to 
redesign how they approach Saskatchewan. They have to think 
about what the impact of their decisions are on real people and 
they have to know what the fiscal realities are. The member 
says they’re doing that. Well, Mr. Member, if you would 
consider what you’re doing: you’re taking someone else’s job 
when there’s little opportunity for education students. Those are 
the things . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order. Now I simply 
want to remind the member that rules of debate in the Assembly 
require that debate is directed through the Speaker, and I’ll ask 
the member to cooperate with that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask, Mr. 
Speaker, then, how a government can justify when one of their 
members takes jobs that are critical opportunities for graduating 
university students? 
 
This morning when I was driving in from Melfort there was an 
interview by a professor at the university who said there are 
very few opportunities in education for full-time jobs  some 
part-time ones, but the opportunities for education students are 
very bleak. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government condones one of its 
members taking one of those scarce jobs from one of our 
children and I find that as a perfect example of why this 
government is out of touch with the real folks that make this 
province special. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, these are the reasons why I 
have a fundamental problem. It’s not the numbers. This 
government is to be commended because at least they can add 
and they know when the books are balanced. And it’s arguable 
if they’ve done it in the right way or way or not, at least they’re 
consistent in their performance in delivering what they said they 
would do as opposed to previous Conservative government that 
wasn’t even within a shotgun blast on a barn wall near to it. It 
just didn’t happen. And so they should be commended for that.  
 
But Mr. Speaker, where they’ve fallen down tremendously is 
they’ve lost touch with the reality of this, the people that they  

represent, and in four years  three years, 1999  the people 
of this province will indeed remember what has happened here 
and they will mark their X’s. And, Mr. Speaker, because of 
those reasons I will not be able to support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the budget debate this afternoon, although I was 
wondering, Mr. Speaker, if someone had not told the member 
opposite that April Fool’s officially ends by noon on the day of 
April 1. For today, Mr. Speaker, he’s beginning to seem to have 
a lapse in memory that today is the day that the Canada health 
and social transfer kicks in. It’s going to affect everyone and I 
think the member opposite should know that it’s going to affect 
the people he’s talking about when he talks about keeping in 
mind the face of human consequence in the province. 
 
Sherri Torjman of the Caledonian Institute of Social Policy 
says:  
 

Beginning today and during the next two years, the 
Canada Health and Social Transfer will replace all the 
programs that have governed how Ottawa sent money to 
the provinces for health, post-secondary education, and 
welfare. 
 
The single fund will be (reduced by) $7 billion . . . (in the 
next) two years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that will have a major impact on the provinces. 
And how we’ve chosen to address the impact is to put our 
monies in to replace what Ottawa is taking out of health, 
education, and social programming in this province because 
we’re concerned about the withdrawal of monies from Ottawa 
and what that means to our basic quality of life in our province. 
 
The provinces will get, in return, more say on how the money is 
going to be spent. And in many cases we’ve heard from people 
who say what it means is that the standard for social 
programing in the country will be . . . you can’t deny anyone 
social programing in the province they live. But we’ve had 
examples now of other provinces who’ve then chosen to send 
the responsibility to someone else by a one-way bus ticket out 
of their province, and in many cases the one-way bus ticket to 
Saskatchewan, a province that has traditionally looked after its 
people in greatest need with compassion and care. 
 
For the poor, Sherri Torjman says that this will mean that there 
will be work for welfare cheques that will be significantly 
smaller. For students, it will mean sky-rocketing tuitions, and in 
some cases they’ll begin to have student loans in excess of 
$10,000. For the sick, it could mean closed hospitals, extra fees 
and poor service. 
 
For the member opposite to get up and not recognize that the 
impact that that would have if we had not chosen in this budget 
to back-fill for the federal Liberal government, Mr. Speaker . . . 
If Canadians don’t see their faces in those crowds who will be 
affected by the Canada health and social transfer, she says to 
those people, understand that social programs will affect  



632  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

everyone. Everybody comes in contact with social programs 
because they do mean  in the province of Saskatchewan  
health, education and social programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I therefore find it passing strange that the 
member opposite would stand up and say that this budget is the 
one that is going to affect the face of those programs, and 
refusing to admit to himself  I guess as an April fool’s joke 
on himself  that you lay the blame squarely in the laps of the 
federal government who’ve chosen to withdraw 73 per cent of 
their budget dollars in the area of health, education and social 
programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, this is the first time I’m able to 
enter into the debate and return debate to the throne speech or 
the budget speech, and so I also wanted to take an opportunity 
to respond to the member opposite, but also to take this 
opportunity to tell people that I’m very pleased to stand as their 
representative in Regina Wascana Plains in this Assembly. It’s 
indeed humbling to know that they’ve put their trust again in 
me to allow me to serve in this Assembly as their 
representative. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s also another first because, as their 
representative, this is the first time I’ve had an opportunity to 
get outside of the city limits and campaign in one of the first 
urban-rural ridings. Therefore in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
Regina Wascana Plains is one of them. In being one of the four 
urban-rural constituencies, the people in Wascana Plains are 
predominantly middle income wage-earners, small-business 
owners, small-business operators, farmers or retired farm 
couples, and people who are employed in the public services. 
They are people who are employed perhaps as educators, health 
care professionals, civic employees. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite in the 
opposite benches, are realists. And they know that these are not 
easy times to craft budgets. With a backdrop of shrinking 
transfer payments, with a backdrop of taxpayers who are saying 
they’re suffering from stress and tax fatigue, and with the call 
for us to preserve the quality of services add all that to the 
unenviable task of balancing interests in the budget and also 
balancing the budgets after the 10 years of the Tory legacy  
they know that indeed it is challenging times to present a budget 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They also know that Saskatchewan people are caring people. 
And they know in many circumstances that they can say, there 
but the grace of God go I. And they would like assurances that 
we’re looking after those who are most vulnerable in our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget we have before us, after months of 
hard work, extensive consultation, and much debate, can be 
summed up by a budget that is a budget of cooperation, of 
caring and compassion, and a budget of community and 
defining ourselves as neighbours. 
 
(1600) 

And it can also be summed up by the heading that we saw on 
budget day from The Globe and Mail. It said, “Again common 
sense in Saskatchewan” common sense as we take our 
province into the next century. 
 
So it became clear, Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the economic 
indicators that would form the backdrop of economic 
information to the budget, as I felt the blows as our people did 
in Saskatchewan from the federal government’s withdrawal 
from some of its commitments to health and education and 
social transfers, and as I talked with a broad section of people 
not only from my constituency, but people from all sectors in 
the community  from business to labour, from seniors to 
young adults  that there were four major themes that were 
emerging. 
 
And because we’ve worked long hours to claim this budget as 
our own, we all know that the four areas that we wanted to 
highlight in our budget were, the first one, building prosperity 
and jobs for the new century. The second was to preserve the 
cornerstones of our quality of life. The third, to look at 
ourselves and look at how we govern in the province of 
Saskatchewan and restructure and streamline those government 
mechanisms. And the fourth, to provide the freedom to choose 
and control our future  perhaps the most important legacy 
that we’ll leave for the next generations in Saskatchewan. 
 
I won’t speak long on each of those areas, but I really did want 
to talk very quickly about jobs and the economy. 
 
For in this budget, we’re looking at support to small business 
that creates a vast majority of the jobs in the province by 
stimulating investment and job growth . . . And by continuing 
the 9 per cent investment tax on capital purchases for 
manufacturing processing; targeting those dollars that we can 
provide in a reduction in corporate tax rate on manufacturing 
and processing profits that’s based on the level of business 
activity and the jobs that are created for Saskatchewan people in 
the province; supporting the growth of the small business sector 
by cutting through some of the red tape with one-stop centres to 
make it easier to complete the paperwork that’s required to start 
up a small business; and by continuing to support communities 
through the REDAs, the regional economic development 
authorities; and by continuing to provide funding for 
community-based regional economic development 
organizations to help the tremendous potential in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the area of compassion and cooperation, I think that many of 
the members will know that we’ve done a lot just by trying to 
find dollars elsewhere in our budget to make up for the lack of 
transfers in the Canada Health and Social Transfer that I talked 
about earlier. 
 
But in doing that, we’re also going to be developing 
made-in-Saskatchewan training and upgrading strategies, 
coordinating the Departments of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training that would be most important in the creation of 
jobs in the province, and highlighting that portfolio by having a 
minister who will pay full-time attention to the important job of 
preparing our next generation for the new economy. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

Mr. Speaker, and perhaps the most important one  and the 
one I would like to highlight for the next generation in this 
province  is that Saskatchewan will be the province that sets 
the course for the freedom that is unique, and that’s the freedom 
to choose our future and where our program dollars and funding 
will go by providing balanced budgets and by lowering the debt 
that we leave for the next generation in Saskatchewan. We’ll 
continue to balance our budgets for the next four years and 
continue to prepare our citizens for the new century, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to thank, in an odd way, the members of the 
Conservative Party opposite because they’ve also helped us in 
crafting our budget . . . to look clearly at what we would not do 
as we present a budget to the people in Saskatchewan. And that 
would be to stand up in front of cameras and claim that yes, we 
support balanced budgets, but we would deliver nine years of 
whoops budgets that say whoops to $1.2 billion of debt and 
deficit financing in this province each and every year they 
governed. 
 
And to thank the Liberal members opposite as well, who are 
going to somehow indicate to us that they know how to craft a 
budget. And I would not craft ours in that way. I wouldn’t begin 
by a statement of saying that in this period, we’ll cut taxes, and 
somehow we’ll see unprecedented economic growth, 8 per cent 
each year, because of that happening. 
 
But in doing that, they’re also going to spend more on programs 
and services. And in the same breath, they’re apologizing to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan for their federal 
counterparts, the Liberals in Ottawa, who are showing us that 
how they would do that and how they would try and begin to 
address their deficit would be somehow to improve the quality 
of life by cutting health, education, and social programs first. 
That’s the plan I hear from the members opposite . . . and at the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, to still be running deficit budgets. 
 
So I want to thank the members of the Conservative Party and 
the members of the Liberal Party for clearly defining for me 
what I do not ever want to see in a budgeting process in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Who I do really want to thank, Mr. Speaker, is everyone who 
participated in the public consultation process, and those in my 
constituency who continue to provide me with feedback and 
with information on what they feel would be the important 
priorities for people in their communities. 
 
I want to thank the people that are very rarely thanked in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker; it’s the people who spend hours and 
burn the midnight candle to prepare the background papers and 
the statements that we use to look at what decisions will affect 
the outcomes in the budget. And that’s the people in Finance 
who spend hours and hours preparing the papers that will help 
us to decide and choose which direction we’re going to go in 
the budgeting process. 
 
And I want to thank the members of the cabinet who sit for 
hour after hour on the treasury benches. They’re not seen, but  

they’re certainly heard in the final outcome, and we thank them 
for the information they bring forward. And the people I also 
want to thank in the end, Mr. Speaker, are my colleagues who, 
during the time that the budget is presented to caucus, sit with 
us, challenge the assumptions that have been used to formulate 
the budget, hone the decision making, and finally develop the 
cornerstone of a budget that has been presented to the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this budget does is truly give us and our children a unique 
privilege: the freedom to decide and control our future, our own 
future. Mr. Speaker, I now want to go on record as a proud 
supporter of the budget that is before the Assembly. Thank you 
very much for the time . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak in this 
debate and indicate right off that I’m going to be supporting the 
budget that is preparing for the new century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on a few comments that have 
been put forward in this debate by different members previously 
and indicate why I think that they should spend a little more 
time reading the budget as it is written and understanding what 
is there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the person that I want to start with is the 
representative for the constituency of Thunder Creek. He threw 
out basically a challenge to the members opposite when he said 
that we should take and read page 74, and this is what he said. 
He said 
 

Unfortunately while it (is said) . . . the total cut (from the 
federal transfer payments) is $114 million on page 9 of the 
budget, on page 74 it goes on to say something different. If 
the members opposite would look (at) . . . that page  go 
ahead  (and) you’d soon notice that it points out that the 
total reduction in federal transfers is only $43 million. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I took the time to open up the budget book 
and look at page 74, just to assess to see what the individual 
was talking about. And it’s a real strange thing to read because I 
don’t know what figures he subtracted or what figure he 
subtracted from what other figure in order to come out with 43 
million. The closest I could come is forty-two million eight 
when I started subtracting figures, one which was basically 
talking about apples and another one about oranges, and if you 
subtracted the oranges from the apples, you ended up with that 
figure. 
 
But if you look at page 74 under transfers from the Government 
of Canada, you can see that the total transfers from the 
Government of Canada, estimates for 1995-96 fiscal year  
that’s last year  the estimate was $1.384 billion. The estimate 
for 1996-97, Mr. Speaker, is 921 million. So when you subtract 
the number of oranges from the number of oranges, not from 
the number of applies, you end up with 462.5 million less. I 
don’t know where the member opposite got the figure of $43 
million, but I suspect, Mr. Speaker, it is the same way that he 
got the figures that when he tried to convince the Minister of  



634  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

Finance that there was no tax reduction in this particular 
budget. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the public should be very 
watchful of these members as they do their math because I 
suspect that grade 6 students would find it difficult to pass if 
they followed the same techniques in their math. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the budget book is something that I think a 
lot of people should spend a little bit of time, especially reading 
and understanding, especially if they’re members of this House. 
It’s not that difficult to take and get a few figures down so that 
you can remember them. And the members opposite might like 
to take the time and do that. 
 
One of the things that we’ve said and that we’ve done is that 
we’ve supported the three major areas: health, education, social 
services. And, Mr. Speaker, those three areas would be covered 
off in the top four budgetary items this year if it wasn’t for the 
interest payments on the deficit that was left to this government 
by the Conservatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first payment that was . . . or the expenditure 
by this government is on health care, at $1.56 billion, with a 
little change  252,000, if you want to look it up. 
 
The second expenditure, Mr. Speaker, is for education, K to 12, 
and that’s $524 million, if you want to take and look it up in the 
budget book. 
 
The one that I am not mentioning and will mention at the end is 
the interest payments. Social Services is then $524 million. But 
Finance, the interest payments, is the one that really kicks a hole 
in whole operation. It’s $813 million. Mr. Speaker, if that $813 
million wasn’t being spent on interest, it would almost totally 
cover the education from K to 12, plus the education and skills 
of $344 million for education and skills, $542 million for 
education. 
 
And I think the members opposite should spend some time 
looking at the book and reading it so that they understand what 
it actually says. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the same day as the member from Thunder 
Creek tried the shuffle with the $43 million, which I do not 
know where it comes from because it isn’t when you are adding 
or subtracting figures, another member tried to convince the 
Minister of Finance that there was an increase of 12 per cent in 
the cost of electricity to schools. And I just sort of . . . I’d like 
to just read what he said. He said: 
 

Madam Minister, those numbers don’t add up and you’re 
negotiating a salary increase on behalf of local school 
boards at the same time you’re cutting your funding. At the 
same time, the school has been hit with other major cost 
increases such as your 12 per cent SaskPower rate hike. It 
doesn’t make any sense. And people who are going to have 
to pay for it are the local taxpayers and the children in the 
classroom. 

 
(1615) 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a news release here of December 1, 
1995. And it is a news release from the minister in charge of 
SaskPower, and it says in the second paragraph . . . in the last 
sentence in the second paragraph: 
 

In addition, the government has directed that SaskPower 
reduce rates for schools, hospitals, nursing homes, curling 
and skating rinks by 2 per cent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I find that the members opposite have a 
tremendous difficulty with their math, and I can see why they 
can’t remember numbers. And it would good for them to take 
the time to practice a little bit, reading what comes to them in 
news releases and learning the 10 numbers that we have  one 
to zero  so that they understand what they are and can 
remember and repeat them when they need them, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s an interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, to see how these members 
opposite add and work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out another particular thing 
from the members opposite in regards to that. And that is that I 
have here a news clipping that says: 
 

Ten years ago, this kind of budget (referring to the budget 
that we’ve brought down) was politically unthinkable. 
Indeed 10 years ago the former Conservative government 
of Grant Devine was bringing in a budget that ended up 
with an operating deficit of $1.2 billion. 

 
To even say those words now, an operating deficit of $1.2 
billion, seems beyond belief. But, Mr. Speaker, it is that type of 
a budget that was brought in 10 years ago that today generates 
the $813 million worth of interest that we must find the money 
to pay before we can do other things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley stated today that he 
did not see that this budget was a good one. In fact, basically 
what I interpreted from what he was saying was that the budget 
should be . . . that the budget should change and do some things 
like it was being done under the Conservatives previously. And 
he was supported by his member from behind him, who 
indicated that they should go along with some grants for putting 
in gas services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say I would prefer to follow the 
budget that we have, a budget which The Globe and Mail says, 
in a headline, “Again common sense in Saskatchewan.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s been some 
indication from the members opposite that rural Saskatchewan 
is taking a beating. Well, Mr. Speaker, in some sense it is  a 
beating in the sense that if there are no children left there to 
teach, it becomes difficult to say why you should have a school. 
 
But this government is implementing a province-wide 199 Bill 
to introduce this capability for SaskTel. In fact we’re going to 
spend something like $2.4 million to computerize the map of 
the province of Saskatchewan, which will be very important for 
rural Saskatchewan, far more important in rural Saskatchewan  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

than in the urban centres, because this will allow the people 
who receive the call to direct the correct people to provide 
assistance. And so if you have a mapping system in place, it 
will work the best. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is technology of today, meeting the 
conditions of today, providing the services that we want today. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we should understand that health care 
in this province is delivered today in a major sense in some of 
the major hospitals. Over 70 per cent of operations and 
procedures of that type are provided in those hospitals. 
 
So it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that we can get individuals 
who are involved in an accident to those hospitals. And one of 
the key things involved in that is having the ambulance know 
where it has to go to pick up the individual to take him there. So 
this particular item of the 911 is a very important item for rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not planning to spend a great deal of 
time but I want to talk a little bit about the forest area of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And what brings me to talk about 
that is a couple of news items that have been in the 
Star-Phoenix. This one, the one that is the Weyerhaeuser clear 
cutting too fragmented. Mr. Speaker, this is part of a study that 
is being done by the model forest, and a Thomas Bouman, 
manager of the Prince Albert model forest, said on Thursday, a 
three-year environmental study of the forest done indicates 
areas clear cut by Weyerhaeuser are too fragmented. That 
means there’s too small and too many. 
 
Well I happen to live beside the forest and have lived there long 
enough to  with this particular study report  to be able to 
say I’ve now seen directions to people logging in the forest 
make the full circle. They have gone a full circle. 
 
As a young lad, I can remember my father talking about 
harvesting the trees in the forest and the problem that was 
facing him in that particular time was that he was delayed in 
doing the work because he had to wait for the forester to come 
and mark the trees because it was individual trees that he was 
taking out. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it was learned subsequent to that a few years 
later, that when you went in and cut individual trees and 
dragged them out what you did was you damaged the roots and 
what happened is that a majority of the trees that were left 
ended up having rot in the centre of the tree. And then they 
became less valuable than they were if you’d harvest all at one 
time. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the cutting changed — and I was involved 
in that myself — where you would take part of a bluff, a very 
small clear-cut is what it would be. And as I had indicated, 
we’re going now back through a full cycle. But this small 
cutting ended up demonstrating some real problems because 
then that . . . what would happen is other sections of the bluff 
would blow down, and you destroyed valuable timber by the 
procedure that was done. 
 
There were other things that went along with that, Mr. Speaker,  

as to whether the cutting was done in a manner that left the cut 
very rough in appearance or that everything was slashed to the 
ground. And for some time in past, the idea was that it should 
be slashed very level to the ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just last year on a tour that I went through, it was pointed out 
that that was one of the problems with the clear cutting today, is 
that it was slashed to the ground very flat and didn’t leave 
environment for the birds and that, things to land on, perches 
and that, and allow them then to harvest bugs from over the 
whole area. 
 
So with the damage to the trees that were left standing, we’ve 
seen then the size of clear cuts to expand, and they expanded up 
to some . . . to a 1,700 hectares, a thousand-and-some-odd acres 
which then was changed, Mr. Speaker, rotated back to very 
small cuts. And we’ve gone the cycle around to where this 
study says that the cuts should be made fewer and larger and 
mimic what really was taking place in the forest, where when 
there was an intervention into the forest of fire or of something 
of that nature, that it was usually major in extent and covered a 
fairly large area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in pointing this out, I’d like to say that I think 
that people who are making the rules . . . because quite frankly 
the rules were not being made by those who were cutting but by 
people in government or people who were in a group that was 
pressing for change or pushing for a lot of things based, not on 
fact, not on the information available, not on the boreal forest 
of the province of Saskatchewan, but on temperate forests or on 
jungle-type of forest or hardwood forest and not the forest that 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And from my perspective, I’m certainly glad to see that we’ve 
now gone the full circle, tried everything, have places in which 
we can look and see what really takes place and so that we will 
have a system in place that will make for a very economical 
harvesting of forest products and at the same time provide the 
best environmental plans possible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I see then in a paper of a couple of weeks later 
that Weyerhaeuser Canada said that it was one of the reasons 
. . . it says that one of the reasons the industry moved to 
disbursing their clear-cuts more widely has been in response to 
public concern about the large cut blocks. We’re finding that 
the large cuts are nature’s way. When nature creates a 
disturbance, it is apt to create a fairly large disturbance. We 
need to bring our forest practices more in line with natural 
occurrences. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to you that in this case we’ve gone 
full cycle and in doing so we should now be able to do it 
correctly. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that as I listen in regards to 
this budget, as I listened to the members opposite, I find that 
there are some people around that remember . . . or I should say, 
have studied and realized that we’ve gone full circle as well 
with the economics. And it’s in the . . . from the newspaper; 
let’s see, from the P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald, I believe . . . or 
no, I guess it’s the Saskatoon paper: “A far  



636  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

different view of government.” And it says: “For a province like 
Saskatchewan where people were crippled by debt in the ‘30s 
and again in the ‘80s, it is a lesson worth learning.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the cycle has made a full loop and I hope 
that most people take the education that provides. I will be 
supporting the budget, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can look 
forward to the 21st century with a sense of confidence and 
security. Confidence because the future promises jobs, a 
balanced budget, reduced taxes, and a declining public debt. 
Security because these cornerstones of our quality of life  our 
health, education, and social programs  will be there for 
them, their children, and their grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased on behalf of Regina Sherwood to rise 
today in the budget debate. And I will be supporting, on behalf 
of my constituents in Regina Sherwood, I’ll be supporting the 
budget motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are known for a spirit of 
partnership and cooperation. We have many more similarities 
than differences. Mr. Speaker, I wish our members opposite 
would pay heed to some of these words and stress more our 
similarities than our differences. We have much more to gain 
through cooperation and partnership than through division and 
rivalry. The spirit of working together is one of essential values 
that define Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. It is at the very 
heart of this budget and the very heart of the Partnership for 
Growth document strategy which was released by our 
government last month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Partnership for Growth document contains 21 
initiatives that will help this government build on the 
accomplishments of the earlier Partnership for Renewal 
economic strategy over the past three years. And both the 
Partnership for Growth document and this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, focus on opportunities for economic growth and job 
creation for Saskatchewan as we move towards the 21st 
century. 
 
These documents outline how government, business, 
communities, farmers, co-ops, all the stakeholders of our 
society, can work together towards common goals. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s important to nurture the small businesses that create most of 
the jobs in Saskatchewan, and this budget does that. 
 
(1630) 
 
There are a number of ways to help make things easier for small 
businesses, and here are some of these that are outlined in the 
budget and in the Partnership for Growth. Mr. Speaker, the 
budget outlines plans to reduce the number of government 
regulations by 25 per cent over the next 10 years. It announces 
an education program for young people about the option of 
going into business for themselves. And it makes REDAs  
regional economic development authorities  a focal point for  

the economic development strategy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget and our strategy for economic growth 
also recognize that increased trade will be one of the main 
sources of wealth creation in Saskatchewan in the 21st century. 
This fact is further demonstrated by recent reports in the Sask 
Trends Monitor which confirms these statistics. 
 
1995, Mr. Speaker, was a record year for Saskatchewan, 
especially in non-traditional commodities sold to 
non-traditional customers. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
manufacturers shipped $4.7 billion worth of goods last year, 
also an all-time record. 1995 was the third consecutive year of 
substantial growth in Saskatchewan’s manufacturing sector. It 
may be partly coincidence that the period coincides with the 
original Partnership for Renewal strategy, but I think it 
certainly proves that Saskatchewan people can accomplish 
anything we set our minds to when all work together to achieve 
the same objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because trade and export development are so 
crucial, the budget allowed for the establishment of a trade 
development corporation called the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership Inc., known by its initials  STEP. STEP 
will help our exporting firms develop and expand their markets 
which will allow these firms to grow and create jobs and wealth 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism is another area with great potential for 
growth and job creation. This budget allows for continued 
cooperation among the provincial stakeholders to develop a 
provincial tourism strategy. There is enormous international 
interest right now in tourism related to our first nations and our 
Metis cultures, as well as in the areas of adventure tourism, 
eco-tourism, and agri-tourism, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Partnership for Growth, with the support of this budget, 
also includes a plan on Saskatchewan’s existing strengths in 
agri-value, forestry, mining, energy, cultural industries, and 
information technology. Other significant initiatives include, 
Mr. Speaker, analysing Saskatchewan’s business climate to see 
how we can be more competitive with other jurisdictions, 
commercializing new and emerging technologies, and matching 
training to job opportunities. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the budget and our Partnership for 
Growth represents a renewed commitment to the objectives laid 
out earlier in the Partnership for Renewal, which included 
continuing with an orderly plan to balance the provincial budget 
and manage the debt, targeting tax reductions for business, 
helping form regional economic development authorities to 
coordinate development in their areas, and developing 
comprehensive strategies in Saskatchewan’s key economic 
sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these actions have developed our partners, our 
businesses, our workers, cooperatives and communities, to help 
create 10,000 jobs in Saskatchewan since 1992. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is on the verge of accelerated economic growth. 
And this same partnership of Saskatchewan people will result in 
the creation of another 20,000 jobs over the next five years. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

Mr. Speaker, this will accomplish Partnership for Renewal job 
target of creating 30,000 new jobs between 1992 and the year 
2000. This budget facilitates the priorities of the Partnership 
for Growth economic development strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a host of opportunities opening up 
because of Saskatchewan’s improving economic situation, and 
all segments of the economy have a role to play in capturing 
and building on those opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget, like the Partnership for Growth plan, 
is a strategy for Saskatchewan business. It’s clear that economic 
development must be a shared responsibility among all 
segments of Saskatchewan’s society, which will continue to 
work together to achieve the goals of the Partnership for 
Growth, and this budget, and to ensure that Saskatchewan 
people have a prosperous and more secure future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summary, building prosperity and creating jobs 
continue to be our number one priority. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy is strong, and this budget supports 
further prosperity, security, and growth in our province through 
keeping our promise  our promise of continued lower taxes 
on families, continued targeted tax incentives for business, and 
cutting red tape and investing in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Regina Sherwood, 
I’ll be pleased to support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly my 
pleasure to rise and speak in support of the budget that I view as 
fair, reasonable, responsible, and forward-looking. 
 
Albeit fairly late, Mr. Speaker, I would like to use this 
opportunity, my first opportunity, to publicly congratulate you 
on being the first Speaker elected by ballot here in the 
Assembly and I appreciate the very fine job you are doing here 
for us. 
 
Upon becoming a cabinet minister last fall in November, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the privilege of sitting on Treasury Board, so 
I’ve had the opportunity to observe and partake in the whole 
development of the budget process. It’s a very intriguing 
experience; lots of long hours but nonetheless very informative 
and a great experience. 
 
And I’d like to, in light of that, congratulate and thank our 
people in the Department of Finance for the many long hours 
that they have put in to working and developing the background 
for the budget and sitting with us to as late as 1:15 a.m. one 
particular morning. 
 
And also I had the opportunity to meet and have input from the 
various government departments and various staff, and I would 
also like to thank them as well for their fine work in preparing 
this budget. And last but not least, the public employees of 
Saskatchewan here do a great job and their commitment to 
Saskatchewan is very much appreciated by everyone. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the budget highlights are really 
highlights. For an example, we have a plan for four more years 
of balanced budgets and total debt reduction of $2.4 billion by 
1999. That will leave another 12 billion to go, but still 
nonetheless we’re headed in the right direction. 
 
Something that people really appreciate is no new tax increases. 
Also expenses are cut by $230 million this fiscal year and there 
will be certainly more in the years coming as well. Our annual 
interest costs should be reduced by $100 million by the year 
1999-2000, so that is also very encouraging, as we are headed 
in the right direction. 
 
Part of our budget is looking at building prosperity and jobs. 
And certainly some of the points that I would like to refer to 
are, continued reduction in the debt reduction surtax which 
saves people $55 million annually in taxes or $150 per working 
person or $300 per couple in a two-income home. 
 
We’ve also got targeted tax incentives to increase development, 
jobs. We’re cutting red tape. This is evident in my department 
of Environment and Resource Management. People, for an 
example, recognize the environment is very important and are 
prepared to do things on their own and abide by the rules and 
regulations, so we’re able to save some dollars in that area. 
 
Up to $238 million is being invested in our most important 
industry, which is agriculture, which is good news for the farm 
sector; $630 million in capital projects in 1996-97 is also being 
put out. And there’s support for regional economic 
development in a number of areas through the REDA programs. 
 
The economic outlook certainly is encouraging for 
Saskatchewan. Our economic growth is projected to continue to 
average 2.5 per cent per year in real terms. And growth is again 
driven by exports and investments, and we certainly are really 
making great progress on exports and value added, again in the 
agriculture industry in particular. Jobs are very important to 
people, and we are looking at increased employment. We’re 
forecasting another 21,000 jobs by the year 2000, and that is on 
top of the 10,000 jobs created since 1992. So jobs are 
important, and we are making great gains in that area. 
 
Preserving the cornerstones of our quality of life through the 
pre-budget consultations, Mr. Speaker — health, education, and 
social services — were viewed as very important to people. 
And we have recognized that, unlike our federal counterparts. 
So we are putting in 110 million new dollars into funding 
health, education, and social services, and this is to basically 
back-fill the $114 million that the federal government decided 
to cut out of health, education, and social services. And we are 
committed to preserving these services, and we are doing so by 
putting money where our mouth is, so to speak. 
 
The budget provides, as I say, funding to replace the money 
taken out by the federal government; $52 million is being added 
to social services, and that’s exactly what was taken out by the 
federal government; $47 million put back into health  added 
to health, I should say  and that back-fills the 47 million 
taken out by the federal government; post-secondary education, 
we were able to back-fill 11 million of the 15 million cut by the  



638  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

federal government. 
 
And we very seriously question the federal government’s 
priorities when they cut health, education, and social services 
by 40 per cent and the remaining federal government 
departments by 8 per cent. 
 
We also had to look at ourselves. People told us, reduce the size 
of government. So we have been cutting administration; we’ve 
eliminated duplication and overlap. This has been ongoing over 
the years. For an example, a couple of years ago we combined 
the Department of Environment and the Department of Natural 
Resources to make one Department of Environment and 
Resource Management, again reducing duplication and overlap. 
 
And we’re also delivering services more effectively, and as a 
result $50 million in savings is being realized. 
 
Total expenses, or I should say operating expenses per capita, to 
operate the government, is going to fall to $4,300 per person. 
So basically the cost of running government is $4,300 a person, 
which is down $270 from 1991-92 and this is the lowest capita 
government spending for any government in the country. So we 
are appreciative of that. And it’s again a tribute to our public 
employees for being able to do more with less. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the real impact or the real message 
from people is found out in our constituencies. And despite the 
gloom and doom conveyed by some members opposite, I 
believe that Saskatchewan is thriving. And my particular riding 
of Indian Head-Milestone is a rural riding and I’d just like to 
touch on a few communities and provide information to show 
that these communities are doing very well. 
 
Sintaluta, in the north-east corner of my riding, despite the train 
derailment last week, is doing very well and fortunately no one 
was injured in that derailment. I did observe the wreckage 
yesterday and it was quite an impressive sight to see the 
wrecked cars and what not, but fortunately no one was injured. 
 
There’s a very viable seed-cleaning plant operated by the 
Blenkin brothers in Sintaluta. They have a very good museum, 
it being an old community, agriculture community. And also 
Darlene Redding has a very attractive and interesting antique 
shop where people are able to purchase supplies and people, 
being along the Trans-Canada Highway, stop in there 
throughout the tourist season. 
 
As most small communities, Sintaluta has a thriving co-op store 
and a credit union as well. 
 
Just south of Sintaluta is the Carry the Kettle First Nation. And 
again the first nation is expanding and developing and it’s really 
encouraging to see they have a health centre there now, a store 
which was recently opened, a very useful hall which is used for 
many functions, and they also sponsor rodeos and powwows 
throughout the year. 
 
Further south again at Montmartre we have Dusyk Enterprises, 
a long-time John Deere dealer, well recognized, and they are 
reporting very brisk sales since, really, throughout the fall and  

winter and into the spring here. 
 
(1645) 
 
Family-run businesses are important in rural Saskatchewan. 
Schmidt’s Convenience Store is a very . . . is a hub of activity. 
You’re able to rent movies, buy milk, and play pool and just 
about everything. It’s a real attraction and a centre of activity 
for many things in the community. And they host things such as 
rock-a-thons to raise money for their local pool, and the recent 
rock-a-thon did raise about $2,400. 
 
Down in south-east corner of the riding is the town of Fillmore. 
And unfortunately Fillmore, like many other communities, was 
hard hit by a summer storm last year. Last June a storm did 
whip through the town and damaged many buildings, trees, but 
being rural Saskatchewan, people came together and helped — 
neighbour helping neighbour. The clean-up was under way 
within hours and the town is still thriving. There’s a very 
successful seed processing plant there with several full-time 
employees. 
 
Moving west to the town of Yellow Grass, Hennie’s Lucky 
Dollar Store and Bonnie’s Café are two of the businesses there 
which provide services, not only for the residents, for people 
travelling down the highway towards Weyburn. Unfortunately 
Yellow Grass lost its hotel a year or two ago through fire, but 
I’m sure that the facility will be rebuilt. 
 
Moving up the highway to Lang, we have a new business there 
called Written in Stone and Geo-Ark Petrographic. And this 
new business is going to be using stones, which there are lots of 
in Saskatchewan, for various products, and these will be sold. 
And it’s only the second of its kind in North America, this type 
of business. 
 
In Milestone, a thriving community, I had the pleasure of 
attending a dinner theatre there last week in a brand-new hall 
which was constructed from the proceeds from the estate of 
Gertie and Elmer Hendrickson. And again these pioneers, 
recognizing the value of their communities, left their mark and 
donated their proceeds in their estate to the community. And 
that’s certainly a tribute and will be greatly appreciated for 
many years. 
 
Wilcox, the home of Notre Dame College, is still a thriving 
community and well-known throughout not only Canada, but 
abroad as well. And still the reputation of the Wilcox college is 
well-known and high standards are maintained. 
 
At Kronau, Saskatchewan, about 20 miles out of Regina, we 
have a number of young families living there; commute to the 
city. And as a result of the people there, the school stays viable. 
Curling is a great pastime, producing provincial and national 
champion teams. And also Kronau is the home of . . . capital of 
the burrowing owl of Canada. And back in 1987 when we were 
celebrating the centennial of wildlife conservation and Prince 
Philip was here from England, we toured the site to observe the 
burrowing owls. 
 
Other communities such as Sedley has a thriving auto-body  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

shop and a seed plant. And Vibank and Odessa again are 
pleased to welcome new families to their communities, both 
within commuting distance of Regina. 
 
Odessa recently hosted the junior girls and boys broomball 
championships. And very fitting that both the Odessa junior 
girls’ Flames and the boys’ Bandits won both provincial 
championships. And they have since moved on to the 
provincials. So we congratulate the coaches, teams, and 
families of these two junior teams. 
 
Kendal is a small community. However it has a store. Heidi 
Foord, restaurant owner there, and doing a thriving business 
and again providing a great service to the community. 
 
McLean is the home to the Wood Country Building supplies. 
People from many miles around obtain building supplies at that 
facility. 
 
The town of Qu’Appelle is the most, I guess, most recent riding 
to experience a devastating fire in my constituency. And, 
however, the town lost two or three businesses, but will 
certainly survive. 
 
And speaking of surviving, Wilson’s Store in Qu’Appelle 
celebrated its 50th anniversary last year, as being in business 
with the same owner. 
 
Well Fort Qu’Appelle, in the Qu’Appelle valley, is a thriving 
community with many businesses and many opportunities. I live 
closest to the community of Indian Head which is a 
well-established farm community, rural community. At one 
time Indian Head was bigger than Regina, being established in 
late 1800s. 
 
The PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) tree 
nursery continues to send out millions and millions of trees to 
people across the Prairies for shelter belts and farmsteads. The 
experimental farm at Indian Head, although due to cut-backs 
there’s not near as much activity there, still does great work in 
researching agricultural products and weed control and such 
like. 
 
The Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association recently 
moved to Indian Head as their headquarters; Doug McKell, the 
executive director, and this too is very fitting with the research 
station there. 
 
The number of people in a community have got together to 
form the Indian Head Agricultural Research Foundation, again 
working cooperatively with farmers and the experimental farm 
and the Soil Conservation Association. 
 
There’s some industries at Indian Head, including the Conserva 
Pak, zero-till machinery manufacturer. And Jim Halford, who 
lives a couple of miles from me, began this production about 
seven or eight years ago, and he now employs 18 full-time 
people and a number of part-time people on the farm, 
manufacturing these seeders which have been sent throughout 
western Canada, United States, and as far away as Australia. 
 

Indian Head has a number of new businesses and we have 
recently . . . will soon be having the official opening of a new 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) depot. The China 
Garden Restaurant is building a new facility  in fact moving 
into it this week  and to provide more room to accommodate 
the customers. Ken McCabe recently opened a Sports Hall of 
Fame at Indian Head, and last year we had a H & L Automotive 
Repair open a new building; a new Indian Head co-op building 
last year, and other businesses like Dragan’s Drugs are 
expanding. 
 
We also have the first Paterson Grain Company inland terminal 
located at Indian Head, and Agtech Seed Processing, again 
providing a number of jobs in the community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is doing very well and we 
need to look at the positive things instead of dwelling on the 
negative things and I believe that the people of Saskatchewan 
will continue to be positive as we adjust and make necessary 
changes for the 21st century. 
 
If I might say a few words about Environment and Resource 
Management, Mr. Speaker, which I am minister of. As I 
mentioned earlier, these two departments were combined a 
couple of years ago and back in the 1980s the environment was 
the number one issue on people’s agenda. Although it is not 
number one in the 1990s, it still is very high on the list of 
priorities, and certainly we need a healthy environment if we 
wish to have a healthy place for to raise our children and 
continue having long lives which we are recognized for having 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the Department of Environment is involved with 
regulating and monitoring activities such as mining, hazardous 
wastes, community waste disposal sites, air emissions, and such 
like. And as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, we are getting 
great cooperation from industry and communities. And we look 
forward to that because everybody realizes we do need a 
healthy environment in order to survive and prosper. 
 
Some of the new initiatives in the department include used oil 
recycling and used tire recycling. SARCAN, which recycles pop 
cans, has been very successful. And basically SARCAN has 
proved to us if a recycling opportunity is there, people will 
participate. 
 
And many farmers have tires and gallons and barrels of oil on 
their farms, which they’ve been storing up. So we look forward 
to the very near future where we will have a place to dispose of 
these things, and again contributing towards a healthy 
environment. 
 
On the natural resources side of the department, we have 
forestry, fisheries, wildlife, and parks. And the new forestry 
resources management Act is going to be a very positive step as 
we move towards the 21st century. And we do have good 
cooperation with stakeholders, including the forest industry, 
trappers, first nations, and other groups concerned and 
interested in the forest. 
 
We have a number of co-management agreements, which we  



640  Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

have in place with first nations and communities in the North 
and we look towards working with these people and expanding 
on them. 
 
We’re apparently in the process of doing an environmental 
impact assessment on the east side FMA (Forest Management 
Agreement) and we also have a forestry advisory committee 
which does provide very valuable input from the public as we 
look forward to managing our forests for the future. 
 
Our fish and wildlife are very important to people. There’s 
roughly 200,000 people that fish in Saskatchewan each year, 
and we have a fisheries enhancement fund and fisheries 
biologist, which we are working to enhance the fish populations 
in areas. And unfortunately some areas have been impacted by 
pollution, over-fishing, and it’s up to us to work together to try 
and resolve these problems. 
 
On the wildlife side of things we are working on endangered 
species, the whooping crane being a very notable success story. 
In 1941 there was only 21 whooping cranes in the world, and 
currently we have around 300 whooping cranes. So they’ve 
made a remarkable comeback. The burrowing owl, as I 
mentioned earlier, and other species are also in need of 
attention and we’ll be working to ensure that these species 
don’t dwindle into oblivion like some of the other species such 
as the passenger pigeon. 
 
Wildlife management is always a challenge and we’ve certainly 
seen that this winter with the deer populations Again we are 
going to work towards, cooperatively with SARM, farmers, and 
organizations to fix this problem in the future. And the 
conservation easement Act is a very positive piece of legislation 
which will be coming through, Mr. Speaker, where again 
landowners will be rewarded financially for preserving some 
habitat on their lands. 
 
We have a parks advisory group in place to give us advice on 
parks. Our park system is very important to people, with 2.3 
million visitors a year in our parks. And we certainly need to 
maintain our parks in the most economical and feasible way 
possible, and this advisory group will be coming forward with 
some recommendations later this month. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess to summarize, quoting from the 
Leader-Post which we are very pleased to say has a positive 
editorial here, last Friday, and I quote: 
 

Since its election in 1991 the NDP government has done a 
credible job of managing the province’s finances. That 
tradition continues with Thursday’s budget. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly going to my pleasure to support 
this budget with pride and optimism as we move towards the 
21st century. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 611 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 611 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 612 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 612 
Murray ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 629 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Regional Science Fairs 

Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 
Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan Awards 

Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 
Cypress Hills Timber Wolves 

McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 613 
Newspaper Inquiry 

Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................. 613 
New Business in Elbow  

McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 
PAMI Wins Defence Contract 

Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 
Local Residents to Attend Olympic Games  

Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................. 613 
World’s Largest Bunnock 

Murrell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 614 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 614 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 614 

Highway Maintenance Depots  
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 615 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 615 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 616 

SaskTel Union Job Action 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 617 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 617 

Tax Relief 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 617 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 618 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
SaskEnergy Rates 

Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 618 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 619 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 619 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 

MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 620 
 
 



Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public Employees 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 620 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 620 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 620 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 620 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 620 

Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................... 624 
Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................... 624 
Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 625 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 627 
Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 631 
Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 633 
Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................... 636 
Scott ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 637 


