


















































April 22, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1061 
 April 22, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me, 
immediately to my left, is Mr. Duane Adams who is the deputy 
minister of Finance, and . . . of Health, actually. And I’m the 
Minister of Health. Beside him is Kathy Langlois who is the 
executive director, finance and management services, and right 
behind me is Glenda Yeates who’s the associate deputy 
minister of Health, not Finance. And joining us in a few 
minutes will be Lois Borden who is the executive director of 
the district support branch of the Department of Health. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
want to welcome your officials that are with you this evening. I 
believe there will be several meetings that they’ll be enjoying 
some debate between yourself and I given some of the cuts in 
your department and some of the things that have happened 
especially in the rural areas. And of course we’ve got days that I 
think, Mr. Minister, that we’ll be dealing with some of these 
questions. But we’ll just start off easy tonight. 
 
I’d like to ask you how it is that the districts are funded. And I 
raise it in this context because it was your department and you, 
Mr. Minister, and the previous ministers that talked about how 
the funding in health care would be based on need. So I’d like 
to hear what you have to say about this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to tell the 
hon. member that funding to the health districts is based upon a 
population-needs-based approach. 
 
What that means first of all, of course, is that we look at the 
population of each district. There are 30 districts in the 
province, and we try to base funding, the amount of funding, on 
the population of each district. But we, within each population, 
we have to look at the demographic characteristics of the 
population. That is, if the district has more elderly people, 
senior people, they require more money for health care, so that 
there’s an adjustment in favour of the district. The district 
would receive more money because it has a higher proportion 
of seniors, or perhaps there might be a higher proportion of very 
young children who require more health care and the district 
might get more money because of that. 
 
But generally speaking, the funds are allocated, 80 per cent of 
the funds are allocated, to the districts using the 
population-needs-based approach. In other words, on the basis 
of how many people the district has and the characteristics of 
the district population. 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so does it go 
beyond . . . are there circumstances where it would go beyond 
dealing with population, getting into geography? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Strictly speaking, Mr. Chairman, generally 
the funding formula does not take geography into account 
except with respect to home-based services; the distance 
required to travel to see the person is taken into account in 
allocating the funding. 
 
The other aspect where geography is indirectly taken into 
account is that the population-needs-based funding is adjusted 
to recognize that certain districts have more costly infrastructure 
than others. So that you might have larger districts with a large 
number of smaller institutions, and the formula takes that into 
account. 
 
So in those two ways geography is a factor. Beyond those two 
ways, geography is not a factor. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister. So what I hear 
from you is that in fact if there’s any deviance on this funding 
. . . or what the formula takes into consideration would be costs 
to provide the service, costs to the Department of Health or to 
the district health board, but there’s no extra funding given a 
geographical situation where there is a lot more cost to the 
residents or people that would be using the service, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I think generally speaking that’s right. 
If the district is large and it costs more to provide home-based 
services, it’s taken account for home-based services. And if the 
district has more costs to the infrastructure than other districts, 
that is also taken into account. But generally I think what the 
member says is true. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, so there’s no 
extra costs . . . I’ll use the community of Climax for an example 
where in fact there’s a geographical divide. And you recall the 
court cases there, your deputy would recall the court cases or 
the proposed court case that you could have been facing 
because of the Frenchman River valley, and so that community 
or communities that would have geographical concerns like 
this, they would receive no extra consideration at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, as I said, the funding would be based 
upon the population of the districts and the demographics of the 
population. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  The funding formula that you’re using, is 
it consistent right throughout the province, whatever the 
formula be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Is it easily explained? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’m not going to say it is because then 
I’ll get into trying to explain it and I’ll probably have a rough 
time. I think that it’s a fairly complex matter actually. 



1062  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, could you . . . without being 
I guess too precise  I’m going to have to give you some 
latitude here  but could you give us . . . get as close as you 
can, say how you would fund one district versus another, with a 
larger centre versus a smaller centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’ll start with this explanation, Mr. 
Chairman. The funding starts with the district’s population. 
This is based on the people that have health cards. 
 
For acute care services, we know that children, elderly, and 
women in childbearing years need and use more hospital 
services. And therefore districts with a higher proportion of 
these people receive an upward age and gender adjustment. The 
needs adjustment for acute care services recognizes districts 
that have a high number of births, a high number of premature 
deaths, and a high number of low birth weight babies. 
 
The service flow adjustment recognizes districts that have an 
inflow of residents from other districts; that is, the district is 
providing services to residents of other districts. 
 
So in other words, I think there’s two factors here. The first is, 
as I said a few minutes ago, you take the pool of money 
available to the districts across the province, and you divide it 
up between them based on their population, but you adjust that 
depending upon other factors such as the number of women, 
seniors, babies’ births, and so on. The other adjustment you 
make is that if people move from one district to another to 
access services, then there would be an adjustment with respect 
to that as well. 
 
The member says what was the last line. The first part of it is 
based on population and the characteristics of the population. 
So you do that. Then there is a service flow adjustment which 
recognizes that districts have an inflow of residents from other 
districts; that is, a district is providing services to residents of 
other districts. 
 
In other words, if you took the district of Swift Current and the 
district of Rolling Hills as an example, the Swift Current district 
would provide a lot of acute care services for people that live in 
Rolling Hills, which is, you know, is the district surrounding 
the city of Swift Current. So the Swift Current Health District 
would receive compensation for providing acute care services 
to people that live in Rolling Hills but access their services in 
Swift Current. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, is there any additional 
funding for any districts or any communities where there are 
facilities that have larger industry involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The answer to that question, Mr. 
Chairman, is no. A district would not get more funding because 
it had large industry. Although generally speaking you would 
probably find, other than some of the mines in the North, that 
the larger industries would exist where the population was 
higher. They would tend to be in urban areas. So coincidentally, 
if there was large industry, the district where the industry was 
located probably would get more funding, but that would be by 
way of coincidence rather than design. 

(1915) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the needs-based funding, 
has that been consistent since health reform began, or has the 
. . . oh, I guess the definition of a needs of a district, has that 
changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The framework for needs-based funding 
was implemented, Mr. Chairman, in 1994-95, but we’ve made 
adjustments to it since then and will continue to make 
adjustments to it in consultation with the districts. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so are you telling 
me that up to that ‘94-95 year, in fact the needs was based on 
the needs of the residents of the district and not necessarily the 
population? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I would say that the reverse is true. 
That under needs-based funding that we have now and since 
1994-95, the funding is more likely to be allocated based upon 
the needs of the residents in the district in the sense that the 
funding takes into account the number of people that live in the 
district, and the services accessed there. Prior to that time, as 
the member knows, there used to be approximately 410 separate 
boards, and the funding was simply allocated on the basis of the 
historical relationship between each individual board and the 
province. So that the province would be funding, you know, St. 
Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon directly, and Royal University 
Hospital directly, and the hospital in Hafford directly, and so 
on. 
 
But there wasn’t really planning in terms of the population of 
the district. It was more a matter of just looking at what the 
institution got the previous year and then making an adjustment 
based on that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then who determines the 
need of a district board, of a health district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The need of a health district would be 
determined by looking at the population of the district; and also 
by looking at any special characteristics within that population, 
i.e., are there more elderly people within that district; are there 
more births; low-weight babies; women of child-bearing age 
and so on. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, if in fact . . . you keep 
coming back to having it based on almost solely on population. 
So then, can you tell what the role of these needs assessments 
and acuity studies  acuity studies, I guess, in particular  
how this would play into it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the needs studies that the member is 
referring to have more to do with allocating the money within 
the district itself, not the amount of money that the district 
receives from government. 
 
In other words, say that we have a billion dollars that we’re 
giving to the districts, which is not quite the exact number but 
approximately the number this year. Then we would divide that 
amongst the 30 districts based upon their population. But we  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

would take into account different population characteristics to 
determine exactly how much money each should get. 
 
Once they are allocated their money, the district itself has to 
take its pool of money and decide how to spend it, and they 
would carry out further studies to determine levels of acuity and 
also need within the district so that they could then take their 
pool of money and allocate their money between the various 
institutions and services within their district. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, what role does your 
department play once the money is allocated to the district 
board or to the health district? What role does your department 
play in, in fact, deciding where within that district the funding 
gets spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the districts have to 
meet certain provincial standards set out in The Public Health 
Act and The Health Districts Act. But generally speaking, once 
they receive their money, they come up with a plan as to how to 
spend their money. 
 
There is one rule; they cannot take money from what is 
allocated for community-based care and put it into institutional 
care. But they can take money out of institutional care and put it 
into community care, or they can shift money as between 
several institutions. So they could make a decision to close an 
institution, convert an institution, establish a new institution, 
consolidate institutions and so on. But within those parameters 
they would be free to spend their money how they wish. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, then your department, 
when you’re going to fund a district, your department then must 
be setting out how much money can be spent in that district on 
acute care, long-term care, home-based care. It’s already set out 
there, and they can’t deviate from that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  There are three pools of money: acute care, 
supportive care, and home-based care. And the department and 
the legislature decide how much money, with respect to each of 
those three pools, the districts should get. But once they get the 
money, they can do with the money what they like. They don’t 
have to keep the same amount in the acute care pool or the 
supportive care pool. But they cannot take money out of 
community-based care and put it into institutional care, but they 
can take money out of institutional care and put it into 
community-based care, or they can adjust the configuration as 
between acute care and long-term care. So even though they 
receive the money based upon what the department perceives 
their needs to be, they can do what they like with their money 
within those parameters. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then given that answer it’s 
clearly your department that sets out how many acute care beds 
are allowable in any one district, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. Given my answer, that would not be 
the case. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, if in fact your 
department controls the funding, if the district board doesn’t  

have the ability to shift funds into acute care, only take monies 
out of acute care, the only latitude they would have is if they 
want to have less acute care beds. So perhaps you would like to 
revisit your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well there would be some examples where 
the districts could, if they wanted to, move money for example 
from long-term care to acute care. That would be within their 
decision-making power. So I just say to the member that to say 
that they can’t increase the number of acute care beds if they 
wanted to would not be true. But they cannot take money from 
community-based care and put it into acute care beds. 
 
As between long-term care and acute care, they can make 
whatever decisions they like. And as between various 
institutions, on the institutional care side, they can come up 
with the configuration that they feel best meets their population 
needs. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, on February 28 of this year 
the rural municipality of Hart Butte No. 11 wrote a letter to 
yourself, and in this letter . . . well in fact they refer to several 
letters that they have been writing to you and your department, 
and seemingly never getting any response. But I’ll deal with this 
particular one. And the question is: is it district health boards or 
the Minister of Health that has the authority to establish acute 
care beds in a facility? To date we have no response from your 
office. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you stand in the House this evening and 
give a response to that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That would be a decision for the district to 
make, but of course the district would have to meet provincial 
standards such as the type of standards in The Hospital 
Standards Act for an acute care facility. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Then, Mr. Minister, perhaps you could 
step us through the process that they would have to go through 
to have this happen and explain in lay language; tell us what the 
process is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  To answer the member’s question . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . although I do appreciate the 
assistance of my colleagues, Mr. Chairman, let’s say that a 
district had three acute care facilities, each with 20 acute care 
beds. And they decided that they wanted to reduce the number 
of acute care beds in two of the facilities and increase the 
number of acute care beds in the third facility. They would just 
go ahead and make a board decision to do that. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, let’s look at it in another 
way. Let’s say the former minister of Health made an error in 
closing . . . Mr. Chair, it’s so noisy over there; I’m glad they’re 
your colleagues. 
 
In fact, Mr. Minister, if the former minister of Health had made 
an error in closing too many beds, would the district health 
board have the ability, have the latitude, to open more beds?  



1064  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

You keep referring as though they all wished to close and turn 
some of the beds and the funding of those beds into long-term 
care or supportive or home-based. View it from the other side 
of that stick, Mr. Minister, and tell me if in fact they could 
increase, without your department’s influence, the number of 
acute care beds in their health district. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if the district wished to designate a 
facility as an acute care facility and to allocate some of its 
funding to that facility, they would so decide. And then they 
would apply to myself to designate the institution that they 
wanted to turn into an acute care facility as a hospital, and I 
would have to make a decision under The Hospital Standards 
Act whether to designate that facility or not. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, what would be the 
criteria that you would then sit down . . . as a lawyer and not a 
health professional, what would you sit down and decide what 
was appropriate criteria that you would want to see before you 
would allow these beds to be reopened after the former minister 
of Health cut and slashed and destroyed the health care in rural 
Saskatchewan. So what would your criteria be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member mentioned that I might 
answer the question as a lawyer, not a health professional. I 
suppose I could ask the member if he’s asking the question as a 
rancher or a farmer, not a health professional. 
 
But I think we all have an interest in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
But let me say that if a health district desired to open an acute 
care facility in a particular location and that met the needs of 
their population and they were within their budget  because 
admittedly it is always within the budget  but they decided 
that was the best way to spend money within their district, and 
they were making other changes to accommodate their desire to 
do that, then I think that if it was sustainable and it met the 
needs of the population, that that would be something that the 
health district should be able to accomplish. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So then, Mr. Minister, I guess . . . that was 
a good question that you had, whether I was asking it as a 
farmer and a rancher, because really that is the case. I’m 
looking at this through the eyes of the people that I represent, 
and that’s what I was hoping, that you would also come back as 
a minister and think along those same lines as to people that 
actually need this service and not just to satisfy the Finance 
minister’s needs. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, then if . . . can you give me any examples of 
where in fact any communities or health district boards put a 
request for additional acute care beds and you granted their 
wish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chairman, there have been no specific 
requests to me in that regard. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well I find that hard to believe. Not that 
I’m feeling that you’re not being truthful with the answers, but 
in fact there were 52 communities that were affected by your 
government. And through the health care coalition I know 
several of them were trying to hold onto some acute care status.  

And are you telling me that none of those affected facilities 
have requested to have some acute care funding and acute care 
beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if the member is asking if the districts 
have asked, through their boards, to reopen any of these 
facilities, we’re not aware of any such requests. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So then, Mr. Minister, you would allow 
this, I guess though, if the request came to you by way of the 
district board because you believe these boards are autonomous, 
right? You’ve said that on many occasions. So we’ll take that 
for granted for a moment. 
 
You had mentioned a while ago that in fact it’s the . . . that is, 
the districts have the authority . . . you see I’m looking at a 
letter here from the rural municipality of Hart Butte, again 
December 4 to yourself, where in fact they are stating that, from 
you and your department, they’ve been advised that they have 
no authority to open acute care beds in the district; they only 
have the authority to close beds. The decision to open acute 
care beds rests with the Department of Health and the minister. 
So is this the case or isn’t it the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, 
if I could see a copy of the letter for clarification. But while the 
member is sending me a copy, let me say that, in answer to the 
first part of his question, if the district had an appropriate plan 
to open an acute care facility which was within its budget and 
they could pay for it, then the answer is as I told the member. 
 
Yes. The member asks that I repeat that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I said to the member in response to the first part of his last 
question that if the district wished to open an acute care facility 
and they could do so within their budget, and they deemed that 
to be appropriate, and it didn’t involve transferring money from 
their community-based funding to acute care, but it was a 
reconfiguration of their institutional side, then I believe the 
district should be permitted to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister. That tells me that 
what you’re doing is controlling the amount of acute care beds 
in the district because you’re under-funding these districts now. 
 
In fact, how many times during this session alone and the last 
session have we found that there’s been deficits that are 
uncontrollable and are in fact further cut-backs. So you know 
full well, you and your department know full well, that you 
would never grant any more acute care beds because you’re not 
funding health care the way it needs to be funded in rural 
Saskatchewan. Am I right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well in fact, Mr. Chairman, there haven’t 
been any cut-backs in the amount of money paid to the districts. 
As the member knows, notwithstanding the fact that we receive 
less money for health care from Ottawa, we have put the money 
that they have cut back in, and we haven’t reduced the amount 
of money we’re giving to the districts for health care. So there 
really haven’t been any cut-backs. 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

But I’ll be the first to admit to the member that yes, each district 
must live within its budget. If you’re suggesting that the 
districts should have an unlimited amount of money or a blank 
cheque, it’s true that they don’t. They have a finite amount of 
money, just as government does and universities do and 
municipalities do, and so also it is the case with health districts. 
That’s an unfortunate fact of life and reality that we all have to 
live with. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, as a Health minister then are 
you telling me  and I’d like to hear it from your words  that 
in fact coming in on budget, on target or below, is more 
important than the health needs of the people of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, certainly not. In fact I would say to the 
member that even though the amount of money we spend on 
health care today is just slightly more than what we spent in 
1991, the same number of services are provided to the people in 
terms of the number of surgeries provided. And the total acute 
care services used by residents of the 30 health districts has 
remained very constant. 
 
So it’s very important to meet the health care needs of people in 
the province, and I think actually we’re doing a very good job 
of it. The services have not gone down. But it is a fact of life 
that there is not an unlimited budget. And I simply say to the 
member that if he’s asking me if the districts have to live within 
a set budget, yes they most certainly do. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then perhaps you could tell 
me, if in fact they have the constraints of budget . . . and your 
department and you, Mr. Minister, you already said that . . . told 
us here in the House tonight that in fact this has to be run by 
you, even if in fact they had the . . . you know, if it was 
affordable to have more acute care beds. 
 
Tell me, with these constraints, why then your department and 
you, Mr. Minister, would have these districts do acuity studies 
and needs assessment within the district. What was the point? 
Could you tell us that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well in answer to the member’s first point, 
Mr. Chairman, I would say that the designation as a hospital by 
the minister is not something that came along in the last few 
years under health reform. This is something that has existed in 
legislation for a long time  not just in this province but in 
every province  that you can’t just call a facility a hospital. It 
has to be so designated by the Minister of Health, whether it’s 
Saskatchewan or some other province. This is nothing new. 
 
So the idea that somebody who wants to start a hospital up has 
to get approval of the Minister of Health, is really neither here 
nor there. Nor is it any kind of an attempt to undermine the 
authority of health boards. 
 
In terms of the acuity studies and needs-based studies, it only 
makes sense that each district should look at the characteristics 
of its population and the services they require in determining 
how to deliver their health services. But at the end of the day, 
the decision will be the health district’s in terms of what 
services they feel that they should offer within the parameters  

that we’ve already discussed this evening. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, if you’re saying that 
they should do needs assessments and acuity studies . . . but at 
the end of the day, they would base it on what? These aren’t 
people that are, you know, professional actuaries and such. 
What would they base this on if in fact you don’t feel that they 
have to live by the needs assessment and acuity studies? I mean 
what do they base it on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the people on the boards may not be 
accountants and actuaries, but they’re people with common 
sense. They would look at the evidence in their jurisdiction and 
they would make a decision based upon the evidence, as people 
with common sense, as most people in the province do possess. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the role 
of advisory committees within a district play? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chairman, each district would have a 
medical advisory committee, the purpose of which would be to 
have the district board get some advice from the, mainly the 
physicians within the district; and then beyond that, they would 
set up committees to advise them in accordance with the wishes 
of the district, and usually in relation to some population group 
or another. 
 
For example, a district might want to have a committee of 
seniors, or people representing mentally challenged people, or 
the particular needs of women in the health care system. And 
they would set up advisory committees of seniors or 
representatives of the mentally challenged or women in order to 
give them advice as to how to best meet the needs of those 
particular groups within their communities. And if they wished 
to do that, then they would go ahead and do that according to 
what they thought was appropriate. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, are you familiar with the 
advisory committees that were set up within a district dealing 
. . . I know that some of them had dealt with, you know, the 
acuity studies and the needs where, in fact, they should have 
some acute care beds within a district, and they were to advise 
the district boards. Now are you saying that these advisory 
committees are under the medical advisory committee or is this 
separate and apart? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well as I indicated to the member, Mr. 
Chairman, these would be advisory committees that the board 
would decide to set up in order to get advice. And it would be 
within the discretion of the board of the district to set up such a 
committee and to get advice. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, as Health minister of the 
province, it is your role to ensure that people have a safe and 
reliable health care system. And in fact if communities . . . And 
I’m going to take the community of Coronach as one example 
because that just happens to be the community . . . or well Hart 
Butte I believe surrounds that community. And I got so many 
letters from Hart Butte that . . . and in fact I think you, Mr.  



1066  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Minister, should be giving them some clear answers. 
 
When you look at the community of Coronach with two major 
industries, a power plant, a coal mine, and the distance from 
other services, being right along the border and being on the 
very edge of a health district, how then can you as a Health 
minister  because the buck stops with you  how can you sit 
by and watch a community like that with a brand-new facility 
not being utilized when you know full well the need is there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chairman, I want to advise the 
member that the facility in Coronach is used. It’s used as a 
health centre. And in fact they do have the capacity to perform a 
variety of services, including emergency stabilization and 
assessment, so that if someone was in the position that the 
member’s referring to, that facility would in fact be used to 
attend to the needs of that person. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  But, Mr. Minister, you and I both know 
that these facilities that are out there . . . And you can blame the 
Conservative government all you want; I guess they shouldn’t 
have built some of the facilities. But the fact of the matter is 
they’re there. Why on earth would we not utilize them to their 
fullest and in fact make them an efficient centre? 
 
By under-utilizing them or to say that all you’re going to do is 
perform stabilizing services, people don’t view that as any acute 
service. Now it’s all in the definition of acute, because I recall 
when your government was bringing in health care reform and 
the argument was, well people aren’t having these major 
surgeries out there, and so we must cut back. Well nobody 
expected some major surgeries to occur out there. But to say 
we’re going to take it all away from them and provide 
stabilization services, well that’s just as ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not see that perhaps in utilizing this 
institution, that is so far removed from other communities, 
would not be a lot better use of funds from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well to carry the member’s argument to its 
logical extreme, you could have hospitals every 10 miles within 
the province if you wanted to, but would that be a good way to 
meet the health needs of the population? I would argue, no. 
 
The reality is that up until 1993, Saskatchewan had 130 
hospitals, which was almost as many as they have in the 
province of Ontario, which is a very large province with 11 
times the population. Today we have some 70 hospitals, 
approximately, which is much higher per capita than elsewhere 
in the country. And we have as high a number of acute care 
beds to take care of the population per capita as most 
jurisdictions do. 
 
So unless there’s something very strange and unique about the 
Saskatchewan population, we actually have more hospitals per 
capita than elsewhere, and most people do live within a 
reasonable distance of a hospital and certainly, as well, they live 
within a reasonable distance of an ambulance service. And in 
fact the hospital and emergency needs of people in 
Saskatchewan are very well taken care of compared to other 
jurisdictions. 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I know that for political 
reasons you’re trying to, in fact, take it to your extreme by 
saying there was hospitals every 10 miles apart. Well Coronach 
is an hour’s drive from other communities. So we’re not going 
to buy into that. 
 
Can you tell the House tonight whether or not you feel that 
communities such as Coronach . . . I’ll keep using that as the 
example because it’s right along the Montana border. People 
can’t go south. There’s nothing to either sides of them; really 
the direction is north. And what do you feel is a reasonable time 
frame to get to a hospital or, in fact, a more major . . . you 
know, surgery or emergency service could be performed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’d like to tell the member, Mr. 
Chairman, that Saskatchewan currently has 77 hospitals, and 
approximately 99 per cent of people in our 30 health districts 
live within 30 miles of a hospital, health centre, or ambulance 
service. And approximately 99 per cent of the population is 
actually within 50 miles of a hospital; 70 per cent of the people 
have a travel plan of less than 10 minutes to a hospital; and 
fewer than 3 per cent have to travel more than 40 minutes to 
reach a hospital. Seventy per cent of the population within 10 
minutes, I think is a pretty good indication. 
 
The member should realize, and I think he does, that if you live 
in northern Saskatchewan, you are very distant from a hospital. 
And it’s nice to think that in the South where we have better 
highways and hospitals are more accessible, that they should be 
very close together and we should have a hospital every 10 
miles, Mr. Chairman. But actually most people do live within 
10 minutes of the hospital, which is pretty commendable. 
 
And I think, Mr. Chairman, the member referred to the lawsuit 
surrounding Climax. And I think if the member reads the 
judgement of the judge in that case, the judge does point out 
that it’s very unreasonable to expect that distances are going to 
be much, much shorter in the South with no regard to what may 
go in the North, for example. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I think that the court case 
that you’re referring to is the Ponteix court case, not Climax. 
And I recall going over that judgement. And in fact there are 
some other notable things in there that the justice had to say in 
regards to funding of that facility, and it had to with the 
Department of Health and the minister controlling all the 
decisions in that community regarding health care. Because it 
wasn’t really up to the district board to in fact come good on 
any of the health care coalition agreements because the 
government controlled the purse-strings. And thus the 
government controlled the decisions of health care in the 
community. 
 
Now I see a grin come to your face and I think that you recall 
. . . and it’s probably best that you don’t get too deep into the 
Ponteix court case because I don’t think you’ll win that one at 
the end of the day. 
 
The fact that you feel that most of the people in Saskatchewan 
are within 10 miles from health care  surely you’re talking 
about just in the two major centres where the cabinet ministers  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

live. But in fact if you get out in rural Saskatchewan . . . I dare 
say, you know, even when you’re flying from Saskatoon to 
Regina, just have the pilot just come down a little closer to the 
ground and see what’s out there because you are so out of 
touch, Mr. Minister. 
 
What I would like to ask because, Mr. Minister, you asked me 
. . . Mr. Deputy Chair, could you bring them to order? Mr. 
Minister, as soon as your colleagues stop heckling we’ll get on 
with it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you’re not very 
bright. Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well take 
care of him. 
 
The Chair:  I simply wish to relate to all members that the 
Chair needs no help in, or advice in, how to run this session. 
Order. Order. Order, order. Now members of both sides have 
engaged in some jocular banter. I have chosen to allow that for 
a while with the desire that that would dissipate and we could 
get on with the estimates. I think it is the desire of members of 
the opposition and of the government to in fact proceed with 
these estimates. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, a while ago I was quoting from some documents from 
the rural municipality of Hart Butte. You asked for copies; I 
sent them. I’m asking you if you would send a copy of the 
documents that you’re quoting from over to myself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes I would, in answer to the member’s 
question. These documents the member sent over, as I 
understood it, the member was trying to say that I had said 
something to the RM (rural municipality) of Hart Butte. But 
these are letters from the RM of Hart Butte to myself. 
 
I want to say to the member that fewer than 3 per cent of the 
population of Saskatchewan lives more than 40 minutes from a 
hospital. Now the members can sit there and say it’s not true, 
whatever. We’ve done research and this is the case; more than 
70 per cent of the people have a travel time of less than 10 
minutes to hospital. The members can say it’s not true. 
 
But I say to the members, they should do their own research if 
they dispute the research of the Department of Health, and 
come forward with their own facts, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But I would be most happy to provide the member with a copy 
of the document that I’m reading from. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the Department of Health, of 
which you’re the minister of now, several of the employees of 
your department in fact were there during the years when 
several of these health facilities, as you call them now, the 
integrated facilities, were . . . I mean there were needs 
assessments done at that time. There must have been a need; the 
Department of Health okayed it and went ahead with the 
construction of several of these integrated facilities, such as 
Rockglen or Coronach or Mankota. 
 
And could you tell me why in fact 10 years ago there was a  

justified need but today there isn’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think the difference, Mr. Chairman, is 
that 10 years ago a lot of decisions were made in this province, 
not just in the health care field but in other departments of 
government, that were based more on politics than need. And 
hospitals were built in communities in order to try to ensure the 
re-election of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
Other government buildings were built in communities to try to 
ensure the re-election of MLAs. 
 
These decisions were largely political decisions, partisan 
decisions, not necessarily rational decisions made by the 
officials. At the end of the day, the politicians, whether it’s 
myself at the present time or the government that was in power 
in the ‘80s, the politicians are responsible for the decisions that 
we make. And that’s true of me. I don’t consider the officials to 
be responsible for the decisions that government makes. They 
give us advice; we can choose to take that advice or not take 
that advice. 
 
In our case, we try to make decisions on a non-partisan, 
non-political basis, on a rational basis. I don’t think that was 
true in the ‘80s, for which I would not blame the civil service. I 
would put the responsibility with Mr. Devine and the people 
that were in power in the ‘80s and who actually made these 
decisions for their own political purposes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then you don’t feel that any 
of these facilities were built based on need; it was strictly 
politics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I think, Mr. Chairman, that some of 
them would be needed and some of them would not be needed. 
I would not give a blanket answer one way or the other. One 
would have to look at each single institution and various factors 
surrounding that institution. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, looking at some of these 
individual institutions then, are you saying that the community 
of Coronach had their facility built based on politics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I don’t have the files with me in 
connection with that institution, Mr. Chairman, but I think that 
overall the decisions that were made in the 1980s were too 
influenced by politics. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well I’ll help you along since you don’t 
have your file, but I’m sure that the next Health estimates you 
would bring the file on this particular community, not that we 
want to single out any community, but it is the example that I 
think we’re going to be using. So bring your file along and 
we’ll sort of step through to see, in fact, if that community was 
unjustly dealt with either by Devine, by getting the facility, or 
by your government, by closing the facility. And then we could 
base this on fact. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think given just the facts as we know them, 
and you know there’s a rather large SaskPower generating 
station in the community; there is . . . Prairie Coal has a very 
large coal mine at Coronach; they have a labour force of some  



1068  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

1,000 people based, you know, in the community. They don’t 
have the luxury of heading south because they’re up against the 
United States border. And are you saying to me that this 
community, given its geographics, its demographics, its 
industry, had their facility based on politics and not need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well in the context of Coronach, as I said 
to the member, it was decided not to close that facility. It was 
decided that they should have some acute care services within 
the context of a health centre, and that’s what was done in fact. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  But, Mr. Minister, then acute care as far as 
a health centre goes, you were in enough problems before, or 
your government was, with referring to some of these health 
centres as providing some sort of acute care services, when in 
fact it was bolting a SaskTel pay phone on the outside of the 
building, as they did in different communities. I know Ponteix, 
for sure. I brought the pictures to this House in the last session, 
and I think it shocked many members to find out health care in 
rural Saskatchewan came down to having a quarter for the 
phone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well obviously, Mr. Chairman, the proof 
of the pudding is always in the eating. And within any facility, 
whether or not there are acute care services depends upon the 
services that are actually being provided. And there may be IV 
(intravenous) services in a facility which are acute care services. 
There may be emergency intervention and stabilization in an 
acute care manner, and that may be done in an institution called 
a hospital or a health centre. I agree with the member that it 
doesn’t matter what you call a facility. The question is, what 
services are provided. And you may have 24-hour nursing care 
in a special care home which is not a hospital at all. 
 
But the important question is whether the right services are 
provided to people at the right time and whether the health care 
needs of the particular community are met. And that’s the 
decision that the Department of Health tries to look at, or 
formerly I should say, before the formation of the districts and 
converting the 52 facilities. That’s now the decision that each 
individual health board is responsible to look at, as the member 
and I discussed earlier. 
 
And certainly the district health boards have some flexibility in 
terms of taking their acute care budget and changing the 
configuration of their facilities if they so desire. And if the 
health district in that area decides that the Coronach location 
could replace some other location and it’s within their budget, 
then they would analyse the utilization of the facility or the 
needs that there might be and make the appropriate decision. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, if it comes back to your 
office  and you said earlier this evening, it does in fact, come 
back to your office  whether or not they have acute care beds 
opening or changes to acute care services in the district, you 
will be the final judge on such services. So hypothetically 
speaking, if in fact another or more than one other community 
within the health district . . . I believe that’s the South Central 
Health District, going from Weyburn to the east, Coronach to 
the west. Now if another community were to ask for acute care  

services, would you in fact grant them any acute care services, 
even though we have brand-new facilities? Would your 
department step in and say, let’s put a little common sense to all 
of this? Or in fact, would you too play politics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well you can never get too much common 
sense, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I want to make it clear to the member that what I tried to say 
earlier  and if I didn’t say this correctly, then I’ll correct 
myself now  is if you want to designate a centre as a hospital, 
then you must get the approval of the minister under The 
Hospital Standards Act. That is not a new development; that’s a 
development that has existed for a long time. 
 
An Hon. Member:  How long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well decades, I’m sure. This isn’t 
something that would have come in in the ‘90s or is connected 
with health reform. 
 
If you want to have some acute care services in a facility, that 
doesn’t necessarily mean that you have an institution designated 
as a hospital. If you want to provide some acute care services, 
you may do so without having the institution designated as a 
hospital. The question, I think, is whether there are in-patient 
beds. But there are acute care services that go, you know, far 
beyond the question of whether or not you have in-patient beds. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if in fact your 
deputy minister was in full agreement with everything you said 
there. Looking at his face, I was trying to read into the fact that 
perhaps he would like to have given you some advice but . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Once the heckling stops. But in fact 
the question was whether or not you would permit other 
communities to have any acute care designation added to them 
or facilities or more beds. 
 
And I raise this for this reason, Mr. Minister. The former 
minister of Health from Moose Jaw in fact, and before he 
leaves the House, I would like to raise this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Order, order. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I didn’t say he was gone; I said before he 
does. 
 
In fact we had a conversation. I was there representing the 
community of Coronach and the RM of Hart Butte, posing 
those questions that they wanted posed. And in fact when I 
asked that particular question, the former minister of Health 
made the statement that in fact this may well happen that some 
other community could be designated as having acute care 
services and not a facility that is sitting brand-new. Clearly the 
need, the industry, the population, the geography, really plays 
into the need. And so I mean was the former minister of Health 
playing politics or in fact are you at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 
could indicate what is the question. 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think it was clear, 
had you followed along and not had your colleagues heckling 
so much. But the question clearly is whether or not you would 
support a community such as Coronach with its new integrated 
facility and a clear need versus one of the other communities 
that does not have that same need that, firstly in geography and 
population, but in fact even having a newer facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What the member confuses, Mr. Chairman, 
is the distinction between the community itself and the district. 
I tried to say to the member earlier that the district could make 
its plan with respect to the services it wanted to deliver. That 
would be a decision of the district board. So that when the 
member says, well could the community, such as the RM, or the 
town of Coronach, decide to start up a hospital, in effect, I 
would say to the member that that RM or town would go to the 
health district and say, we think the services should be 
organized in a slightly different way. We think that the acute 
care services at Coronach should be expanded, or we think it 
should be designated as a hospital under The Hospital 
Standards Act. 
 
But the town or the RM would go to the health district board. 
They wouldn’t make that decision on their own. And the health 
district board would include representatives duly elected from 
that area. And together the elected members in the community 
itself would make that decision. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, on more than one occasion 
the RM of Hart Butte, the community of Coronach, the 
residents in that area, have asked for a meeting with yourself 
and your department officials, but you clearly being there. 
Would you offer your time to meet with the residents of this 
community so that they may have a chance to ask you questions 
and have you give them some very clear answers so that they 
know the direction of health care in their community? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I would encourage the people in the 
community to meet with their district board representatives. It is 
the decision of the district and the district board whether or not 
to have a hospital in a particular community. So I would say 
that if the RM or the town feel that the district board should 
change the configuration of hospitals, or start a hospital in 
Coronach. I would encourage them to meet with their district 
board. That’s what the district boards are set up to do. This is 
not a decision that would be made by me in Regina, this is a 
decision that would be made at the community level. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then this gets confusing for 
anyone watching this, of course, on TV this evening because we 
started off the evening with a few simple questions as who 
controls acute care. You, Mr. Minister, said that the decision 
lies with you. At the end of the day it is you  it is you, Mr. 
Minister, that sits in cabinet, and perhaps you’re on the 
Treasury Board, are you? Well I mean you should be there, I 
guess, fighting for your department, the funding of it. But it is 
you that clearly is in control of the funding of health care, 
which controls the decisions of acute care beds. You said that. 
You said it is you that makes the decision as to if in fact there  

are more acute beds. 
 
And if communities such as Coronach . . . and maybe I 
shouldn’t just always use one example because I’m sure there’s 
many out there. But in fact if they’re not having . . . you know, 
if they’re not convincing the district board to look at them at all, 
and in a situation at Coronach where in fact they’re right in the 
very corner of a huge district, and yet the population is at 
Weyburn, well people from Coronach are not going to go to 
Weyburn for health care services. You see, there is the problem. 
 
But in fact if the dollars are being spent in Weyburn, then what 
options do they have? It lies with you. You’re the one. So why 
won’t you agree, Mr. Minister, to come out and meet with these 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Ultimately, Mr. Chairman, as the member 
knows, the amount of money that goes to Health is set by the 
legislature, not by myself, in the budget. And this is part of that 
process, to look at the estimates of the Department of Health. 
And it’s very much a function of the legislature to allocate 
money to the Department of Health and to the districts in the 
budget. 
 
But I say to the member that his confusion is that . . . perhaps 
I’m not making it as clear as I should. The districts make the 
decision as to the number of hospitals they want to have in the 
district or whether to open up a hospital. It’s not a decision that 
is made by the Minister of Health or by the Legislative 
Assembly or by the RM he’s referred to, or by the town. 
 
So I’m trying to explain to the member that it’s the district 
board that makes that decision. And the people in the area, if 
they don’t agree with the decisions of the district board, should 
be referred to their elected district board members and the 
district board to make appropriate representations to them. But I 
will not be making a decision whether to open up a hospital at 
Coronach. That’s not within my jurisdiction. That’s within the 
jurisdiction of the district boards. 
 
So that’s why I say to the member that it would be most helpful 
if he would refer anyone with that question to the district boards 
so that the question could be addressed to the people that will 
actually be making the decision. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you and your department 
must have a full list of each district in the province  their total 
funding; their shortfalls or surpluses for, well I guess, for 
’94-95, ’95-96, and ’96-97  and would you be prepared to 
bring that document at the next session of estimates so that we 
can have a complete picture of the funding of each health 
district, where it was when you changed the funding formula 
and where it’s going in the future? Would you be prepared to 
bring that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think we could give 
the member a list of the deficits or surpluses for the districts for 
1993-94 and 1994-95. The ones for 1995-96 would have to 
await the audit of the statements which I understand is still 
ongoing and wouldn’t be completed until some time later this 
year. And then the member asked about ’96-97 deficits. Those,  



1070  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

of course, would not become clear until . . . for some 
considerable time. I don’t know if that would be . . . maybe late 
’97, I suppose. 
 
But just to repeat, we’ll get the member lists of the deficits or 
surpluses for ’93-94 and ’94-95; ’95-96 we’ll have to await the 
audit so that those numbers can be confirmed. And then ‘96-97 
of course would be in the future. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, for ‘95-96, can you give the 
projected deficit or surplus? We have about half of them now as 
you know. I’ve used them in question period to in fact . . . I 
would like to think of it as bringing you in line; you may view it 
differently. But surely those projections are out there, and I 
would hope that you would bring those also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would say to the member, Mr. Chairman, 
that the principle of releasing unaudited financial information to 
the legislature is not a correct principle. If the member wishes 
to get information from the districts or elsewhere, he’s free to 
do so, and I have no objection. But in terms of my presenting 
information to the member or the legislature, I will not be doing 
so unless it’s audited financial information. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, would there be a concern, is 
there a problem in fact, if you have the consent of the district 
board, in bringing forward that projected surplus or deficits? 
 
You see the problem that I had a year ago when we were getting 
into some of the budget problems that district health boards 
were facing is that I believe once the Health minister of the day 
found out that I was requesting such information, we found out 
we then had to go through freedom of information for 
everything we wanted to know. And I was hoping we could 
avoid that because perhaps there is no politics in this at all, and 
it would just make a lot of sense to do it. But I think it would be 
best coming from you and through you as minister to ourselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I repeat my answer to 
the member. The financial statements of the districts for 
1995-96 don’t have to be prepared until three months after the 
end of the fiscal year which takes you into June or even July if 
they’re a bit late. As a matter of principle, mistakes can be 
made; that’s why you audit financial statements. And I don’t 
believe that I, as Minister of Health, should be offering 
unaudited financial information to the member or to the House. 
I would like to have it audited and certified as correct before I 
present it. The member may wish to rely on other sorts of 
information, and undoubtedly he will. But I would choose to 
rely on accurate and audited information, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister of Health, 
I’m just wondering if you could give me a list of the hospitals 
that were originally closed, of the 52 hospitals that were 
originally closed, that went from hospital status to 24-hour 
wellness centre or health centre, and have now gone down to 
just . . . to your wellness centre. And I’m using Spalding as an 
example. It started as a hospital, then it had 24-hour service, 
and now it is down to just daily, daytime service. I’m 
wondering if you have a list of those facilities that have 
changed the designation. 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I would say to the member, Mr. Chair, 
I can’t give her the list right at the moment. The information is 
actually available on a map that is included in the material I sent 
over to the member from Wood River. 
 
But why don’t we undertake to provide you with a written list 
next time we’re in estimates, and we’ll table that response for 
you. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have one question 
for the minister with respect to the capital funding projects, 
particularly . . . in particular, the hospital in Fort Qu’Appelle. 
And I wonder if the minister could give us the assurance that 
that project will be funded equally or at some percentage, as 
was discussed previously, with the federal government’s input 
into that project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I can say to the member, Mr. Chair, 
that we do have an agreement with the federal government 
whereby the federal government will pay 30 per cent of the cost 
of the facility, but the plan for the facility is not yet developed. 
So the federal government will be paying 30 per cent of the 
cost, but we don’t know what the total cost will be because the 
plan for the facility is not yet complete. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When the plan is put 
together, will the government here, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, cooperate with the federal government in 
ensuring that that facility is in fact built? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the answer is yes. We intend to 
proceed at some point and put in our share. And if we don’t do 
that, if the plan changes for some reason, we would have to 
repay to the federal government the money that we have 
received from them to put toward the project. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just in regards to 
the Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital, I noticed there was an order in 
council that I think I’ve had for a week or 10 days, and I think 
there was a funding commitment  was it by the federal 
government for 11.3 million?  is that right? Do you have that 
document, and is that 30 per cent of the facility cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that would not be correct, Mr. 
Chairman. The 11.3 million or thereabouts from the federal 
government is for the new Athabasca Basin hospital, the La 
Ronge hospital and the Fort Qu’Appelle hospital, and we 
estimate that that amount of money would be approximately 
one-third or 30 per cent of the total cost of those three facilities 
together. But I couldn’t tell you what the cost of each of those 
facilities would be at the present time because the plans aren’t 
worked out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Before they leave, I just want to thank all 
my officials for their cooperation. And I don’t think I ever did 
get a chance to introduce Carol Klassen, who’s sitting behind 
Kathy Langlois. So thank you very much to the officials. 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too would like to 
thank the minister having the officials here this evening 
answering the questions, and welcome them back some 12 or 
13 times more. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right 
is Bernie Churko, executive director, logistics planning and 
compliance division. Behind him is Barry Martin, executive 
director, engineering service division. And behind me is Lynn 
Tulloch, executive director of corporate information services 
division, Department of Highways. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 
welcome the Minister of Highways and Transportation and his 
staff here tonight and thank them for coming out and helping 
the minister answer the questions that we have for him. 
 
Mr. Minister, if we could just start and maybe just an overall 
view of your department, if you would. Could you just maybe 
tell us a bit about the mandate of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Chairman, the mandate of the 
department  and there are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8  8 statements. 
And I would read them: recognize the importance of 
transportation for the social and economic well-being of 
Saskatchewan and especially rural Saskatchewan. Number two, 
minimize the pressures on the province’s road infrastructure by 
promoting the continued use of alternate transportation modes. 
Three, develop more costeffective ways of delivering 
highway services to the public to maximize the dollars to actual 
road improvements. Shift emphasis away from expanding a 
road network and onto preserving the network that already 
exists. 
 
In consultation with RMs and municipalities, develop a core 
network of rural roads that have the quality and capacity to deal 
with the stresses of increased truck traffic. Partnershipping in 
the most effective use of funds. Investigate and promote the use 
of new technology to reduce road infrastructure damage. And 
last but not least, recognize the close link between 
transportation efficiency and economic development. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that 
there has been a major reorganization within the department in 
the last year and a half. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That is correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  If that has happened, can you relate to us 
then, Mr. Minister, a change in your mandate, if there has been  

one since that reorganization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, 
there’s no change in the mandate. I guess the streamlining and 
reorganization of Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation 
is made because . . . It’s going to happen over the next two 
years, primarily to take money from administration and 
operations and put that money directly into roads. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then maybe could 
you tell me, or tell us, if there really hasn’t been a change in the 
mandate, what was the reasoning for the reorganization and 
restructuring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well as I mentioned earlier, the main 
reason was to take as much savings from administration and 
operations and put directly into roads. 
 
One of the things I guess that people told us in our pre-budget 
consultation was to find internal efficiencies within 
departments and to use that money for front-line services, and 
that’s what the Department of Highways did. In fact this year 
there is $5.6 million in savings and administration and 
operations that will be turned into road preservation, 
maintenance and reconstruction. And in future years that of 
course will be more than this year because it will be 
implemented completely. We expect about $38 million over the 
next five years to be transferred from administration operations 
directly into roads. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned that 
there really hasn’t been a change in mandate. I’m just 
wondering if you can tell me how that relates to the changing 
times that we’re seeing. We’re seeing changes, major changes, 
in the way goods are transported across this province, especially 
agricultural goods  the changes in transportation rates, all 
those things. 
 
Do you not think possibly, given the lack of support of your 
government to rural Saskatchewan, there should have been a 
mandate change then to address some of these needs in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I would say probably the lack of 
support comes from the federal government. It, of course, 
hasn’t really got a transportation policy anymore. It kind of . . . 
whatever it had for a transportation policy, it sort of deregulated 
a little, section by section by section, letting the chips fall where 
they may and expecting each province to pick up those pieces 
and try and put some kind of a program together. 
 
Certainly we’re doing that now. We’re working very closely 
with rural municipalities. We have the south-west transportation 
policy council for an example of 107 municipalities involved in 
looking at planning roads in rural Saskatchewan because in fact 
you are right; there’s a great deal of changes. 
 
The federal government is allowing rail abandonment to take 
place a lot faster than what we had hoped. Certainly the grain 
elevator companies are moving to cement structures rather than 
the old wooden elevators, and this all means added truck  



1072  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

pressure on our roads. And not only that, but I think the 
member opposite would know that our economy is improving 
greatly in the oil sector, in the mining sector, in the forestry 
sector, and this of course puts added pressure on our roads. 
 
So the department is working very closely with the 
stakeholders, with municipalities, on planning, with companies 
on partnershipping so that we in fact can address as best as 
possible the shift  the federal government change, I guess  
from having a transportation policy to having no policy and 
deregulating all facets of transportation. And I think we’re 
succeeding quite well under the circumstances. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
would just remind the minister that we are dealing with 
provincial matters here. And regardless of how the problems 
come about, it’s up to the provincial government to look after 
these. 
 
I appreciate him for the little history lesson as to what’s 
happened in rural Saskatchewan. We’re fully aware of that. I 
would ask him again if he doesn’t think it’s appropriate that the 
department should have changed its mandate in trying to 
address some of these needs, and given the fact that you’ve had 
some five years now to start working on these problems, that 
you’re once again late in recognizing the changes out there. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite for 
the question. We have restructured the department, and we have 
now a deputy minister. We do not have any assistant deputy 
ministers any longer. 
 
But we have eight branches of the department: the engineering 
service division, the preservation and operation of region 1  
we now have three regions rather than six districts  
preservation and operation of region 2, and preservation and 
operation of region 3. 
 
Then we have the logistics planning and compliance division 
primarily to look at savings within the system, that producers 
can actually benefit from these savings. We have also 
partnerships that can be formed. And that area, that division, 
will look at partnerships so that monies saved by . . . 
Companies can actually partnership with Highways, and we can 
in fact put some of this money directly into roads. There’s the 
corporate information services division, the human resources 
branch, and communications and public relations branch. 
 
Now the engineering services division previously had six 
districts, as I mentioned earlier, and the Weyburn municipal 
office. It had two technical branches in head office, and six lab 
locations. Under the new engineering services division, it will 
be managed as one project-based organization. Consolidate all 
field and head office units into Regina and Saskatoon over a 
two-year period with a North Battleford satellite office; 
consolidate to two lab locations. And there’s an elimination of a 
grading crew. 
 
If we look at logistics planning and compliance division,  

previously we had six branches and one project unit. Under the 
new, we’re going to have three branches; less emphasis on 
policy development; continued emphasis on transportation 
compliance, on grain transportation efficiencies; increased 
emphasis on regional transportation planning and trucking 
partnerships. And vehicle registration and traffic safety is of 
course transferred to SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). 
 
And in human resources there’s no significant changes. 
Communications and public relations branch has no significant 
changes. Under the corporate information services division, 
previously finance and administration and information services, 
two separate head office branches: property service branch in 
the old TSAP (technical standards and policies) branch, and the 
GIS (geographic information systems) service in the old PAC 
(planning and coordination). Now under the new it will be 
consolidated into the new corporate information services 
division to bring all corporate information management 
together. 
 
So certainly we’ve restructured the department in a way that can 
look after the problems or the concerns that the member 
opposite has. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked a lot 
about emphasis on this, emphasis on many different things. I 
guess what I’m asking is when are we going to see something 
concrete; when are we going to see a plan as to what’s going to 
happen in this province in regards to transportation? 
 
As you mentioned, you talk about the grain companies. Really 
they’re the ones today that are dictating where a rail line is 
going to be able to survive. They’re haphazardly going about 
moving, as you talked about, to cement elevators, which will 
force the grain companies of course into consolidating and 
closing because of low volumes. Therefore we see no plan as to 
where we’re going to have a railroad, where we’re going to 
need some heavy roads to handle the traffic. 
 
We talk about all these things. Again over the last four or five 
years since your government’s been in power, we haven’t seen 
anything happening. I’m wondering when will there be a plan. 
It’s nice to talk about emphasis on, and talking about things. 
When are we going to see something happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I would recommend to the member 
opposite that he talk to the member from Wood River who 
likely will be aware of the south-west regional planning 
committee that’s been in place for two years, coming up with a 
strategic plan for the south-west dealing with rail line 
abandonment, dealing with the transfer of wood elevators into 
fewer concrete elevators, and the use by oil companies in that 
particular area. So certainly the department has been working 
very closely with rural and urban municipalities in that area. 
 
The north-central area, the Rosetown-Biggar area, has a group 
together as well working on the same kinds of things. The 
department have great expertise and great technology to help 
plan. It shouldn’t just be done in Regina. It should actually be 
done using the local expertise, the farmers, and the RM  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

councillors, and the urban-municipal councillors, and people 
that are in charge of grain elevators in rural Saskatchewan and, 
in fact, hopefully some point in time we could get the railways 
to sit down on these committees as well. 
 
So we are addressing that. Certainly there is no great bundle of 
money when the federal government pulls $110 million out of 
health care and social programs and education and we as a 
government have to back-fill that; certainly puts other pressures 
on other departments to come up with as much savings as they 
can in order to preserve the funding that they have. But we were 
able to do that this year by the reorganization. We will see $5.6 
million this year and we will see of course $38 million over the 
next five years that we will be able to put back into roads 
because of internal efficiencies. 
 
We see the federal government with Bill C-14 for an example, 
giving all power to railways. We are trying to address that  
not only myself as Minister of Highways for the province of 
Saskatchewan but also the Minister of highways and 
transportation for Alberta, also the Highways and 
Transportation minister for Manitoba. 
 
Now we have a federal government that does not want to listen 
and continues to allow the railways to have all these kinds of 
power. It would be perfectly logical in my mind to promote 
short-line railways for an example, to allow short-line railways 
to be a part of our transportation system; certainly might be 
benefits to the farmers and also benefits to road authorities like 
municipal road authorities and provincial road authorities. But 
we don’t have that support. So what we have to try and do is 
work as closely as we can with local municipalities, with other 
stakeholder groups, in fact to have a policy and a system that 
we can best address the needs of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad that you 
are taking to heart my suggestion of last summer and bringing 
the rail lines and the elevator companies and the municipalities 
and the people of the province together to discuss these issues. 
It’s a little overdue. 
 
You talk about plans in the south-west and a little bit on the 
west side of the province. You’re talking about two little 
pockets within the province of Saskatchewan. We’re talking 
about a plan for Saskatchewan. You start developing little 
pockets across the province and you’ll end up with a patchwork 
system again. What we need is a plan for the whole province, 
something that’ll fit where one road and one rail line rolls into 
another. When will we see a plan like that and when will you 
start these discussions with all these groups on a provincial 
basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I guess I’d like to tell the member 
opposite that you’ve got to start somewhere. And I would 
remind the member that we did start a few years ago. I would 
encourage him to talk to SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) because SARM is very aware of the work 
that’s being done. They’re very supportive. And I would think, 
if the member opposite took some time to check with SARM 
members, that he would be . . . he may not continue with this 
line of questioning. 

But I want to say that, in the south-west for instance, there’s 
107 municipalities. There’s probably 20 to 25 per cent, could 
even be as much as 30 per cent, that are involved already in 
regional planning to some degree. And other areas are 
expressing interest in the process and we believe it’s the right 
way to go because it involves local people that know local 
concerns  hopefully would include the elevator companies, 
the railways, so we would know what lines might be abandoned 
and where the next location for the next high throughput 
elevator or terminal would be. So we believe it’s the right way 
to go and we will continue in that direction. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe just a little 
history, if you would, for me. Can you possibly tell me, in the 
history of the province, when the most activity occurred within 
the department in construction of infrastructure in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I will go back to 1986-87 and I will give 
you the capital budgets and then I will give you also 
maintenance because, as you will be aware, two years ago we 
moved our capital construction budget more into preservation 
and maintenance. It was a policy change because we believe 
that our road infrastructure was mature, but what needed to be 
done is more preservation and maintenance rather than new 
construction. 
 
In 1986-87 there was $107 million in capital. Then it went to 
101; ’88-89 was 109; ’89-90 was 116. And you have to 
remember in those years were the years of the Tories where we 
were spending a lot more than what we were taking in. They did 
not have a balanced budget. In 1990-91 there was 106; in 
1991-92, 77; ’92-93, 64; ’93-94, 70 million; ’94-95, 64 million; 
and in ’95-96, 33 million; and 1996-97, there was 37 million. 
 
But then we’ll go to maintenance. It was 87 million in ’86-87; 
84 million in ’87-88; 82 million in ’88-89; 87 million in ’89-90; 
86 million in ’90-91; 83 million in ’91-92; 71 million in ’92-93; 
77 million in ’93-94; 78 million in ’94-95; 102 million in 
’95-96; and this year is a little over 103 million. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Then, Mr. Minister, could you tell us perhaps 
in 1986 how many kilometres of highway did we have in 
Saskatchewan; how many do we have in 1991; how many do 
we have now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, in 1980 we 
had no more earth highways, I want to tell the member now. We 
had about 4,600 kilometres of gravel; we had about 8 of 
non-structural pavement  8,000 kilometres; and probably 
about 10,000 kilometres of full-structured pavement. Now we 
have about 25,600 in total  about 6,000 gravel; about 8,000 
thin-membrane surface or non-structural pavements; and about 
12,000 kilometres of full-structure pavement. Now those 
figures are approximate. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, while you have your book 
handy there, do you have the figures then for 1992? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Virtually unchanged from 1992. 



1074  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, can you tell how many  that 
your best guess and the way we’re headed  how many 
kilometres of highway will go back to gravel in the next two 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well to the member opposite, my hope 
is none. You know, and I guess that depends on the regional 
transportation committees and joint decisions with the 
Department of Highways. If in some cases they feel a gravel 
structure would better handle grain transportation, for an 
example into a high throughput elevator, it may be their wish 
that that happen. But it won’t be me making a decision. I don’t 
think that we should be gravelling a particular road unless that’s 
the desire of the region. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you tell me then  and I’m glad to 
hear that you don’t want the highways to go back to gravel  
can you tell me how many kilometres of highway returned to 
gravel over the last two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Last year, because of the wet conditions, 
there are probably about 200 kilometres of highway that had the 
top removed, in fact either by equipment and/or by just 
breaking up. And we allowed those roads to dry out. We 
replaced about half of that, about 100 kilometres, with surface, 
and we expect that we’ll be able to do the other half as we can 
fund them and as the roads are ready for them. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well if that extra . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Well if that next 100 kilometres is ready to do next 
year, do you commit to resurfacing those 100 kilometres as well 
as breaking up a similar amount of kilometres over the next 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Of course, to the member opposite, that 
depends on a lot of things. It depends on weather again. The 
rural roads for instance, this year, were holding . . . and 
highways were holding up reasonably well. We don’t know 
what’s going to happen after this last snow in parts of the 
province. And I guess it’s all based on priority and the budget 
limits that we have and how much we can do. So we will 
priorize the work that has to be done, but those certainly will be 
considered. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Once again, given favourable weather 
conditions and all those things put aside, will you be trying to 
resurface those 100 kilometres of highway? Will it get done 
next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I can’t say for sure  and the member 
knows that  whether it can be done this coming year or not. 
It’ll certainly depend on a lot of factors, but it will certainly be 
considered. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Turning to the 
Estimates and some figures on page 71. For ‘95-96 you have to 
your best estimate there, 168.059. Also in Supplementary 
Estimates you have another $5.8 million there in Highways and 
Transportation. Is that 5.8 included in that 168 or is that over 
and above that? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I believe the amount was 5.8. Is that . . . 
Yes, that was in the supplementary budget that was under 
’95-96. That was an over-expenditure primarily because of the 
flooding last year and the work that was done, and is not 
included in the 168. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Okay, thank you. So then the estimated 
budget then for ’95-96 would have been about 173,909 or 
thereabouts. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That is correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So then in actuality what we have then is 
about a $5 million decrease in budget from this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well it’s actually an increase in budget 
and we, of course, always hope to live within budget. The 
problem last year was unforeseen and it was monies that really 
needed to be used, and Finance did give us approval, of course, 
for the over-expenditure. 
 
Hopefully that doesn’t have to happen again. A lot of it was 
work to do with the floods so it was either culverts or those 
kinds of things and hopefully that won’t happen again. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize that some 
of these expenses are unforeseen certainly. But still you would 
have to admit that this year’s budget is down considerably from 
last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I mentioned earlier that because of 
internal efficiencies, we will be spending an additional $5.6 
million on roads this year rather than on administration. So, you 
know, I guess if you look at that then you would know that it’s 
not less. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Sorry, Mr. Minister, I have trouble following 
that. If the bottom line is 173 for last year and it’s 168 for this 
year, the total budget is less. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  If you take . . . I don’t know how to use 
an example here, but on your farm for instance, if you were 
spending $100 to put your crop in and you decided that you 
would maybe use your smaller tractor and save $5 from the 
operation of the smaller tractor and take that and put it into your 
crop, you would be actually spending more money than on 
other areas. Now that might be a poor example but what I’m 
trying to say is that if you take money from administration and 
put it directly into roads, you will get the same amount of work 
done on roads as you did the year before, in fact more. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’d like to 
ask you if you think that this budget . . . if there’s enough 
money in this budget to . . . and you and your government keep 
talking about moving into the new century. Do you think there’s 
sufficient funds in this budget to start the process toward that, 
to look after the changing needs that we’re seeing in 
transportation in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It would always be nice to have more 
money in our budgets, but we have to live within reality. And  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

we can’t sort of bury heads in the sand, I guess. We know that 
we had to back-fill in health care, $50 million. We had to 
back-fill in health care and in social programs, another several, 
several million dollars. And so I guess it would be nice, but we 
know that we have to face reality, we have to face the federal 
decisions. 
 
So what we are doing now with our limited amount of funds is 
looking at partnerships with the private sector. We’re hoping 
that at some point in time the federal government agrees to a 
national highways program, for an example. 
 
We also are working, like I mentioned, with rural municipalities 
and urban municipalities, elevator companies, to better plan the 
limited funds that we do have. Is it adequate? I think we can, if 
we do it right. But it’s going to take a lot of cooperation, I 
guess, not only from municipalities and other stakeholders, but 
from the opposition benches too. 
 
When we do write to the federal government to tell them of our 
concerns with some of the decisions, we would hope that we 
would get that support from the opposition as well, because 
certainly it’s going to have an effect. We in Saskatchewan have 
25 per cent of all the roads in Canada. If you joined every road, 
tip to tip, you would circle the equator, according to the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), four times. 
 
But we have a million people. The population is growing. But, 
you know, we’re 1.018 million now. And of course not 
everybody pays taxes, so there’s not a large group of people that 
have to pay for the infrastructure that we do have. So certainly 
it’s important to work very closely with the cooperation of 
municipalities, and in fact all political parties. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You continue to 
talk about back-filling for the federal government. I guess 
there’s other factors that come in this equation as well regarding 
funding. And there’s certainly one regarding Crown tendering 
that eats up a fair amount of the provincial budget, and certainly 
could transfer some of that into Highways. And I’d be more 
than happy if you would lobby your counterparts in doing that. 
 
You talked earlier about your mandate, and I guess a little bit 
about some objectives and goals that your department probably 
has. 
 
I guess . . . can you tell me just briefly what kind of a process 
does the department use, along with yourself, in determining 
those goals and objectives, in trying to meet the changing needs 
of transportation in this province. And at the end of the day, 
how do you measure those? How do you determine at the end, 
when you sat down and finalized this budget, that that was 
going to meet the needs of the transportation for this year and 
leading into the year 2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Of course the department, in preparing 
its budget, sets its goals in partnership and cooperation with 
stakeholders. We have an asset management program within the 
department that looks at the age of the infrastructure and when 
is most appropriate and most efficient to in fact repair and/or 
restructure a particular road. We have the cost analysis program  

that determines the need for road improvements based on 
traffic, safety, on accidents, on the cost of maintenance per 
kilometre, on economic development and tourism within an 
area. 
 
And I want to tell the member opposite that we just did a poll 
that was just released not too long ago. It dealt with what 
people thought of many issues in the Department of Highways, 
like the conditions of roads, like maintenance, and all those 
things. And generally the poll indicated that people were more 
satisfied than not satisfied with all aspects of the Department of 
Highways. And I was very pleased to note that they were very 
pleased with the communications with the Department of 
Highways. 
 
And so all in all I think under the circumstances of still having 
to pay $850 million of interest each year and having to back-fill 
in health care, social programs, and education, we're still able, 
through better planning with the stakeholders, better use of our 
limited funds, to do as best a job as we can under those 
circumstances. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would just 
mention to you that if you would spend half as much time 
back-filling the potholes in the roads out there as you do talking 
about the federal funding, I think our road structure would 
improve quite a bit. 
 
You talked earlier about downsizing in administration. I’m 
wondering what your views are on that as it relates to the 
services out there; in particular, road maintenance in terms of 
snow and ice removal in the wintertime on the provincial 
highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you very much for those 
comments. Of course, administration will not affect winter 
maintenance or summer maintenance. Administration deals 
primarily with head office and the restructuring of six districts 
into three regions. 
 
For an example, do we need the amount of engineering services 
that we had in the department now that we’re moving to 
preservation and maintenance from construction of new roads? 
So there’s a lot of things that maybe we didn’t need as much of 
now within administration and can actually move that funding 
into roads. And I’m very pleased that of course, as I mentioned 
earlier, that this year $5.6 million will be spent, instead of 
administration and operations, but directly into roads. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you saying then 
that the . . . such as the closure of some of the depots across the 
province is not included in that 5.8 million and is not classified 
as administration? That’s cuts from elsewhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As I mentioned earlier, administration 
and operations; this would be considered operations. And we 
were able to, by reorganizing the department, in fact eliminate 
29 depots. In some areas, for an example, some crews were 
looking after 100 kilometres. Other crews were looking after  



1076  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

300 kilometres. We balanced that workload as much as we 
could. 
 
We have to also remember, I think, that the equipment has 
changed dramatically. We haven’t restructured the Department 
of Highways basically since the ’60s, and certainly the 
equipment has changed since then. We have different types of 
snowploughs, different types of equipment, and certainly we 
believe that we can provide adequate . . . and the service that we 
have been providing with this reorganization. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. However, in the reorganization I 
see by what has happened, especially now in the South  I saw 
it in the North last fall when I was up there  a tremendous 
amount of the operating budget is being eaten up in travelling 
time. The more and more we have of that, the less time is spent 
on road maintenance, and in particular, in the wintertime and 
road conditions, in snow removal. 
 
I don’t see that as an advantage, as a cost-saving measure; I see 
that as time being eaten up in the budget by travelling time. And 
I see it as unnecessary wear and tear on the equipment. No 
matter how modern it is, it still has to travel over those 
hole-ridden roads. So I don’t see that as being an advantage, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to tell the member opposite that 
we are still located in 107 communities across the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have over 90 crews. When you’re travelling, 
you know, winter maintenance, you have your blade down. So 
if you start from here and you go this way and then you come 
back, or if you start from here and go here and come back, you 
still have your blade down and you’re still working. 
 
And so when we took all this into consideration, when we did 
the reorganization, and we believe that we will have a good, 
efficient service to all parts of Saskatchewan with this 
reorganization. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, I think some of the members 
opposite haven’t been in rural Saskatchewan for a while either 
or they wouldn’t be too fussy about agreeing on that one . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It’s nice you could make it back safe 
and sound. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can’t say that I agree with your logic. It makes 
sense on paper, going one way with your blade down and 
coming back. I’ll use an example in the North where the graders 
are travelling many miles on pavement to reach a gravelled 
highway to maintain, and then travelling the same distance back 
after they’re through. Can you tell me how that’s economical? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well what the member doesn’t realize, 
Mr. Chairman, is that not necessary do you have to have the 
grader over here. I mean the grader can be located over here. 
And in some cases we have it located in a community where the 
gravel starts or at a farmer’s home or at a service station so that 
in fact the grader is ready to go. 
 
I agree with you that you have to look for every efficiencies you 
can so that you can in fact put as much of that savings into  

roads . . . And that's exactly what we’re doing. And so you have 
to understand that the grader does not necessarily have to be 
located exactly where that particular crew is. The crew in fact 
doesn’t have to live in that community. In fact they maybe live 
in different areas around, in different communities close to the 
centre. 
 
So what we’re trying to do here, and what we have been able to 
accomplish, is over the next five years, save $38 million and put 
$38 million back into roads. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we could 
discuss the logic of this for some time and I’m not sure we’d 
ever to come to agreement unless of course you want to agree to 
our point, and we’ll continue a different line of questioning. 
 
I just have a question, as I notice our time is running out, I 
wanted to ask a couple of questions about bridges, if I could. 
And the first question would be on the Outlook bridge and I’m 
just wondering if you could tell me when the construction of 
that bridge will start; when it will be completed; and the amount 
of money that’s budgeted in this year’s budget to start the 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite for 
that question. We’re happy that we’re moving forward with 
Outlook bridge. The grading . . . all that will be done this year is 
the grading and the abutments. And the budget amount is 
$500,000. And the construction will be set over the next two 
years, you know, as much finished in ’97-98 . . . and completed 
of course in ’98-99. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked 
about, as much as you can in the next year; what determines 
that? Is it budget related or is it time or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The reason the abutment work is being 
done this year; because you need time to let that stabilize. In 
’97-98 of course we haven’t budgeted an amount. We expect 
the total cost to run  and of course it has not been tendered or 
anything yet  but between 5 and $6 million. It will depend of 
course on budget, number one, and how much we are able to do 
next year, but also on weather and a whole lot of other things. 
So our intentions are, is to complete it over a two-year time 
frame. 
 
Mr. McLane:  In regards to that bridge and the unstable 
condition of it right now, I’m wondering if you have taken that 
into consideration. I’ve seen some of the reports and the work 
that’s been done on the bridge, and it gives rise to major 
concerns for people using the bridge. 
 
It would seem to me that when safety is a factor, that you might 
want to look at trying to get it done as quick as we can. And I 
would ask you again if . . . what you would expect to have done 
on it next year and then get it into use as quickly as possible. If 
budget is part of the problems, then that’s one thing; if time 
constraints because of construction is the problem, that’s 
another  two different scenarios. And I don’t think budget 
should enter into the picture on that one. 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, safety is 
always a factor. And we continue to monitor the bridge and 
certainly safety is a factor always considered. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. 
Minister, your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department produced a priorized list of the 
highways and roads throughout the province, and we had one of 
those priorized lists  when was it?  last January, December, 
before that. I guess it was well before that, sometime last fall. 
And that was a draft list that your department gave us. 
 
(2130) 
 
I was wondering if you had an up-to-date list, a priority list of 
the highways. And also if you would provide us with the 
winter’s project list, what was tendered, and what was let, the 
dollars involved. The projects, the details of the projects, and 
all of the summer projects. Has that also been prepared? It’s 
probably prepared by this time  the summer projects. And so 
all the details, dollars, pavement, everything that we would 
need to know on the two projects, winter and summer. If the 
next time that you would come to estimates, if you would bring 
those detailed lists and also the new priorized list. Is that 
possible, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite for 
his question. We were very pleased last year that the member 
from Humboldt requested some information, and we set up a 
meeting with that member and the deputy minister at the 
Department of Highways. And I think it was very useful 
because, as the member opposite will know, is that that 
priorized list changes from day to day. 
 
I mean if all of a sudden there’s going to be an elevator built in 
a certain place, the list will almost automatically change for 
whatever reason. And so what I would suggest is, to the 
member from Wood River, that I certainly can help arrange a 
meeting with the deputy minister at the department, and he can 
explain firsthand exactly how the roads are priorized under the 
new BCA (benefit/cost analysis) program and in fact show you 
the list as it sits on that particular day. 
 
Do we have the . . . and I will send over the ‘96-97 construction 
projects for the member’s information. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Is that winter or winter and summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  This is the ‘96-97 construction projects 
and the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  The whole ball of wax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The whole ball of wax, yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not sure what the problem would be with you 
sharing a priorized list today. If in fact there’s some rationale 
that you would like to provide with the priorized highway list  

as to how you arrive at your priorization, that would be great. 
 
But I see no need for you to hold this back. I mean they’re 
public highways. And if your department has priorized them, I 
think it’s only fair that the public knows how they’re priorized 
and where they are on the priorized list. 
 
Now will you commit in the House today, before we have to 
make this part of a lengthy debate, in bringing a priorized list 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, as I mentioned 
earlier, that this list changes almost day to day. And if I brought 
you a . . . I haven’t got a list with me, first of all. Second . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Okay. Do you have it . . . (inaudible) . . . 
tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I don’t know when . . . if there’s one 
ready. But one is being worked on now, as it is each and every 
day, and it’s updated each and every day. But I certainly can 
send you one within the next day or two. . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Could we get a cut-off for today or 
yesterday or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I can’t answer that. I don’t know. The 
department’s working on the updated one right now. So . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Will you provide that to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes. We’ll provide that as soon as it’s 
complete, which hopefully will be . . . We should be able to 
have a list to you by Friday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I would like to thank my officials for 
coming out tonight. And I would like to thank the oppositions 
for all their very good questions. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too, as the staff 
is running out, thank them for coming in tonight, and the 
minister for letting them come. And I’m sure this is . . . be the 
first of many, many evenings that we’ll spend together. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair:  I’ll invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to introduce my deputy 
minister, Brent Cotter; Doug Moen, who’s the executive 
director of public law and policy; and Tammy Pryznyk, who is 
the executive assistant to the deputy minister. And Elizabeth 
Smith, who is the director of the administrative services branch. 
 
Item 1 



1078  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I welcome 
the minister and all his officials. I’m overwhelmed by the 
support you’ve arrived with this evening, and I welcome each 
and every one of your officials. 
 
Could I ask just as an overview from yourself, Mr. Minister, as 
to perhaps, you might just give the House an idea of how you 
can see your department changing over the coming year, seeing 
as you’re the new minister. And how do you foresee changes to 
your department, and your department operating over the 
coming year, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to answer that question. 
I’ve actually prepared some notes and I’ll be pleased to give 
you a whole review. 
 
I’ve been serving the people of this province as the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General for about five months now. This 
has been, without doubt, one of the most intense and exciting 
periods of immersion that I’ve ever experienced. 
 
As a scan of almost any day’s headlines or newscasts will tell 
you, it sometimes seems that almost every issue of public 
interest or concern has a Justice connection. When you think 
about it, that is not really surprising. Our laws and system of 
justice help us to live together peacefully and harmoniously. 
They’re a focal point of our lives as citizens of this province 
and this country. 
 
Over these past few months I’ve gained a real appreciation for 
the tremendous variety of programs and services provided by 
the Department of Justice. I’ve also come to know and to 
respect the many dedicated and professional staff who work on 
behalf of the public. 
 
I’m pleased to have this opportunity to talk about the vision of 
Saskatchewan Justice and the work that is being done to make 
that vision a reality. To develop a vision is to carry it into the 
next century. The department took a very critical, 
future-oriented look at its operation and mandate. The views 
and concerns of all interested parties were considered. Staff 
across the province were involved in articulating the vision. 
 
The Department of Justice has a vision of a fair, equitable, and 
safe society, supported by a justice system that is trusted and 
understood; a justice system that is respectful of and responsive 
to diversity, individual and collective rights, and changing 
public expectations and community needs, including the needs 
of aboriginal people. 
 
Six core strategies have been identified as central to achieving 
this vision. Three of these strategies have an external focus. 
First, promoting the most constructive and accessible ways of 
resolving disputes; second, defining our role in social justice 
and implementing specific actions that are consistent with that 
role; and third, fostering a justice system that is relevant to, 
respectful of, and respected by, aboriginal people. 
 
The remaining three strategies have an internal focus. They are, 
first, delivering our programs and fulfilling our responsibilities 
in the most effective and efficient way; second, enhancing and  

maintaining the quality of work life for our employees; and 
thirdly, developing and implementing a communications plan 
that fosters respect, understanding, and trust in the justice 
system. 
 
I believe this vision and these core strategies identify a 
department that recognizes and is prepared to meet the 
challenges of providing effective, efficient, and relevant justice 
services in a changing environment. We are working in several 
key areas to make our vision a reality. 
 
We know there is a need for fundamental change in our current 
criminal justice system. People are concerned that the system 
has lost touch with the victims and communities it’s supposed 
to protect. They believe it is too focused on upholding 
offenders’ rights instead of holding them accountable for their 
actions. 
 
Aboriginal people continue to be disproportionately involved in 
crime as victims and as offenders. Even though we charge and 
jail a high proportion of offenders at great cost, people are 
feeling less safe and secure. Some people believe that we are 
too soft on offenders. They believe that we must get tough with 
stiffer penalties and harsher penalties. I agree that we have to 
get tough, but we have to be smart about how we get tough. We 
must deal with offenders more effectively, and we must get 
tough on the causes of crime. 
 
An important part of the answer is restoring community 
commitment and involvement in ensuring the well-being and 
safety of our neighbourhoods. We must also recognize the 
societal problems contributing to the causes of crime and 
attempt to better address those issues. 
 
On the criminal justice side, we must work to do more justice 
and less law. Throughout the Department of Justice, we are 
working to develop a new relationship between government, 
community, victim, and offender. Justice and Social Services 
officials are working with communities to identify and develop 
an alternatives response to crime, a response that increases 
offender responsibility, enhances victim satisfaction, and 
restores community responsibility and family responsibility in 
solutions that have meaningful consequences for offenders. 
 
Working with offenders in the community, involving the 
community and victim, is based on the philosophy of integrated 
shaming. It condemns the behaviour, but preserves the dignity 
of the offender. 
 
This change in the criminal justice system ties in closely with 
many of our core strategies. It is more effective and efficient 
because it enables us to rely on community-based measures to 
deal with low-risk offenders and to focus the heavy 
mechanisms of the criminal justice system where they need to 
be  dealing with high-risk, dangerous offenders. 
 
A community-based focus on criminal justice will facilitate the 
development of alternatives that are respectful of, and respected 
by, aboriginal people. It is the response based on the aboriginal 
concept of justice as healing, and the biblical concept of justice 
as the restoration of harmony and community. In that way it  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

also relates to our work in identifying and defining our role in 
social justice. 
 
Our work to change the criminal justice system also ties in with 
our core strategy of promoting constructive and accessible ways 
of resolving disputes. The department has actually been 
working to broaden the options for dispute resolution for the 
past couple of years. 
 
We have built upon the successful use of mediation in the farm 
debt area and are actively encouraging its use in a broad range 
of civil disputes. In pilot projects in Regina and Swift Current, 
parties in civil disputes must examine the option of mediation 
before the matter proceeds to court. 
 
In establishing the family law division of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench to ensure the most effective and supportive environment 
possible for resolving family law matters, we have also 
implemented a range of support services for families. If it is 
appropriate, parties in family law disputes are told about 
mediation and are able to determine whether mediation might 
be an option in constructively resolving their differences. 
 
Our work in developing alternatives in the criminal justice 
system is also likely to result in the development of alternative 
methods of making things right between victims, offenders, and 
the community. Many other initiatives support our efforts in 
social justice in providing services effectively and efficiently, 
and ensuring that our system is trusted and understood. 
 
(2145) 
 
The victims services program of the department has developed 
a range of services for victims of crime during their 
involvement with the criminal justice process. Through 
networks of trained volunteers and the guidance of 
professionals, victims are receiving information, support 
through the criminal justice process, and referral to necessary 
services. 
 
Our work to foster a justice system respectful of, and respected 
by, aboriginal people is also broader than our work in the 
criminal justice area. Key to our efforts is the development of a 
process to work with aboriginal people in addressing the serious 
issues of their disproportionate involvement both as victims and 
as offenders. 
 
We are working to build bridges between aboriginal 
communities and the justice system by supporting and 
facilitating initiatives in community-based justice development; 
through first nations policing agreements, such as the one that 
we were at today at Standing Buffalo Dakota First Nation. First 
nations communities are contracting with the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) for policing services. Police 
management boards ensure that first nations communities have 
direct input into policing priorities, and elders are available to 
provide assistance to the police as required. 
 
To be responsive and respectful of diversity and the individual 
and collective rights of members in our society, we are also 
working to ensure that the protections and services of the  

justice system are provided to the most vulnerable members of 
our society. The consumer protection legislation introduced 
during this session is particularly focused on providing 
protections for vulnerable consumers. 
 
The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, which has been in 
place for just over a year now, focuses on facilitating the safety 
of some of the most vulnerable members of our society, those 
who are victims of violence within their own homes. 
 
There are many other initiatives that I do not have time to touch 
on today, but I hope I’ve given you a flavour of the dedication 
the staff, the Department of Justice, have to achieving our 
vision of a fair, equitable, and safe society here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
would like to commend the minister for his sincere dissertation 
in an area that the people of this province surely do expect and 
appreciate the kind of sincerity with respect to involving 
communities in this very important issue of justice  justice 
for all, not for any particular individual groups. And I thank you 
for that, Mr. Minister. I would very much appreciate if you 
would share with me a copy of your dissertation. I thank you so 
much for these rather ambitious objectives and goals, again for 
which I commend you. 
 
There is a need for financial support as well, and there are some 
areas that I would like to have some assurances that the 
finances will be in place, finances that will be available in those 
areas that you have touched on. 
 
I would like to, first of all, start off by referring to your 
full-time staff which in the Estimates appear to have been cut 
by some 10 for this coming year. I was wondering if you could 
share with us where these cuts were made, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s not exactly a simple question to 
answer, but if I was going to look at the greatest number of 
reductions, would be approximately 25.8 full-time equivalents 
in corrections efficiencies. And actually the total number of 
reductions is 43.5 full-time equivalents. And then the total 
number of increases is 34.6. And so it’s sort of a net difference 
of about nine or ten, like you say. 
 
So the greatest number of efficiencies, if you can use that word, 
are in corrections. But then also there are 13 new jobs in 
corrections as well. So I think it’s a shifting of some of the jobs. 
 
So I’m not sure if you want me to go through the whole list. I 
can tell you each area and where there’s reductions and where 
there’s additions. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, my question was more to those 10 
positions that were eliminated or people that were released. 
Were they in fact released totally, or were they moved to 
another department? I appreciate what you’re saying and it 
might be a little complex and perhaps you can supply me with a 
more detailed report. 



1080  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, there are approximately 40 
employees that’ll be impacted by the budget decisions. 
Thirty-one of these employees are eligible for early retirement, 
seven employees will be given the opportunity to transfer to 
other locations, and one permanent employee and one 
non-permanent employee received lay-off notices on budget 
day. And of the new full-time equivalent positions, 
approximately 19 will be permanent positions, with the balance 
being non-permanent. So there are approximately 34 new jobs; 
19 of those are permanent jobs. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, does this then affect front-line 
staffers, the ones that the public generally deal with on an 
ongoing basis, or are these people that are not necessarily 
dealing with the public on a day-to-day basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Of the people, for example, who are 
eligible for early retirement  it’s kind of hard to answer your 
question directly  but of the 31 who are eligible for early 
retirement, 18 of those come from the in-scope positions and 13 
from out of scope. Of the people that were not eligible for early 
retirement, the two people that were laid off, one of them was a 
non-permanent, in-scope employee; and the other was a 
permanent, in-scope employee. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. If you wouldn’t mind sharing that 
information, the detailed information that you have, rather than 
go through it all individually here, Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate 
that. And then I would also at this time, Mr. Chairman, I would 
like to ask the minister if we could obtain, perhaps, a personnel 
list for your department as well, accompanied with the job titles 
and salaries, if that would be available, for the current year, the 
upcoming year, and for the past year. 
 
Also maybe I could just lump two or three of these requests into 
one here. I’d like to also ask the minister how much the 
department has spent on consultants during the last year, and 
this year up to this point as well, and a list of these consultants 
and perhaps how much they were paid and what their 
responsibilities were as far as the department is concerned. Also 
if on that same list you could please supply us with a list of law 
firms used by the government this past year and the terms of 
payment and the amounts that were paid, over and above your 
department officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Just for further clarity, do I understand 
that you want basically, in advance, the report that usually 
comes when the financial statements are filed? Is that correct? 
 
Mr. Osika:  If you have those available, it would be 
appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Basically, those lists we can. And then I 
have a further question about the information on employees. 
Could you clarify what that . . . the first item that you 
mentioned. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The personnel list for your department, 
basically, if you could supply that to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  You want a list for the 2,000 employees, 

plus then the 600 RCMP officers? 
 
Mr. Osika:  No, not quite to that extent. Your department 
within Justice here in Regina, within your Justice department 
here in the city  within your immediate department, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well that is within my immediate 
department. That’s the number of employees. So what do you 
want? Management, or do you want in scope, out of scope? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Your management staff, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  So I will provide you then, a list of the 
out-of-scope employees. Okay? 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome, officials. I would just like to present 
some questions to you in regards to the North Battleford Youth 
Centre. Could you . . . or do you have on hand the annual cost 
of running that centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That is actually not administered by the 
Department of Justice. That’s part of the Department of Social 
Services, so I would suggest you save up those questions for the 
Minister of Social Services. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a question 
regarding the Jackson report. Is that also something you would 
like me to refer to the Social Service minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Just for clarification, is the name the 
Jackson report? 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, due to, I 
guess some problems within the North Battleford Youth Centre 
and controversy surrounding those problems, there was . . . 
Marion Jackson was commissioned to do a report on the 
workings of the North Battleford Youth Centre. I was 
wondering whether or not I would be able to address questions 
surrounding that report to your department or if I should refer 
those to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s that the whole area of the young 
offenders facilities is within the jurisdiction of the Minister of 
Social Services and his department so I don’t have any 
information on that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I shall refer them then to 
the Minister of Social Services. While I’m here though, I would 
like to ask you some . . . is legal aid under your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I can say that legal aid has been under my 
department since April 1, 1996 so I can answer some questions 
about the last month, and the future, but . . . and I can try to 
answer questions about last year. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’ve had a 
good number of people phoning me and certainly commenting 
on their dissatisfaction with some of the legal aid procedures 
and also with the representation that they have been getting 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

through legal aid. 
 
I’m just wondering whether or not there’s any option for these 
people or if your department has considered any option for 
those people to access their own choice of lawyer. Or has there 
been any discussion on this in your department? I know that in 
other provinces, in some other provinces in fact, that people can 
access their own lawyer, and it is paid for under legal aid. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In Saskatchewan we’re very proud of our 
clinic-based program of legal aid, and so that on first instance 
you always will work with a staff lawyer in one of the clinics. 
But there is an appeal procedure whereby a person who is 
dissatisfied with the kind of advice or assistance that they’re 
getting, they can go and appeal to the Chair of the Legal Aid 
Commission, and then there’s further appeal from that if 
necessary to take a case to a lawyer of their choice. 
 
And I have the figures for the year 1994-95 — that there were, 
of 22,668 approved applications from legal aid, 226 federal 
criminal matters, adult and youth; and 106 family matters were 
assigned to the private bar 
 
So the total of 332 was about 1.46 per cent of the total 
approved applications. About $534,000 . . . or $534,458 were 
expended to the private bar case, about 6.2 per cent of the total 
expenditures for the year. 
 
I’m not sure if you have any more questions about that, but I 
think also there’s 112 members of the bar in Saskatchewan 
were involved in the year 1994-95 as providing assigned cases 
from the Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if it is so 
that people do have access to a lawyer of their choice, I have 
had no knowledge of that from the people that have consulted 
with me or talked with me. They have indicated that in fact they 
are given another legal aid lawyer not of their choice, but that is 
certainly selected by the department as I understand it, and 
that’s one of the grievances, that they would like to be able to 
select their own lawyer. 
 
So I’m wondering where is the discrepancy here in whether or 
not a person has the choice of accessing their own lawyer or 
not, and how is that determined by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Section 29 of The Legal Aid Act 
describes the circumstances when the commission  which is 
independent from our department; it reports through me  
when this commission can appoint members of the private bar 
to act for people. 
 
And the cases that are authorized to the private bar may be 
authorized to the private bar where, number one, a person is 
charged with murder or high treason; two, a young person 
charged under the Young Offenders Act may become the 
subject of a transfer hearing to adult court and may be charged 
with murder; or if there’s a professional or legal conflict of 
interest within the law firm, there’s some difficulty that way. Or  

the legal aid lawyer or clinic people, it may be impossible or 
improper for them to act for a client. 
 
There are other circumstances as well where an appropriate 
level of expertise of a staff member is unavailable, where the 
assigned commitments of a staff lawyer make attendance upon 
a matter at short notice impossible, or where as a result of the 
failure of a client to cooperate with or to instruct counsel, a 
staff lawyer feels unable to act, with resulting consequences if a 
client were to be convicted. 
 
And in some situations where it is more economical in terms of 
travel time and cost, they would hire somebody in the private 
bar. And then there are some other exceptional circumstances. 
All of these decisions usually are made by the director of the 
Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So that if a person 
wanted to make an appeal for a private lawyer they would go to 
the director, as such, and appeal through that person for a 
private lawyer. Who would determine whether or not their 
appeal was justified, I guess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well practically it would go to, you know, 
the overall Chair and director of the Legal Aid Commission. 
There also is an appeal process from her decision if you don’t 
agree with her decision. And so there are two levels of appeal. 
 
I think, you know, practically if you have specific examples or 
concerns, that you may want to just advise them that it’s 
appropriate to appeal from the clinic director, if they’re in a 
community in your area, to Ms. Jane Lancaster who is located 
in Saskatoon, and she’s the person that handles these appeals. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In all due respect, I have 
had a couple of people phone me that have said that they have 
gone through Ms. Lancaster and they have been given different 
legal aid lawyers actually to the point of about four or five legal 
aid lawyers, even though they had asked for a private lawyer, 
and they get the same response that, this is the lawyer appointed 
to you and if you’re not satisfied then we can’t do much about 
it. 
 
So I’m just wondering what kind of avenues those people could 
take if they feel that they’re not being represented well and that 
they have exhausted their talks with Ms. Lancaster. I guess 
that’s the final question in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well all I can say is that, in Saskatchewan 
we have developed a very effective and efficient clinical legal 
aid system. And for many years we’ve been shown to be the 
system that operates the most efficiently. 
 
Ontario, as you may have recently noticed in the number of the 
media reports, has had a great deal of difficulty funding their 
system which was almost exclusively transferring cases out to 
the private bar. They are seriously examining the way we run 
our system here as a method of providing affordable legal 
services right across the whole community. 
 



1082  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

And even though there are some instances where there are some 
difficulties, I think we do have the appeal procedures available. 
And I would suggest that you encourage these people to use 
those appeal procedures, and if there are still difficulties then 
we can go on to the next level of appeal. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could I just ask you a 
direct question on how many legal aid lawyers  you may have 
mentioned this but I missed it if you did  how many legal aid 
lawyers do you have commissioned right at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Legal Aid Commission employs 60 
lawyers, 22 paralegals, and 49 administrative and support staff; 
it’s a total of 131 employees. But there are some that job share, 
so it’s actually 127.5 full-time equivalent jobs. And they’re 
located in 14 area offices throughout the province. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m just 
wondering, say within the last year, how many clients have 
these 60 lawyers in fact had in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The case-load per year has plateaued. In 
other words, the last number of years it’s been approximately 
23,000 full-service applicants every year. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, it seems to me the ratio of applicants 
to lawyers is really . . . the applicants are . . . it’s very high. I 
have had, in fact, one legal aid lawyer tell me that they’re 
overwhelmed with cases and feel that they cannot represent 
their clients well enough because of the case-load. Is there 
anything in the budget to address this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. This year we are increasing the 
budget for legal aid by $275,000 which is approximately 3.2 per 
cent. And that’s one of the few areas where we’ve actually 
increased our budget. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would be really very 
appreciative of you maybe passing that document on to me so 
that I may use it for reference. I’m wondering what the total 
cost of legal aid for the past year has been for the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  For the 1995-96, the approved budget was 
$8.675 million, and the budget we’re hoping to have approved 
for this year, ‘96-97, is $8.950 million. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One last question. Was 
that eight-million-and-some dollars, was that over the budget 
for last year, or in fact did it meet the budget and did it stay on 
an even keel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The information is that we were just 
slightly under that budget figure of $8.675 million. So in other 
words, we almost spent exactly what we had budgeted. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d 
like to welcome the minister’s officials as well as the minister. 
 
Just a couple of questions on northern Saskatchewan. As you 

probably know, the strain on the justice system really is, you 
know, a reflection of the economic situation of various regions 
and of the people. When it comes to northern Saskatchewan, we 
know that the justice system is under siege, I guess you could 
say. There is a lot of use of the justice system; there’s a lot of 
problems with the justice system. 
 
Is your department doing anything innovative or exciting in 
reference to the problems of justice and its delivery in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m very pleased, actually, to answer that 
question. The Leader of the Opposition and I were at the 
Standing Buffalo Dakota First Nation today to celebrate the 
signing of a tripartite policing agreement. That’s not too far 
from Regina. But there have been quite a number of the 
aboriginal policing agreements signed in the North in 
Saskatchewan. And we are actually at a point where we’ve 
signed 16 out of, I think, about 33 that we anticipate signing, 
with many of those to be signed in the North. 
 
Also we have developed victim services programs which 
provide assistance to victims when they are required to testify 
and be part of criminal proceedings. I, my first week as Justice 
minister, visited La Loche and saw the system that they have set 
up there. They also have a similar system in La Ronge and a 
number of the communities in the North. 
 
We’re also working with community justice workers in northern 
communities, and that’s become a very important, valuable 
program. 
 
Also just this last week we announced that we’re doing . . . 
we’re now in a position to negotiate the funding for the Prince 
Albert Grand Council healing lodge, which we hope will 
provide another option in some of the correctional side and do 
something that’s specifically catering to the northern 
communities. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you for your response. A couple of 
other points. In my particular constituency of Athabasca we’ve 
got approximately 18, I guess you could phrase them as Métis 
communities, which are non-treaty settlements. And the first 
nations probably consist of about seven communities in the 
whole region. So in essence, dealing with the first nations 
communities and the reserves, I sincerely applaud your efforts 
and I think we have to do more of that. 
 
The second, flip part of the question is of course the Métis 
community side. I think it’s very key, Mr. Minister, that we 
don’t forget about the Métis communities because they’re very 
much similar to the reserve communities in northern 
Saskatchewan. The stats are similar, the use of the justice 
system is similar; however, there seems to be a different 
treatment when you come to the Métis communities. Could you 
elaborate on the Métis perspective as well, please. 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Métis services that are provided in 
the North, and I didn’t mention before, one of the main . . .  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

another main program we have is the courtworkers’ program. 
And many of those are in Métis communities or the carrier 
agency is a Métis agency. Also the community justice workers, 
we have those programs in Métis communities. We’ve also 
provided grants to the Metis family and community justice 
committee, $30,000; into the Métis Nation — some of their 
research — of 6,500 to help them in looking at some of the 
definition of their area in north-west Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if we 
could just go back to perhaps the departmental review which 
you had announced will be undertaken. Would this be 
appropriate? Could you share with the House at this point what 
the mandate of that particular review of your department will 
be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Just for clarification, are you talking 
about the review of the department of prosecutions? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Yes, Mr. Minister. The review that will be 
undertaken by a couple of attorneys from Calgary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. As I explained when this was 
announced, over the last number of years we’ve gone through 
and reviewed different parts of the Department of Justice; 
looked at some of the registry areas; looked at the, I think, civil 
law area. This year we’re doing it with special focus on the 
department of public prosecutions. 
 
And the terms of reference for the operational audit are as 
follows. Number one, analyse the organization of the public 
prosecutions division of the Saskatchewan Department of 
Justice. 
 
Number two, analyse the division’s management practices and 
procedures and internal and external communications. 
 
Number three, evaluate the conduct of prosecutions, including 
the role of the Crown prosecutor, resources, accountability, 
independence, and the process followed in the exercise of 
prosecutorial discretion. 
 
And then number four, recommend improvements to the 
organization, management, practices and procedures of public 
prosecutions. 
 
Number five, consult and interview, as required, to address the 
above terms of reference, individuals within and outside the 
criminal justice system. 
 
And six, report the results of the evaluation to the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The review is said to 
cost, or will cost, in the vicinity of about a hundred thousand 
dollars. Is this in fact a firm amount, or could it be more than 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s possible that it could be slightly more 
than that, but we’re hoping that it will be right around that 
figure. 

Mr. Osika:  Are then the two attorneys who will be involved, 
will they be paid on an hourly basis then? And with all due 
respect, in this day and age the costs for attorneys’ fees are 
rather, I guess, given with the times, considered by some, 
substantial. Is that in fact six months, that it will take that long 
to do the review, or will it in fact be less? Again, given the cost 
of attorneys’ times, preparation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is yes, 
that we will be paying them in the normal way that one would 
pay lawyers. We were quite concerned that we would get top 
quality people to do a careful job and we will be paying market 
rates for these lawyers. The other thing that I would remind you 
is that they will also be doing some other things. This isn’t 
going to be absolutely a full-time job. It will be full-time when 
they’re here in Saskatchewan, but they have a number of cases 
scheduled that they will be handling at the same time as they’re 
doing the work for us. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Have you any indication or idea of how many 
hours that $100,000 would work out to or could be worked out 
to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Not exactly, no, because included in that 
would be some of their travel costs and interview costs as they 
. . . I think they will be going around to a number of places 
within Saskatchewan. But I will be able to provide more 
information, probably, after we are into this process a little bit. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure you 
would have probably negotiated a good deal with your 
counterparts from Alberta. Do you feel comfortable that that 
length of time is adequate or sufficient to do the in-depth 
review that you have intended to carry out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. We consulted with them before we 
retained them to handle this for us, and it was their 
recommendation as to the time lines that we have reported. So 
they appear to be very professional and capable people and 
were able to say that this is the amount of time that they 
anticipated it would take. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. In earlier interviews, Mr. Minister, 
it’s been stated that individual cases, such as Martensville and 
the Latimer case, won’t be specifically looked at. And I was just 
wondering if you do not feel that perhaps these cases may be 
the cornerstones of such type of a review, and it is these such 
cases, after all, that have kind of shaken the confidence, the 
faith of the people in our justice system. Do you not feel that 
perhaps part of the mandate should include . . . or should have 
those cases looked at as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the clear focus of the review is the 
whole system. And there may be things to be learned from some 
of these individual cases, and I’m sure those pieces of 
information will be part of the total review. But the whole 
emphasis is not to focus on a couple of cases and especially 
ones that have been dealt with in the courts or are still in the 
courts, but more to look at the whole system and learn from the 
process of how a whole array of cases have been handled. 
 



1084  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, as far as I understand, the two 
Calgary lawyers hired to conduct this review have both been 
career-long prosecutors. Does the minister agree that perhaps 
that when one does studies of a department critically, it might 
therefore have some input from other sides, from people that 
have had some management . . . perhaps efficiency experts as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I take your suggestion as a positive one 
and in fact we discussed that with the people that we have 
hired, and if it is deemed necessary, then they will retain 
appropriate people to help them on some of these systems 
issues. 
 
I think one of the important things to remember about these 
people is that they were in the prosecution side for many years, 
and then for the last year, year and half, have been working in 
private practice and doing much defence work. And they then 
have a perspective on sort of both sides of the situation. 
 
The other thing is that Mr. Martland was the president of the 
Law Society of Alberta and very much involved in many of the 
discussions around legal ethics and the appropriate behaviour of 
lawyers in some very difficult situations. And I was personally 
quite impressed with his knowledge in this area, and I think that 
he will provide us with some valuable insights into how our 
system in Saskatchewan is working. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I appreciate that. I would just take it for granted 
that the costs that are being paid to the two attorneys, any 
extraordinary costs that they may incur by hiring outside 
consultants, will be part of their fee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In the normal course that’s how lawyers 
work, that they would bill for their professional services and 
ancillary services, and so I assume that that’s how it would go 
as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Just sort of a final note in this particular area. 
Mr. Minister, how do you see the Department of Justice 
compared with other provinces? And are you aware of any other 
provinces that may have found themselves in a similar situation 
requiring a similar type of review? Are you aware of any in 
other provinces, and how has that been conducted in other 
jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m aware of at least two provinces 
that have conducted similar reviews  Nova Scotia and British 
Columbia. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have two more 
questions. I was noticing, Mr. Minister, that when I figured out 
the ratio for legal aid lawyers to the clients, it indicates that 
there is about one lawyer for 378 clients. I can’t understand 
really how it’s possible to take care of these clients, especially 
considering that these lawyers also have other duties. And I see 
that you have put a little more money into this, which I 
commend you for, because there was a lot of people in distress 
out there. Is this ratio correct as far as you’re concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that is the ratio, and the  

explanation would lie in a couple of areas. There are paralegals 
that work with the lawyers. There are also the other staff that 
work with the lawyers, and so those people will often be 
involved in cases at various points in the case. 
 
The other thing is that many of the cases involve people who 
would seek advice, get approved, and then would go to court, 
and there maybe would be a guilty plea. And that wouldn’t take 
very long. So you might end up having a whole case dealt with 
within two, three, or four weeks. And here you’re talking about 
case-load for a full year. And so I don’t think the figures are 
way out of line as far as the traditional comparisons that we’ve 
made. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t know. In the way 
I see it, it looks to me as though there would have to be a case 
per day if in fact the lawyers worked seven days a week. And 
then that wouldn’t be enough, so I think it’s quite a load that 
these lawyers have, and I can commend them. But I can also see 
how they’re having a difficult time. 
 
One more question, if I could. Has there ever been any 
consideration under legal aid for a lawyer for children in fact, 
because we hear of so many cases where children are falling 
through the cracks and haven’t got proper representation. I 
believe Saskatchewan is the only province who does not have 
representation for children. Is there any consideration being 
given to that from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Legal aid lawyers do represent children in 
young offenders matters. There are also situations where the 
Public Trustee will step in and appoint a lawyer if it’s 
appropriate that children need to be protected. And that’s often 
in a situation where there may be a car accident or an estate or 
something where a child has an interest and the Public Trustee 
wants to protect that interest. 
 
Also there’s the Children’s Advocate office which doesn’t 
provide legal advice but they provide some advice. But we 
don’t have a system of appointing lawyers for children in 
custody and access disputes, if that’s where your question is 
rooted. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, it’s something I hope we’ll soon 
give consideration to. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chair, I want to thank the minister and all 
his staff for being here this evening and assisting in clarifying 
some of the points and issues that we’ve addressed. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank all of my 
staff for coming at this late time in the evening, and also thank 
you to the members opposite for their careful and thoughtful 
questions. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:31 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health  Vote 32 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1061 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1061 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation  Vote 16 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1077 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Justice  Vote 3 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1078, 1083 
  Julé .................................................................................................................................................................................1080, 1084 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
 


