
























































June 19, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2829 
 June 19, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

PRIVILEGE 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  To raise a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member for Thunder Creek has, as 
required by rule 6(1), advised the Speaker two hours in advance 
of the sitting of the House that he intends to raise a point of 
privilege. He’s met that requirement and I’ll ask the hon. 
member for Thunder Creek to put his point of privilege. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently it came to my attention that the Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner, who albeit is an officer of this 
Assembly, serves as a director of Extendicare. That company, 
Mr. Speaker, is a co-owner of Crown Life with HARO 
Financial Corporation, a company majority owned by this 
government. Extendicare, Mr. Speaker, benefits significantly 
from that relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s widely known that I both questioned and 
criticized the matter of government involvement in Crown Life. 
The company, on whose board of directors the commissioner 
serves, openly criticized my position, as did Crown Life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on an annual basis, like other members of this 
House, I must file with the commissioner a confidential 
disclosure statement regarding my financial affairs and those of 
my family. From that disclosure statement, the commissioner in 
turn prepares a public disclosure statement. In addition, the 
commissioner advises MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and may also conduct investigations and inquiries 
regarding members as allowed by the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the matters I must place before the commissioner 
are of a sensitive nature to the well-being of my family. In order 
to fulfil my duties as a member, I must be assured beyond all 
doubt that the commissioner will treat any matter relating to 
myself with complete impartiality. The commissioner’s duties 
beyond this House leave this in doubt. This situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is a breach of parliamentary privilege as it impairs my 
ability to fulfil my duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I await your ruling. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The Chair is willing to 
consider other comments related to the member’s breach of 
privilege if other members wish to put them on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Now I have a couple of comments to 
make, one of which is, Mr. Speaker, I think you’ve ruled on this 
matter. I think we’ve had this matter aired and it was 
determined that this is not a breach of privilege. 
 
Secondly, I want to point out what I think is obvious to most,  

and that is the most . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . as someone 
chimes in, and that is that the fact that a person is on a board of 
directors of a company which owns shares in another company, 
scarcely puts him in a conflict of interest. That is a very distant 
relationship. 
 
I think it really is incumbent upon the member opposite to bring 
forth some credible evidence of a conflict of interest, rather 
than simply repeat a worn out and tired allegation. I really think 
it’s incumbent upon the member opposite to provide you and 
the Assembly with some evidence of his charge. 
 
And if he has no evidence of his charge  and none was 
provided this morning  then I think the appropriate 
disposition for you, Mr. Speaker, is to dismiss it forthwith, 
rather than have the name of a legislative officer dragged 
through the mud once again on the same issue as was before. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, unfair to a legislative officer to 
have this matter repeated twice. Surely there is a principle that 
everyone is tried once. He was tried. He was found to be . . . 
was found to be without substance. The member simply 
repeated the same allegation in a different process. Surely an 
officer of the legislature is entitled to some protection, but 
surely he’s entitled . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . surely  as 
someone has said  surely he’s entitled, if his partiality is 
going to be drawn into issue, surely he’s entitled to have some 
substance to the allegation. 
 
This is simply a tired repetition of something that was said 
before. I really urge you, Mr. Speaker, to come to the defence of 
legislative officers and just dismiss this here and now. It really 
is unworthy. It’s unworthy of this Assembly and it is most 
unfair to a legislative officer to have this thing repeated a 
second time with no more substance to it than was apparent the 
first time. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as soon as 
some of these children come to order then we’ll continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the disappointing part on the Government House 
Leader’s comments were the fact that he didn’t follow what the 
point of privilege was this morning. It is not on the same point 
of privilege as of the other day. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Exactly the same. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well it is not. And if you would follow 
along for once, you would . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. All hon. members of the House 
will come to order. And I will ask all hon. members, in putting 
their remarks on this point of privilege, to direct their remarks 
directly to the Chair. There is only one appropriate place to 
direct these remarks, and it’s through the Chair. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the other day the apology 
was made because of statements made in the House in regards 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

to an officer of the legislature. Today’s point of privilege 
clearly states yet something different. And I wish the 
Government House Leader would follow along and see what 
the point is. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I have listened carefully to the remarks 
made by the hon. member for Thunder Creek in putting his 
point of privilege, and I thank the hon. member for providing 
me the notice in advance of his intent to do that, in explaining 
his case there. 
 
I also listened carefully to the remarks made by the Government 
House Leader and by the House Leader of the official 
opposition. I will want to further reflect on the remarks that 
have been made on the record and to review Hansard, and will 
take them into consideration and bring a ruling to the House. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

The Chair:  Order. I will ask the members to come to order. 
Order. I would ask the members on both sides of the House, if 
they have conversations, to walk around and talk to each other 
rather than holler across the House. The committee will come to 
order, please. 
 
If the minister has any new officials that he would like to 
introduce I would ask him to do it now, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair. Again we’re joined by 
Mr. Con Hnatiuk, Mr. Neil Yeates, Mr. Bob Wihlidal, from the 
Department of Social Services to assist us in our deliberations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
noticed that your department does help individuals who, 
through no fault of their own, end up with a disability. And I 
think under community living, I notice you provide services 
above some $51,000 and support services to disabled persons. 
 
And the reason I bring this up is because I’ve had a couple 
people in the last few years that have had some real concerns 
and been seeking some assistance. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, first of all can you give us some idea of the type of 
services that are provided and then I’ll get into some other 
questioning that I have regarding these services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, essentially the kinds of work 
that we do would be early intervention programs for children, 
support to families with disabled children, and the largest 
component would be the community living division which is 
support to group homes for living accommodations. 
 
(1015) 
 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, the reason I raise it is, and the 
reason I’m asking this question, because of a couple of 
individuals who have ended up with a very disabling disease 
that has taken them from, if you will, the prime of life and the 
ability to provide for themselves to a point that they’re into 
wheelchairs and in some cases just can’t even look after 
themselves. And the disease is multiple sclerosis. 
 
And I wasn’t really aware of the problems that that disease 
brings to a person until close friends ended up with it  one 
person who is just totally dependent on other people now. And 
the unfortunate part, Mr. Minister, is her family is expected to 
really do all the caring for her. And the things that was 
originally asked for from the government, and I believe it came 
to your department  and not to you specifically as minister; I 
believe in this case it was a different minister  but it was for 
some assistance in providing wheelchair accessibility to homes. 
Because a lot of these individuals would not have access to that. 
And all of a sudden you have to update your home or update 
access to washrooms. 
 
And I was just wondering, Mr. Minister, does this fall under 
your purview, your department? Is there assistance in that 
manner for people such as the individuals in this situation 
where they find themselves looking for and needing some help? 
They just all of a sudden are put in a position where they’ve got 
a medical cost on their shoulders, of the cost of the drugs that 
are involved and trying to slow down the ravages of multiple 
sclerosis in their life  how it takes away their ability to even 
function. And then on top of it, trying to have some 
resemblance of a quality life. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, does your department do anything to assist 
in these matters, and what level of support could a person 
achieve or expect to receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, through the Department of 
Social Services we do provide income support through the 
social assistance plan. And under the social assistance plan 
there is coverage for drug costs for those who have drug needs 
and whose income is low and therefore can qualify for social 
assistance. 
 
Other supports for the physically disabled come from other 
areas of government. When the member asks of wheelchairs, 
that kind of equipment that may be required, that is available 
through the Department of Health, the SAIL program  
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living. And there have been 
. . . in both federal and provincial levels of government there 
have been programs, for instance for home modification, that 
sort of thing. These fall outside the jurisdiction of course of 
Social Services. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to support, and in one case in 
particular, a situation that has come to my attention, Mr. 
Minister, is the fact of one couple . . . one individual where the 
spouse . . . the husband is trying desperately to continually 
provide for his wife, and it’s created a rift in the home, as I 
understand it right now. 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

What I found, Mr. Minister, is unfortunately that while the 
community has endeavoured to help as much as possible, they 
have found that they have had very little support from the broad 
community, such as Social Services. And even in this case, 
unfortunately this matter also moves into the area of the 
Department of Health  and I’m not asking you to answer on 
behalf of the Department of Health. 
 
But you talked about support for medication. The other concern 
I do have, Mr. Minister, is when you look at support for 
medication  and this is one of the big questions that has been 
raised  the fact that this couple happen to be on the farm and 
because there’s a lot of assets involved here, Mr. Minister  a 
lot of assets that aren’t necessarily liquid assets . . . it’s assets 
that you need to continue to operate and function on a farm, and 
yet they’re all taken into account. Even though the net return or 
income from that farming endeavour may be quite low, these 
assets come into play, which means they do not get a lot of 
support. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what are the criteria you look at, 
and do we continually use assets that a person has built up as a 
means of disposable income that’s available and yet cannot be 
just turned into cash, otherwise it takes away your ability to 
provide for yourself. Can you just expose . . . or give us a little 
more detail on that matter, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it’s difficult to comment 
generally because each and every individual and family 
circumstance may be different. How our income support system 
works of course, is that we will set on one side of the equation 
the needs of the individual or the family, and the other side of 
the equation the income. Part of that income may be based on 
assets. If one has some investments or so on that produce 
income, they’re obviously considered part of income. 
 
In each case there is a review; it’s an individual review of the 
asset base. It is recognized and in some cases assets are not 
liquid. And for instance a home would not be considered a 
liquid asset; that’s your place of residence and so on. So it’s 
difficult to comment generally. Assets that produce income, 
clearly are income generating, and would be considered as part 
of your income. Assets that are necessary for daily living, I 
think would not be considered. But if there is an individual case 
the member would wish us to have a review of, we’d certainly 
do that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So just for clarification, Mr. Minister, so that I 
don’t give up the opportunity to at least raise the question with 
the proper department. Your department then does help if a 
family finds themselves in some form of assistance because of 
some disabling disease that may have hit. If it’s a single person 
or in this case, like a couple of cases that have been brought to 
my attention, where their family situation. . . where it’s taken 
basically one of the major breadwinners out of the home or the 
ability to provide, your department does get involved to a 
degree. 
 
And the other question, when it comes . . . and I ask that 
specifically when it comes to the drug costs because of the fact 
that they are one of the major costs. Now is your department  

involved somewhat in providing some assistance as a result of 
the loss . . . yes, the loss of income and the fact that the net 
income is really driven down because of the drug cost, or would 
most of that be involved in the Department of Health, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, what would happen  if an 
individual or a family qualifies for social assistance, what 
would happen is — that if once determined they qualify, then 
they are recommended by the Department of Social Services for 
special drug coverage. That recommendation is then to the 
Department of Health. The Department of Health 
understandably manages the drug plan and all of the drug 
coverages. There are a variety of coverages available through 
the Department of Health and the Department of Health would 
sort out which plan or which coverage is appropriate for the 
individual. 
 
What happens is, if the individual or family meets the criteria to 
receive social assistance, then they are automatically 
recommended for drug coverage. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’ve been 
sitting here and I realize there’s kibitzing back and forth across 
the floor. Maybe if we were talking directly across to each other 
we could hear a little easier. 
 
The other question I would like to get into, and an area of 
debate that I would like to enter into, Mr. Minister, is regarding 
the support for individuals  handicapped individuals in the 
province. And certainly I’m pleased to see in my constituency, 
over the period of the last 10 years or so that I’ve been involved 
in public life, we’ve been able to establish some group homes 
in the area, in Kipling and in Moosomin, and I know there are a 
number of others around the province. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, how many group homes are 
there in the province that you are involved with and how many 
clients would this entail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we, through the department 
of services fund 59, a total of 59 separate agencies across the 
province who will be providing group home accommodation  
59 agencies. We do not have . . . because some of the agencies 
will provide several group homes in a community. For instance, 
I see Chip & Dale Housing here in Regina. They will have 
several group homes. 
 
But there are a total of 59 separate agencies providing group 
homes across the province. And this is a fairly broad and has 
been an expanding network of group homes over the last couple 
of decades and we think each of them are providing a very 
valuable service. This is in conjunction of course with the 
Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw, which continues to provide 
the institutional, residential institutional care when that is 
required. 
 
But there are now 59 agencies providing group homes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to ask you what the . . . I understand that there is rate of  



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

payment for transportation costs of people associated with 
community living, clients associated with community living that 
live outside of a major centre. If these individuals are 
transported to that centre, for instance in the case that I have 
been speaking to you about in the last while, I want to know 
whether or not there’s a regular rate of payment for 
transportation of individuals to and from a centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member and I have had 
some fruitful, I think, discussions about this issue although 
we’ve not yet come to any resolution. The current rate, I think 
we both have come to understand is 15 cents. We know that 
there may be some . . . we need to be looking at this issue. I 
think I’ve said that to the member privately and I say it here 
publicly, that we need to be looking at this issue, both in terms 
of how this works when there’s one person being transported or 
if there’s two people being transported and the number of trips 
per day and so on. But currently the specific answer is 15 cents. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, through 
some information I have given you, there has been some 
indication that there’s a variance in the rate of payment for 
transportation depending on who the client is or where they’re 
coming from. 
 
I find this variation in rates to be a little disconcerting. It is 
really difficult for me to believe that your government is in fact 
trying to keep young people that are handicapped at home with 
their families, as you have stated in your mandate, is what you 
would like to see. That is becoming more difficult for people 
when they cannot be paid for transportation costs to and from a 
centre like Saskatoon. 
 
And when the suggestion has been to them that they have to 
move into Saskatoon, and that might be the only option, it 
seems to me as though that’s separating the client from their 
family and is not very healthy as far as their mental well-being 
would be. 
 
So I would certainly hope that we would end up having, from 
your department, some sort of stabilization and a 
standardization of rates paid out to anyone transporting these 
clients to and from centres. I will leave it at that, Mr. Minister, 
and I hope to hear from you as soon as possible on this matter. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 
a couple of brief questions regarding your policy on assistance 
for adults that are furthering their education, in particular 
through community college. If there is indeed a policy in place 
that lays out the groundwork for people that are furthering their 
education through community college in terms of assistance to 
them while they’re on the plan as opposed to them taking out 
student loans, how is it decided who gets the assistance? Is 
everyone asked to take student loans? What are the 
qualifications and those types of things in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, again I would remind the 
member, we see social assistance to be that income support of a 
last resort, and so we would require that individuals utilize all 
of their own sources of income and resources, and that would 
include student loans. 

If in the event that the resources personal are not available or 
that a student loan was not available or they were not eligible, 
that we would support someone through that education process 
if the education process is designed to produce . . . at the end of 
it, that it has a plan that would lead to employment. In that 
circumstance where there’s a plan that would lead to 
employment, we will support the individual. 
 
(1030) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. There seems to be 
some confusion. My office has made contact with yours, with 
the department, many times over a particular issue and how 
support was granted to some individuals and not to others. It 
seemed to me then in the situation that we looked at is that 
people that agree to take these student loans have to take them. 
Those that say no are then granted some assistance. I’m just 
wondering if there’s any consistency here. 
 
And I guess I would ask you here publicly, in front of the 
people of Saskatchewan, if you would look into this matter to 
ensure that fairness is being afforded to everyone, and in 
particular to this situation of a constituent of mine. And if you’d 
like further information feel free to contact my office and I’ll 
provide it for you. But I do hope that you will look into this and 
ensure that there is fairness across the piece for everyone 
involved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we sincerely believe that we 
do have a system which is fair and consistent. It does take 
account of individual circumstances, and so I would appreciate 
it if the member would send the detail over of that particular 
case and we’ll certainly have somebody have a look at it. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
before I gave the members from Humboldt and Arm River the 
opportunity to enter into the debate, as they had asked for some 
time, we were discussing group homes. And you had indicated 
to me that there were 59 agencies, and I take it when you talk 
. . . If I understood you correctly you mentioned 59 agencies. 
Would that be groups or organizations that basically manage 
these group homes? And if you will, that 59 agencies then 
doesn’t necessarily mean 59 group homes. 
 
I look at the community of Moosomin. I believe there’s two 
group homes specifically in that community. So I’m taking 
from the information you gave me that we actually have a lot 
more, many more group homes than the 59 agencies. And I’m 
wondering if you could give me an idea of how many group 
homes are involved here. Would you have that number with 
you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our quick calculation here, 
looking at our list, would be that there are 101 individual group 
homes, and they will be administered by the 59 separate 
agencies. 
 
Mr. Toth:  And would you have a number of the individuals 
that would be involved in living in or being accommodated by 
these group homes, Mr. Minister? 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the answer would be, and it’s 
not exactly precise, but approximately 700 individuals. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, the reason I raise this  and certainly 
it’s been something that’s been on my mind and I’ve been 
involved with for the last 10 years  and I look at what’s 
taking place in the community of Moosomin; I take a look at 
what’s happened in the community of Kipling, and I see that 
because of the caring of a lot of individuals . . . and I know that 
any of the communities I visited where they do have care homes 
and where they do have Kin-Ability centres, we have given a 
sector of our society an ability to feel good about themselves 
and the fact that they are involved in projects that they can 
perform services in, or they can do work in, where they actually 
are receiving something and become, if you will, more members 
in our society rather than just individuals who have been 
basically, for a long period of time, if you will, housed in 
institutions where they were not even involved and really didn’t 
have much of a livelihood. 
 
And I want to thank the people across this province who have 
. . . and the many volunteers who actually work so diligently to 
get some of these group homes up and running, or our 
Kin-Ability centres. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to raise the question of the 
Kin-Ability centres. How many would there be in this province 
and are there other centres such as the Kin-Ability centres 
where individuals with disabilities or handicaps are able to go 
and work and, if you will, provide for themselves? And as well, 
Mr. Minister, what involvement does Social Services have in 
the everyday well-being or livelihood of individuals involved in 
these types of services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We have a close involvement with the 
various activity centres across the province. One of the major 
involvements of course is financial, and we contribute 
significant amounts of money to these centres. 
 
There are, for the member’s interest, 36 separate centres across 
the province, 36 in number. We provide to those 36 centres 
support to their boards, advice, encouragement, policy shaping 
and so on. We provide referrals to the centres. And by way of 
budget support, we provide . . . have budgeted for this budget 
year, $8.8 million, which in fact is an increase over the 
budgeted amount last year. 
 
So there’s 36 of these activity centres. Our financial support of 
the centres is now $8.8 million. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So with this funding, Mr. Minister, this funding 
is directly to the centres, or is any of this funding given to the 
clients? I guess what I’m coming to, is the fact that we do have 
support. You had mentioned a number of areas where you are 
involved and where you offer some support, even in the 
administrative level, and offering ideas of how to provide 
services. But I’m also, I think, aware of the fact that many 
clients involved in these centres and living in group homes are 
supported through Social Services. So I’m wondering, is this a 
separate amount of money going to the centres, versus the  

amount of money that clients would get being supported 
directly by Social Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  For the most part, Mr. Chair, the 
budgeted amounts I spoke of go to the operations of the centres. 
Now there is a caveat here, in that the list of 36 which I 
mentioned will include what are sometimes described as the 
sheltered workshops where individuals will receive payment for 
working in that facility. 
 
Some of this funding therefore may come to clients through 
their payments through the sheltered workshop, but the bulk of 
the money here is just to provide for staff and the overheads of 
these centres. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and as we were talking 
about the sheltered workshops, when it comes to I guess . . . the 
understanding I would like as well and the question that was 
just been raised is, what level of . . . For individuals working in 
sheltered workshops, and you mentioned that some of the 
funding comes by the work in the workshops, but I guess the 
question I would like to know is, individuals who are involved 
in sheltered workshops  and in most of these cases they live 
in the group homes in our communities  are they totally 
supported by social assistance or do the workshops derive some 
revenue whereby they then help supplement some of the 
support for these individuals? And if so, how much would that 
be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, yes. In some of the 
workshops in fact there will be revenues generated through the 
projects undertaken by the workers in the workshop. And those 
monies come back into the workshop and hence become part of 
the wage subsidy for the individual. So there is that route. 
 
If I may say, in my own circumstance of Moose Jaw, with 
Moose Jaw Diversified Services, they produce some very, very 
high quality, very high quality product in a variety of ways. So 
yes, that money does come back into the system. 
 
And we’re looking at, we’re looking at in the whole redesign 
package, to . . . as we talk about working income supplements, 
generally for people who are able to access through 
employment, we want the same kinds of things to be happening 
for the people in our sheltered workshops so that they too, and 
the workshops themselves, can find reward in initiative. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, because I’ve noticed, 
even just what I’ve seen in our case, certainly that there’s some 
very good quality workmanship goes into a number of the 
projects. 
 
I am also aware of the fact that SARCAN is involved in both 
the workshops in Kipling and in Moosomin, and through the 
recycling of paper and recycling of cans and some plastics . . . 
but there are a number of plastics that aren’t involved in any 
recycling projects, Mr. Minister. And I’m wondering if you 
could indicate why there would be certain plastics that would 
not be recyclable, or if that is an area that kind of overlaps 
between Environment and the sheltered workshops we’re 
talking about in SARCAN? 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, my officials are quick to 
assure me they are not well advised on the technical aspects of 
recycling of plastic, and I think the member would know that 
any technical questions in that regard would be well answered 
by the Department of the Environment who works much more 
closely in these areas. 
 
But I can assure the member, because we do have an interest in 
 of course we have an interest  in SARCAN, that there are 
discussions ongoing, discussions between SARCAN and the 
Department of the Environment on future opportunities for 
recycling, because they not only benefit, these opportunities not 
only benefit the environment, but through SARCAN have come 
to benefit individuals and communities. 
 
So the discussions we know are ongoing between Environment 
and SARC (Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres) about new products that may or may not be able to be 
recycled. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there is 
an area that has been raised with me and brought to my 
attention. And I’m not exactly sure the level of support that may 
come from your department, but I’ve had some complaints 
raised by individuals with regards to the ongoing work in some 
of the centres. 
 
And I don’t want to get into some of the personal aspects of it, 
but what I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, is there a policy 
within the department when it comes to say sheltered 
workshops and how they’re run? The fact that you fund some of 
these and there’s some funding to them, and you offer support 
and offer ways of how to manage or operate, if there would be a 
complaint from an employee in any of these centres or one of 
the individuals who have clients who happen to be involved, 
who would they go to and what would be the process that they 
would follow if they feel that there are areas that . . . they have 
questions they have and they feel that they haven’t really been 
getting any solid support or haven’t been heard by, say, the 
board of directors that was involved in the area, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We would of course, Mr. Chair, if an 
individual has a concern about his or her own experience within 
the SARC depot or the sheltered workshop, if that individual 
has a concern, we would certainly be more than happy to try 
and assist with that concern. The route that we would most 
likely take . . . we have an ongoing and good working 
relationship with SARC, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres, which is the umbrella organization, we 
have a good working relationship there. We could bring the 
concern to that table or to that forum. 
 
If that wasn’t the appropriate thing, what we would very often 
do is either through an individual social worker or someone 
assisting in another office of the department, or the MLA or 
minister’s office, would make likely some contact with the 
executive director at the local level. If that didn’t have 
opportunity to resolve the situation, then likely what we would 
do is finally then go to the individual community board that 
operates and work on behalf of the person, understanding that  

there is always usually in every case several sides to a story and 
we would try and sort it out. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just a 
couple of questions regarding the welfare reform program. 
Unfortunately you had another commitment yesterday and were 
not able to remain for some of the debate on that, and I’m not 
sure I felt all that comfortable with the pinch-hitting that was 
done by the Government House Leader. And so I’d like to talk 
to you directly, as I think, Mr. Minister, this welfare reform is 
something that has been on your mind and you’ve really got 
into. 
 
I would like to know exactly  well as much as possible, Mr. 
Minister  where we are today in regard to some of the 
proposals you have talked about, that you’ve been doing some 
consulting with interested groups and the public throughout 
Saskatchewan and what your views are as to how the 
department of welfare, or Social Services, can be reformed so 
that it is more accountable and, if you will, meets more directly 
the needs of individuals who would come to the department for 
assistance as well as just being accountable to the general 
public and the taxpayer and that. I’d like to kind of hear exactly 
your views on that reform process that is under way at the 
present time. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it would not be my premiss to 
start a redesign of social services in the province, that the 
system we have can, in some ways, be described as 
unaccountable to the taxpayer. It is a system actually that has 
some very significant accountability measures within, and when 
the Provincial Auditor and others have reviewed the system 
from a financial point of view, they find it to be a very 
accountable system. 
 
The question in my mind is more a question of, and I use the 
word, responsibility: does the current system have the ability to 
respond to the circumstances that we find ourselves in today? 
That’s how I define responsibility  the ability to respond. 
 
Does it, number one, the current system, respond to the needs 
of the poor in our communities? Does it respond to the needs of 
children living in poverty in our province? 
 
And equally, does it provide opportunity for the poor and the 
struggling and those who seek to improve their lot in life? Is it 
responsible to them? Does it allow them the ability to respond 
to their circumstances? 
 
Now in essence, our redesign proposals and our goals stem 
from the fact that our system today is about 30 years old, 
designed essentially in the ‘60s. And as all will recognize, we 
live in a world that is significantly different than it was in the 
1960s. We live in an economy that’s significantly different. We 
have a rapidly changing demographic in our province. The 
world is in many ways, is different than the 1960s. In this 
regard, our system has not the ability to respond as once it did. 
 
Equally we’ve, over the years, we’ve evolved in our social  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

assistance program what I view as disincentives for individuals 
to seek and find their own independence from the system. 
 
And so in our redesign, we’ve subtitled the document  and 
I’m sure the member has seen the redesigned proposal 
document  we have subtitled the document, Supporting 
Independence. We seek to redesign social assistance so that it 
provides for the need when the need is there, but it also is a 
system that can provide a support for independence from that 
system  a move back into independence, a move back into 
employment, a move back into the dignity that comes from 
independence. 
 
This is the fundamental direction that we’re trying to follow. 
It’s a different direction than is being followed in other 
jurisdictions. But we believe in the long run this is the direction 
that will recognize the dignity of individuals, the importance of 
families; will support people to move to independence while at 
the same time recognizing that we have great needs in our 
communities, great needs in our province, particularly among 
children, and how can we best meet those needs. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think as some of our 
discussion over the last few weeks regarding Social Services 
and some of the areas that were raised . . . Even in the last 
session, Mr. Minister, I’ve encouraged your government to take 
a serious look because of the fact, some of the points you raise, 
that the public out there certainly want to know what the . . . 
whether or not the department is accountable with regards to 
their tax dollars. And we had a bit of discussion the other day. 
 
The other major concern and the major . . . the issue before us 
is the fact that in all of the discussion and the debate, are we 
addressing . . . or have you got some proposals or ideas 
whereby an individual who is on a very fixed or low income, or 
the opportunities for work really leave that person with an 
income that is barely sustainable, Mr. Minister, are you 
seriously looking at something that would be something like an 
income support program versus just saying to that individual, 
well I guess if you can’t make it there, then I guess you’ll have 
to quit your job and come and work . . . come and apply for 
assistance and we’ll provide for you? Where is that discussion 
going and what have you received to date as far as support or 
input from the public in regards to something along that line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the response to our redesign 
paper has . . . even in my most optimistic thoughts before the 
paper was released, I did not anticipate the kind of positive 
response that we’ve had to this paper. I think now we’ve gone 
through three, three if not four, separate printings of the 
document. There has been significant community interest in 
this. It has not generated of course the kind of wide public or 
highly publicized debate but there has been very significant 
interest in the redesign proposals. 
 
I have been able, over the last few months, to contact and meet 
with, approximately now, 250 separate groups and their 
representatives, agencies, and so on. We’ve now distributed in 
the neighbourhood of 15,000 copies of the redesign proposal. 
And the redesign proposal has been accompanied with a survey 
questionnaire and it invites comment, and we’ve just received  

literally hundreds of these back. 
 
The response generally, I can report to the member, to the 
various proposals has been very positive. The questions that are 
commonly asked are more of the detailed nature  how can 
these proposals, how can these programs, be actually put into 
place and how can they . . . and what would be the detail and so 
on? That’s the kind of level of discussion we’re moving to now. 
 
While we have been debating the redesign proposals 
provincially, we have in some ways captured some national 
attention around these proposals. And given that kind of 
national attention from other provinces and now from the 
federal government, and through the work of our Premier and 
other western premiers, we are in fact advancing some of the 
ideas here and some of the concern they reflect, onto the 
national agenda. 
 
And I for one . . . and I know we all in this legislature, I think, 
can be very pleased that at the upcoming first ministers’ 
meeting there will in fact be discussion about the social safety 
net across Canada, a discussion which has been led by our 
Premier, placed on that agenda by this province. There will be 
discussion around the social safety net, and key to that 
discussion will be a proposal that is reflective of what’s in our 
own redesign proposals, and that is the concept of a child 
benefit. 
 
We indicated from the beginning of our proposals that we 
believe a mechanism to provide for independence for families, 
to prevent families from in fact getting into the welfare system, 
and to address the issue of child poverty in our province, would 
be the crafting and creation of what we described as the 
Saskatchewan child benefit. 
 
That discussion has now in some ways elevated, or expanded is 
perhaps better said, to a discussion now about a national child 
benefit, a national child benefit to meet those same kind of 
goals in Saskatchewan  that’s to address child poverty and to 
move families and individuals to independence and support the 
children of this province and the children of the nation. 
 
So in fact this has expanded now to where even in my most 
optimistic moments when we initiated the process, I didn’t 
believe what happened. There’s still much to do, but I’m 
confident now. 
 
And I noted remarks made by the Prime Minister of Canada 
very recently, in the current week, in which he said to  I have 
it with me  in which he said to the Ottawa-Carleton 
Economic Development Corporation in an address . . . this is 
the Prime Minister’s address from June 18. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

The western premiers at their recent conference 
recommended we agree on a national goal to reduce child 
poverty. I agree (indicates the Prime Minister) and I hope 
all first ministers will agree. 
 
One idea the western premiers are proposing (and this is 
the idea that came from the Premier of Saskatchewan that  



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

is described in our proposals for a redesign of social 
assistance) is a national child benefit that would integrate 
all the existing federal and provincial programs that 
support low income families. This is worth a serious 
discussion. I hope we can mandate ministers to get to work 
now on finding concrete ways to reduce child poverty in 
Canada. 
 

Mr. Chair, in my view that is a very significant step forward in 
terms of setting a national agenda that can, one, draw our 
country together and also achieve what I think are the goals we 
commonly share, and that’s to lift particularly children in our 
country up from poverty. 
 
The proposals that the member talks about and we’re talking 
about now have also been recognized very, very recently in 
some of the national newspapers. I know The Ottawa Citizen 
many months ago spoke of Saskatchewan’s proposal as being 
one that can lead the nation. In a Monday article from this very 
week in Ottawa, The Ottawa Citizen has an article which begins 
with the sentence: 
 

Saskatchewan Premier Roy Romanow is breathing fresh 
political life into the most promising idea to emerge in 
years, a national child benefit. 

 
And so while we’ve still got much work to do in all of the 
proposals that we advanced here, we see the proposal now of a 
child benefit as being key to what we want to do in 
Saskatchewan and key to what can happen across Canada. 
We’ve taken the position that we’re moving ahead, and we 
hope that other provinces and the national government would 
join us. 
 
Now there are a whole range of other proposals of course in the 
redesign for our own province, including a working income 
supplement and perhaps an integrated training allowance. We 
spoke a little earlier with one of the members about training. 
We’re looking at some proposals around how can we assist the 
young people of Saskatchewan who are finding themselves on 
social assistance, through a program we describe as youth 
futures. We’re talking about a greater emphasis on achieving 
child maintenance. We’re talking about greater accountability 
— all of these proposals here in the paper. 
 
I know that the member has had the paper. I know that he’s had 
a good look at it and I would certainly appreciate in the context 
of this discussion, comments, specific comments, that he may 
have or any ideas he may have about these various proposals. 
We are at the stage now of trying to refine these and will over 
the course of the summer and the fall, refine these into more 
detailed programing options. And so we would . . . I would 
sincerely appreciate any comment the member would have. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. Mr. Minister, I 
just missed some of the comments you were making, and 
specifically with regards to the child benefit program, in regards 
to my question a little earlier about where you saw your welfare 
reform going and my suggestions that we need to encourage 
people and give them the opportunity to, if there is a job 
available, to work at that without . . . and yet having the  

availability of some assistance so that they got a sustainable 
income. 
 
And I’m just trying to put that together with your comments 
about . . . and I’m sorry I just didn’t catch all of what you were 
saying about the child benefit program. I’m trying to understand 
what you exactly mean by child benefit. Is this something that is 
over and above income support to a family, that would be say 
given to . . . included in the upbringing of that child say till the 
age of . . . and I’m going to use the figure 18, because I don’t 
think children at 14 and 16 should be off by themselves and 
social assistance looking after them. I strongly feel that families 
have a responsibility. We bring children in the world, and we 
have a responsibility until they reach that age where they can 
get out and provide for themselves, of looking after themselves, 
not having them just come to the government. So I’m just 
throwing that in so we’re not getting mixed up and then all of a 
sudden providing support for somebody who gets a little 
annoyed at what’s happening at home and moves out and just 
goes to social assistance for help. 
 
So maybe you could just explain just a little bit more about 
what you perceive or what you’re viewpoint . . . or what you 
understand child benefit to be, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps I could begin by 
illustration of what I see as one of the problems in the current 
circumstance. Here is I think a real live  I don’t think it, I 
know it  a real live example of what sometimes brings 
children and families into the welfare cycle. 
 
A family may have a very modest income through their own 
employment and so on, but a very modest income. One of their 
children or a child develops a medical problem, an illness, a 
disease that will require medications. The medications will 
have, in some cases, enough cost that the family’s income 
simply cannot bear it or it brings the cost of living for that 
family to a level that then leaves them little or no alternative but 
then to go onto welfare. And so for the cost essentially of the 
medication, we have moved a family onto welfare, with all that 
goes with that. 
 
A child benefit would provide for the children of low income 
families in our province or nationally, a standard level of 
adequate income for that child, paid of course to the family, but 
to represent the needs of that child. It would also, in our 
provincial circumstance, provide for drug coverage, medication 
coverage for that child, without having to access the welfare 
system. 
 
Now how would we accomplish this benefit paid on behalf of a 
child to the family? It would be done in the following way. We 
would take all of those resources we’re now spending through 
welfare, through the welfare cheques, to children, utilizing all 
of those fundings. It would also utilize the funding from the 
various tax programs that are available to children, wrap those 
into a package and make it a child benefit available theoretically 
to any child of our province or any child of Canada in a low 
income circumstance. 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

This is not like the old family allowance program which was 
just mailed out to everybody, it didn’t matter your income. This 
would be a benefit directed to children in low income families. 
But it would not be a benefit that came through a welfare 
system. It would be a benefit available to all, simply accessed 
 it would save all of the problem with accessing through a 
long, complicated process  simply accessed on the basis of 
family income. It would provide that basic, adequate cost of 
living for raising a child. 
 
I agree with the member on the second point that he raised, 
having to do with the young people. And so we would see the 
benefit extending to age 18. And I would also just indicate to 
the member that in terms of . . . we have made some very 
significant changes now in terms of the ability of 18-year-olds 
or under-18-year-olds getting into the welfare system. It’s a 
much different process now than it was even a few years ago. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate your comments and the explanation. I think it’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Minister, though that your department is left 
having to address the needs of families as a result of decisions 
made in the Health department when it comes to drug costs. 
 
And in some ways, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that if 
there is a situation that a family faces an exorbitant drug cost, a 
drug bill, that I’m not exactly sure that your department should 
be asked to help look after or sustain that family. But the 
Department of Health should be looking at that and responding 
to that cost, rather than saying it’s your responsibility as the 
Minister of Social Services. 
 
So in that regard, while I certainly commend the department for 
looking at this and recognizing that this becomes a major 
burden to families, especially families who have individuals, 
and asthmatics can certainly be . . . is one situation where some 
of the drugs that are associated with asthma can become a 
major cost on a monthly basis to a family. 
 
So I would say . . . commend you and your department for 
having realized that this is one of the major economic impacts, 
if you will, on a family’s income and for their sustainability. 
But I guess I’m somewhat disappointed that the Department of 
Health hasn’t recognized that and provides that support that 
should be there coming from the department. 
 
So I thank you, Mr. Minister, for having recognized that, and 
for your department, and for looking at, as an overall view, how 
we provide a positive, fulfilling lifestyle for individuals and 
families who may be at the low end of the economic sector of 
our province and of our country. 
 
Mr. Minister, unfortunately I think I’ve basically come to 
running a little dry on questions and concerns that have been 
raised with me. But I want to thank you for your input and your 
involvement, you and your officials, for having taken the time 
to come, responding to the questions we’ve raised in the area of 
Social Services and support for communities and individuals in 
these communities. 
 
And at this time we’re certainly prepared to allow a vote to  

proceed. I believe there’s a couple other members have some 
wind-up questions as well. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, of late I 
have been getting letters from people who have family members 
who are disabled. And apparently in 1947, there was a rule set 
that they could have $1,500 worth of cash assets. And I’m 
going to have to depend on your knowledge of this area because 
I’m just going by these letters that I’ve got and I haven’t had a 
chance to research how this process works. But apparently they 
had wanted that amount increased. If it isn’t increased, then it 
somehow affects the amount of assistance that they can receive 
for these disabled children. 
 
Could you explain to us how that process works, and perhaps 
you could shed some light on what is being done to alleviate the 
problems of people who have invalid children, and I believe 
that these are adult invalids that are being cared for by parents. 
And perhaps you can enlighten us in this area to some extent so 
that I’ll know how to answer these letters that I’m getting so 
that we can relieve some of the concerns of the people that are 
writing to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm the date 
the member raised about 1947, if that’s when it was established 
or not, but there has been a policy of only being able to hold a 
certain amount of asset and at the same time access social 
assistance. 
 
We recognize this as a concern. In recent days and weeks, 
we’ve been working with Justice, the Department of Justice, 
around The Dependants’ Relief Act enabling families to set 
aside some monies in trust for . . . and this is very often in the 
case of a disabled child. As the parents grow older and the child 
grows older, they want to be thinking about the child’s future 
when they’re gone. And so we’re working with Justice around 
The Dependants’ Relief Act to provide for a greater ability for 
families to establish trust accounts or trust amounts that can 
provide for those kind of special things that might want to be 
provided along the way. 
 
The issue, the debate of course, always is how much should we 
enable individuals to set aside in a trust and still count on then 
the taxpayer or the welfare system to provide for the daily 
needs. I mean there would be some families who could put 
substantive amounts of money in trust and still then call upon 
the welfare system to provide for basic needs. So the challenge 
is to find where is the right level. 
 
We’re also working again with the Saskatchewan Association 
for Community Living people to talk about this issue and see 
what we can do. It’s just to try and strike this balance between 
what’s appropriate for the individual needs but also appropriate 
to the taxpayer, and not asking the taxpayer to provide where 
there are substantial personal assets. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. That does clear things 
up a little for me. Because I was thinking at first, obviously, that 
certainly people should be allowed to set aside a trust fund, and 
I think they should. But obviously your point is well taken, that 
if they have enough money to be able to set aside a very  



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

large trust fund, then why are they asking the taxpayers to pay 
the bills for their dependent child. 
 
So I guess we do recognize the hardships that people go 
through. And certainly there are an awful lot of sacrifices that 
people make in order to take care of their own at home, whereas 
some families simply will depend on the system to take care of 
the family members. And I guess we have to give every credit to 
people that are willing to take on their own responsibilities and 
who love their families enough to want to go to all of those 
sacrifices that have to be made in life in order to keep their 
children in some kind of a state of dignity, some kind of a 
lifestyle that shows some love and compassion and caring. 
 
But I do understand your point, and I’m glad that you were able 
to make that. Now of course your dilemma is to determine 
where that level is. And I have no figure on the top of my mind, 
but I do know that these people are very concerned about the 
ability to be able to at least set up some kind of a trust fund. 
And I think that they probably would want me to make the 
argument for them that this can’t be too low a figure because as 
inflation is a part of our life and probably will be again, then the 
value of those dollars that are put aside diminish. And so you 
have to have quite a few set aside in order to be sure that a 
dependent child would be well cared for or taken care of. 
 
And I think these people are genuinely concerned that after they 
die or perhaps are no longer able to care for these people in 
their families, that it will cost a lot of money to have perhaps 
other family members, or I guess, you know, I hate to use the 
words, but to have institutions step in and take over. 
 
And I know people don’t want to have that happen, but I guess 
it’s probably a reality of life that maybe some folks will end up 
having to go to certain institutions in order to find a place to 
comfortably and safely live. 
 
And of course the welfare system could then be asked to pay 
the full bill, I suppose, in our society and the way we accept 
things. So if we do encourage people to put some money aside, 
then that may alleviate some of the cost down the road. 
 
So I think the point would be well taken that those numbers 
should not be too low. And if you’d care to expand on that just 
a little more, that’s the only question I had in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well I think, Mr. Chair, that the member 
and I both recognize some of the issues here and some of the 
challenges. I thank him for his input here and I guess we have 
not reached any kind of definitive view of this. And it’ll be, I’m 
sure over the next several months, an ongoing discussion and 
again I thank the member for his concern, his interest. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  I have a couple more questions in another 
area, Minister. It goes into the area of getting people trained and 
back to work. 
 
Now we know that this is a sensitive area for your government 
because you don’t like the terms workfare or working for 
welfare and those kind of things. And yet I do have people 
coming to me, both on assistance and off, that have said to me  

that they really would like to see a better opportunity for 
training programs that would allow people to do some sort of 
apprenticeship work, where they wouldn’t actually just go to 
school and learn how to do something but they’d actually be put 
in touch with an employer where part of their training would be 
to work for somebody and learn how to get along with 
somebody else that gives orders and learn how to take orders 
and learn how to punch a time clock, basically. Because a lot of 
folks haven’t developed that ability to wake up at a certain time 
and go to a job and develop that kind of a lifestyle pattern 
where you are accountable at certain periods of time of your life 
to be with somebody else. 
 
And I’m wondering if you are doing any work in that area to try 
to get an apprenticeship program into place so that these people 
can be trained, not only at the job but also a lifestyle of having 
to, I guess, develop a work ethic might be a proper term, where 
you actually have to be responsible to show up some place. 
 
And of course you can elaborate on that to any extent you like 
and we would appreciate whatever input you’ll give us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Again, Mr. Chair, we have similar 
concerns; perhaps flavours of difference in how we would 
reach the conclusion, but I think the conclusions are the same. 
We would like to see a system, I think all of us, that helps 
individuals get out of the dependence of welfare and into 
independence, that assists people to do that and gives them the 
tools to do that. 
 
We have, as the member knows, the New Careers program, 
which was initiated under the former administration, which has 
evolved and progressed and has done some extremely good 
work in just this area of taking individuals who are for the most 
part receiving welfare or are unemployed and putting them into 
both an experience of work and training together. And I think if 
the member cares to pursue that with the minister responsible, 
he would see that there are many, many success stories of 
people who have gone into a New Careers placement who, 
while in that placement or soon after, have then been able to 
access long-term and productive employment. It’s had a very 
successful history. 
 
(1115) 
 
We are, as you know, reviewing all of our post-secondary 
training opportunities, and given the withdrawal of the federal 
government from this area  just a straight withdrawal  it 
has left each and every province now in the position where 
we’ll have to create and craft our own workplace training 
experiences. 
 
The Minister of Post-Secondary, through his review of this, is 
in the process now of looking at the whole package and how we 
can do this best given the kind of resources that we’ll have to 
do it with. 
 
In our own redesign of social assistance, we’re also talking 
about a program which we’ve described as youth futures which 
would require of young people, generally in the ages of 18 to 
21, in that age group, that if they were without the ability to be  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

supported by their families, if they want to receive welfare, then 
to be involved with a plan for each of them that would involve 
some form of training, some form of education  perhaps it’s 
simply to work on a grade 10 or a grade 12  but some form of 
education and/or some form of work experience to develop, as 
you say, the skills of not just the technical skills of a trade or 
work but sort of the life skills of responsibility to an employer, 
being at the job and so on. 
 
So these things are happening. I’m hopeful that in the rethink 
that we’re doing of all the training in the province that these 
issues will be front and centre in those discussions too. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Minister, the area of Workers’ 
Compensation, as you will realize, is something that I have 
taken an interest in because of my leader’s decision to have me 
critic the labour area and related areas, and what we’re finding 
is that people are calling us up and saying that they’d like to get 
some better results out of Workers’ Compensation in terms of 
getting back to work after they’ve been injured. 
 
One specific case, and I’m not going to mention any names, but 
the gist of the thing is the young man is injured so that he can 
no longer do heavy lifting types of work or ride heavy 
equipment. His back has been injured. And the therapist that he 
works with tells him that he should no longer lift. He should no 
longer do that kind of work. 
 
And he says, yes, that’s fine. Now I’d like to get some training, 
and apparently there’s a training program. So  and I’ll get this 
tied back to your department  there is a training program 
available for him that would train him to go to another job. 
Unfortunately, though, the therapist is not willing to take the 
responsibility of signing the necessary letters that would allow 
for him to qualify to get this training. 
 
I don’t know why, and I’m trying to research that to find out, 
but the situation has occurred more than once where medical 
people are not willing to take the responsibility of saying, we 
are the ones that are saying this person no longer should work at 
a certain job and should be trained for something else. 
 
Unfortunately though, this leaves this young person in a 
situation where he can’t do his old job. He goes and tries; 
obviously it hurts. He can’t perform his job. The employer 
agrees with him he no longer should be doing this. So he’s not 
fired; he’s . . . basically quits. But then he can’t qualify for 
unemployment insurance because he has quit his job instead of 
being laid off. 
 
You know the red tape story I’m getting into here. Every 
department is saying to him, well you know, you haven’t got the 
proper credentials to qualify for this, that, or the next thing. 
Can’t get unemployment insurance. Can’t get workers’ 
compensation forever, or if he does he gets a smaller and 
smaller, diminishing amount. 
 
And of course that brings us to your department. And I have 
advised, as recently as yesterday, a young man to go to Social 
Services to ask for help. So what we’re doing is downloading 
the responsibility on to the taxpayers because somebody in the  

system refuses to sign the necessary papers for this person to be 
retrained. 
 
Now do you work with Workers’ Compensation’s training 
programs so that people that come to Social Services through 
this maize of red tape, or lack of ability to cut through the 
tangled webs, do you have some way that you can in Social 
Services then get that person the training that Workers’ 
Compensation might otherwise provide? 
 
Is there some vehicle that we can get this person trained to do 
something of lighter work? Perhaps being an oil well checker? I 
think they’ve got a better term for that, but a person that drives 
around in a truck, checks oil wells; doesn’t have to ride a 
caterpillar tractor that jerks and pulls and stuff like that. He 
doesn’t have to lift sacks of cement. 
 
But he goes and he checks and he has some simple paper work 
that he has to do and keep track of what’s going on. Those kind 
of jobs are available, you see, in south-west Saskatchewan and 
that’s why I identify that potential. 
 
But this person has never done that kind of paper work, needs 
some training. He may also need to have some training as to 
what you would do with safety around oil equipment and gas 
equipment. We don’t want him going out there and blowing his 
head off. But it isn’t probably something that’s insurmountable. 
It’s not like having to go to get a university degree. 
 
And so those things should be available somewhere, and I’m 
wondering if you have any vehicle that these things can be 
provided, or should I send this young man somewhere else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think in all of the programing that 
governments will provide we will encounter these experiences 
of . . . whether it’s red tape or someone somewhere refusing to 
sign something for some reason, we run into these confusions. 
With the best of intentions, you run into these confusions. 
 
What I would hope in this particular circumstance  certainly 
not knowing all the detail  but if the individual is now at a 
situation where income is required, that we . . . Any of us in 
that situation should not feel any embarrassment about 
accessing social assistance. I mean, that is what the program is 
for, and there, but by the grace of God, go any one of us that we 
might find ourselves in a similar circumstance and there should 
be no embarrassment. 
 
The individual in this case, if is approaching a social worker for 
access to welfare, social assistance, it would likely be the 
experience, and I would hope it would be the experience, and it 
is most often the experience that that social worker then would 
review this circumstance that you describe. And that social 
worker would say, well now listen, if there’s an opportunity 
under Workers’ Compensation for training to be provided or if 
there’s an opportunity through Post-Secondary Education or 
wherever the opportunities are, that that social worker would 
see it as his or her responsibility to help that individual pursue 
that route. 
 
Now in the short term there may need to be some assistance.  



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

But part of the social worker’s role hopefully is to assist that 
individual through some of these red tape mazes if they exist or 
if there’s been some problem. Because it’s frankly to our 
benefit budgetarily to have individuals receiving their support 
in other circumstances, whether it be through WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board), which has been the worker and the 
employer’s contribution, or whether it’s through some federal 
programing, or whether it’s through employment  that too is 
to our benefit. 
 
We want our system to be there for the short term in the needy 
situation. So if the individual that you’re working with 
approaches the Department of Social Services for assistance, I 
would hope that part of that assistance would be to solve or try 
and solve some of the issues that has got him to that point. 
Again, and if there’s not, if you’re working with that individual 
and there’s something further you think that could or should be 
done, please feel free to forward to the department or to myself 
and we can try and assist. 
 
But it is always a challenge. I’ve learned in my short time 
around government, it is always a challenge, no matter with all 
of our best intentions, to move people through these various 
mazes sometimes. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. And I do appreciate 
your answer in this matter and I will send this individual a copy 
of the Hansard and continue to help him to pursue this line. I 
think we are on the right direction here; it sounds to me like we 
are. So we will try to coach him, as you say, through the maze 
to try to get his life back together. 
 
And I’m not saying that there’s only one individual that’s in 
this kind of situation. There will probably be others. So maybe 
we can use it as a kind of a blanket approach to know how to 
help folks and save writing a whole lot of letters to yourself and 
having to answer each individual one. So probably it will serve 
some purpose as a kind of a blanket policy to help people, at 
least through my office. 
 
We also have another type of situation, and I won’t even 
mention a town here because this gets fairly complicated with 
one individual. But I guess it can be kind of a general question 
of people that fall into a certain category. And this would be 
people probably in their 50’s who are probably past the point of 
easy employability unless they have specific trained skills that 
they’ve grown up with or developed over the years. But having 
. . . in many cases being in the workforce in, I suppose you 
would say, a hands-on type of working job description where it 
is mostly physical labour and not requiring a high amount of 
technical knowledge, these people, if they find themselves 
getting older and in that state of time where they’re hard to 
employ, sometimes become addicted to alcohol and those kinds 
of things which, of course, makes their life even more difficult 
to straighten out. 
 
They find themselves then though living in some of these 
smaller towns and find that they can’t find employment. Social 
assistance of course is the only vehicle available to them. They 
do of course have these addiction problems which of course 
leads then to the problem that they are not properly taking care  

of themselves in terms of buying food instead of the other 
things that they seem to require in their lives or think they 
require or just plain foolishly spend their money on. 
 
At the end of the month we find these people broke, without 
food. They have neighbours that are compassionate but fed up 
with these individuals consistently never taking responsibility 
for their planning out the whole week or the whole month  
three days on booze and three days without food kind of 
situation. We all would like to help out and the folks would all 
like to help out but there’s a point in time when folks just get 
tired of this. 
 
And it is a real difficult problem because then this individual 
will come along with a broken set of teeth for whatever reason. 
And I can see the reluctance of Social Services to say, well 
we’ll give this person some more money so they can fix their 
teeth. And I know we do set up things like where they can go to 
a dentist and get the teeth fixed and the money never, ever 
passes through that individuals hands. 
 
But there must be some way that we can get these people, I 
guess, delivered maybe food or something like that, so that 
they’re not any longer able to make the decision to spend that 
money on these other things so that they have to get some food 
or some nourishment of something like that. Is there any 
program that you can put into place for that type of an 
individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we in fact do have a program 
in place that tries to deal with just that situation. It’s called the 
trusteeship where it may be an individual  maybe an 
acquaintance or a friend or a neighbour  an individual who 
can serve as the trustee to assist the individual in managing his 
or her money. Or it may be an agency. For instance, in the city 
of Moose Jaw, the Salvation Army serves as the trustee for a 
number of welfare individuals. 
 
So that is the system that we do have in process and that would 
be available in any community of the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, the problem is: what if 
this individual is reluctant to allow that program to be used? Do 
you have authority in your department to say, you’re at such a 
state in life that now you have to accept this? I know I hate to 
even suggest that people should have their civil liberties I guess 
infringed on, the right to choose for yourself, but maybe at 
some point in some cases there is that need. And I’m 
wondering: is there a vehicle and how do you access that 
vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, our worker is reviewing an 
individual case, and of course every individual case is treated 
individually, and if in the assessment of the worker that the 
trusteeship is the only or the appropriate thing to be done, it will 
be done. 
 
Now by way of check and balance, on behalf of the individual, 
we do have our appeal processes where that individual could 
appeal that to the local appeal board which will be made up of 
citizens of that local region. Or ultimately, if not satisfied with  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

that appeal board, could go then to the provincial appeal board. 
Then again the provincial appeal board are not employees of the 
Department of Social Services or agents of government. They 
are citizens selected for their, hopefully, impartial and judicial 
abilities. 
 
But yes, in answer to your question, the department, through its 
social workers, can in fact insist on a trusteeship. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. I hope that these cases 
have been of some value in terms of generalities so that other 
people can use them to guide their specific cases and that we 
haven’t wasted a whole lot of time for the taxpayers and 
yourself over individual cases. But I believe that they have 
some importance as a blanket kind of a thing in our society for 
those people that fall into those categories. And so I’m happy 
with your answers  I want you to know that  and I will take 
this information and try to apply it as best we can to help 
people’s lives out in society. 
 
I do want to say though that you have a tremendous challenge in 
your department. You deal with the most needy people in our 
society and it has always got to be tough to make the decisions 
of where you draw the line on how much you give or not give. 
We are constantly asked for help to get more, naturally, and we 
always take the position that we try to help everybody to get 
more because we take the position that we trust and believe 
everybody that comes to our office until they prove otherwise, 
and in most cases people are genuinely needing a little extra 
help. 
 
But the dollars are short and we know that, and so we 
understand the predicaments you’re in. We just hope that you 
can be patient with us when we constantly are coming to your 
department asking you for more and more help here and there. 
But we do sympathize with your need to have to say no, and we 
know how frustrating that must be sometimes. But we do 
appreciate the fact that in most cases when we’ve come to your 
department, we have been able to get the help that people 
genuinely need. 
 
And we are appreciative of that, and we hope that you can find 
some kind of program that will not only help people but will 
reduce the amount of people that need assistance and will 
reduce the amount of money the taxpayers have to put into it. 
This is obviously a great challenge and we wish you well with 
it, and we thank you for your answers. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
(1130) 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just before we depart, or the 
officials depart, I do want to, on behalf I’m sure of all members, 
thank the officials who have assisted us in the estimate process 
in the House. But I’d want to pick up on the remarks of my 
colleague earlier, when he talked about some of the difficult 
tasks in Social Services. While it may be difficult for we who 
are in the political sphere, in the public sphere, these difficulties 
are met on a daily basis by those who work within the 
Department of Social Services  the social workers on the 
front lines, the community living people, as well as our senior 
officials. And I want to, on behalf of I’m sure all legislators, 
thank those who work on a daily basis in the field of social 
services. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As well, special 
thanks to the minister and his officials for having taken the time 
to come and address the concerns that we’ve raised. I appreciate 
that. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to 
introduce the officials who are with me here today from 
Economic Development. First of all, seated to my right is Clare 
Kirkland, the deputy minister. To my left, Tom Douglas, who is 
the ADM (assistant deputy minister) of diversification division. 
And seated directly behind me is Janis Rathwell, who is the 
ADM of corporate service division. And behind me and to my 
right, Peter Phillips, who is the ADM for policy and 
coordination division. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome 
to your officials, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have a huge responsibility to encourage and 
facilitate economic growth in this province. And I believe, as 
Minister of Economic Development in a socialist government, it 
clearly gives you the mandate to open the doors and stimulate 
the economy so there is enough money for things like highways, 
health care, social services, and education. These are the four 
most important areas in the province that require needs that 
should be looked after by the government. 
 
My philosophy and yours is very different, but I do believe that 
these four areas are relying on your department or on you 
yourself to make sure that there is enough money. And I don’t 
believe that people will believe that our highways are in good 
shape, that our health care is good, that . . . there’s still too 
many people on welfare and now our education system is being 
threatened. 
 
I think that your responsibility to encourage the prosperity in  



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

the province goes beyond the high profile job of shaking hands 
and meeting people outside of the province. So I’d like to see if 
you can tell me what your role . . . what role do you think you 
can give to this province over the next few years to actually 
change the prosperity of this province so that we do have our 
province back on solid footing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
member’s question. I’ll be very brief in my response because 
we’ve gone over this a number of times. 
 
I believe that the philosophy of our Department of Economic 
Development and the Government of Saskatchewan is one of 
facilitating business, co-ops, working people, to form 
partnerships to solve their economic issues in terms of 
cooperating and working together as opposed to dividing 
workers against business people or workers against co-ops. 
 
And these are two very fundamentally different approaches to 
economic development, and I would agree with one thing the 
member opposite says: that we have fundamentally different 
approaches to economic development. 
 
It seems to me that in previous years, if you look at the period 
during the 1960s when the former Liberal government was in 
power  the last time we had a Liberal government between 
1964 and ’71  you will find a period of time when the 
strategy was to appeal to business by being mean-spirited 
towards working people. 
 
That is a very, very different approach than what was used by 
Tommy Douglas, the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation), or Allan Blakeney in the 1970s, where the attempt 
is to create partnerships and teams of people who go forward 
with something of a common interest, never perfectly in sync, 
but trying to join together as much as you can; the common 
interest of course being that the families who live in our 
province have a decent income, good disposable income, 
because the idea being that if working people have high 
disposable income obviously small-business people are going to 
do well. 
 
The theory that right-wing governments often bring to the table 
— and this was certainly true in the 1980s, continuing under the 
Devine government — to put workers down, to have a lower 
and lower income so that fewer and fewer people would have 
more and more of the economic pie, has always amazed us as to 
how this could possibly work in the best interests of 
small-business people. 
 
Because the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is that in 
order to have a strong economy  and this has been proven 
over and over again worldwide  the main thing that you have 
to ensure is that the broad base of the population has a good 
income. Because without that, the fundamental structures of 
your economy  and I say this whether you’re social democrat 
or whether you’re an American right-wing economist  is that 
if you don’t have a solid base of middle income people . . . and 
the more middle income people in the income group the better; 
the stronger your economy will be. 
 

You would be hard-pressed to show me any country in the 
world where you go to the bottom, lowest common 
denominator for salary for workers, where you have a 
successful, thriving middle class or a thriving business class. 
You’ll have very large corporations, very, very wealthy people, 
1 or 2 per cent of the population, and you have a large, broad 
base of very poor people. These are not the strong economies of 
the world. 
 
The strong economies of the world are the Canadian economy, 
the European economies, the Japanese, those countries where 
they emphasize the role of the workers as being fundamental to 
the overall structure of the economy. It’s not to take away from 
the role of business or the role of co-ops or the people at the top 
in management. But without a satisfied working group of 
people who are well paid and reimbursed for the hours of work 
that they put in, the economy doesn’t work well. 
 
And so what always amazes me is when right-wing 
governments get in power in Saskatchewan, the tills of the 
small-business people quit ringing; i.e., that period in the 1960s 
when Ross Thatcher was premier, it was downhill. Everyone 
refers to it as the seven lean, mean years of Liberal 
administration. Punish the workers. And we remember the 
anti-labour legislation that came in. 
 
Same was true in Grant Devine’s era and we saw the economy 
tail off; population loss. And some would argue that this is 
good luck. That every time those doggone social democrats get 
elected everything gets good again, and I don’t know what 
we’re going to do about that. They’re the luckiest people in the 
world. 
 
Others would argue something different — that every time you 
elect an extreme right-wing government in this province, they 
take after the working people of the province, cut their income, 
and lo and behold the economy doesn’t work as well. 
 
I don’t know how many times we’ll have to go through that 
cycle before we realize that having a social democratic 
government that believes in people, ordinary people, having a 
good income, that that’s good for business people. The sooner 
we realize that, I think the sooner we’ll quit electing these 
extreme right-wing governments that you and your colleagues 
represent. 
 
This was certainly true in the election recently in British 
Columbia where the Liberals there tried to, under the guise of 
the Liberal mantle, really being old Social Credit or Reform 
members . . . and you know the back room dealing that went on 
between the Liberals and the Reform Party and the Social 
Credit during the campaign — read about it on the front pages 
of the newspapers — trying to see who could get to that bottom 
line, drive workers down to the lowest common denominator. 
 
Luckily it was exposed during the election and that Liberal 
Party wasn’t elected in British Columbia. And I think the 
economy will do very well as a result of that. 
 
So I say to the member opposite that ours is one of believing 
that partnerships can be formed between working people,  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

between small business, even between large business; that you 
can have a balance between the needs of business people and 
labour legislation. And we’d like to think that the balance in 
Saskatchewan is just about right, but obviously has to be 
reviewed on a very constant basis to make sure that the balance 
is proper. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you for the story. Mr. Minister, I really 
wish that I had a little more than one twenty-fifth of the 
political experience you have, and I guess I will have some day. 
 
But I want to tell you first of all that I believe in people as much 
as you do  probably more  and that’s why I made the 
comment the other day that I was hoping you would answer, 
and you didn’t, when I asked you if you’d ever consider joining 
departments. The reason I’d asked that very important question 
is when we have two separate camps  labour against business 
 that’s what it looks like: we’re pitting one against the other. 
 
Businesses cannot operate and people cannot operate without 
one another. We have something that I don’t know if your 
government is going to be able to do, and that is if you can 
legislate a profit for business, then we can keep two camps. But 
until you can legislate that I am going to be sure that I can 
make, even 25 per cent every year . . . I’ll be quite delighted; 
then you can carry on with your theory. 
 
But I’m wondering what your comments will be on my 
suggestion of joining the two different departments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I guess one could make the 
argument that the Department of Economic Development 
should become the Department of Labour. But I don’t think that 
would meet the needs of the business community that we 
represent. 
 
Or you could argue that the Department of Environment, which 
sets the regulations for the business community or for working 
people, become part of the other. 
 
I think at the present time  and I think it’s well acknowledged 
throughout the western world in democratic countries  that 
the need to have departments to represent different areas is very 
important. And so while I appreciate the process of thinking 
about that possibility, at this point in time, I couldn’t disagree 
more; that I think amalgamating the Department of Labour and 
Economic Development would not be wise. 
 
Simply put, because I think the position of these two 
departments is very, very crucial. That designing programs for 
labour, designing programs for business, and then coming 
together at a cabinet table where these are debated, thought out, 
caucus, then coming to the Assembly, works very, very well. 
 
And I think if you look at the overall situation between working 
people and business in Canada  and I say this generally 
regardless of which political party is in power  you will find 
that we have one of the best situations for working people and 
business, as a result of this formula of having departments of 
Labour and departments of Economic Development, anywhere 
in the world. 

So I would argue quite strongly that I think the process that we 
have in place, although I agree has to be fine-tuned on a regular 
basis, is much better than amalgamating the two departments. 
 
(1145) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, what we have right now, as you 
stated we have, the Labour concerns that are brought to your 
cabinet table on the business concerns, and the government 
works it out. What I’m saying is the government doesn’t have to 
work it out. The people can work it out themselves. 
 
I also wonder if you can tell me, are most of the union members 
in this province, are they private sector or are they government, 
public unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  About 22 per cent of the workforce 
in Saskatchewan is unionized and the balance would be more in 
the public service than in the private. I can get you the numbers 
of exactly how that would break. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The Government of Alberta has actually 
restructured the Department of Economic Development into an 
authority or an agency. Are you considering that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  It’s my understanding they have 
both. They have an authority, not dissimilar I suppose, from our 
Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, and then they 
have the department. So I don’t think, in terms of structures, 
we’re greatly dissimilar. 
 
In fact you’ll know that we took the tourism division out of the 
department and formed a partnership between the private sector 
and government, and we were the first province to do that in 
Canada. Alberta, since, has copied that and now has a Tourism 
Authority as well. And I believe British Columbia has just gone 
through the process of doing a joint venture or partnership 
between their tourism department and the private sector. 
 
So if you look at the structures in western Canada, I think you’d 
find that in British Columbia, Saskatchewan, and Alberta, the 
structures are actually very, very similar. And when it comes to 
how we’re dealing with tourism and now with our Trade 
Development Corporation that we’re setting up, actually 
Alberta and British Columbia are following the example of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would be very careful to just say look, the structures we 
have in Saskatchewan are no good, and we’ve got to go to 
Alberta or another province to find out what works. I think that 
is putting a very, very low value on the work that has been done 
by our bureaucracy, which is excellent. 
 
A lot of work has gone into these structures and a lot of it 
comes as a result of the partnership that was formed between 
business, working people, and government at the time of the 
strategy, Partnership for Renewal, and subsequently 
Partnership For Growth. So I think if you look at Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, you’ll find that the structures, as it relates to 
economic development, are not greatly different. 
 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  I believe from the studies that I’ve done and 
the talking I’ve done, that Alberta gives more authority to 
departments like our REDAs (regional economic development 
authorities), when they let the regional people or the local 
people make more decisions on the economy in their area. Are 
you considering that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  What you may be referring to is the 
role that counties play in Alberta, because they actually have a 
bigger structure for doing economic development at the local 
level. We’ve chosen to leave our municipal governments in 
place and set up regional economic development authorities. 
 
You may be making the argument that we meld the 
municipalities in the with REDAs and form counties, as they 
have done in Alberta, but it’s fair to say that at that level we 
have a great deal of local involvement in our regional economic 
development authorities. 
 
I say again, in Alberta what they do is elect county councils and 
. . . But that has been debated a great deal in Saskatchewan and 
I think local governments would tell you that they are very 
much opposed to going to a county system. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you’ve had 
requests from professionals in the province, such as the 
accountants, to enable them to form corporations . . . to be 
incorporated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  At this point we’ve had no requests 
for that. 
 
Ms. Draude:  When I look at the Partnership For Growth 
agreement, we talk about the amount of regulations and that 
your government is going to be cutting back on them. Can you 
tell me which ones you’re going to be starting with and when 
you’re going to start? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We have a process in place right 
now headed up by Lynn Minja, who are . . . and that group is 
actually doing a review of all the regulatory structures and 
regulations in the province, the goal being, as Partnership For 
Growth indicated, a reduction in regulations by 25 per cent over 
the next ten years. 
 
But obviously we won’t be waiting 10 years to start the process. 
This will start . . . it has started right away, and you’ll see some 
of those results coming in the months and years ahead. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that all jurisdictions believe that there are 
a number of regulatory structures in place that are outdated, 
outmoded, and having a zero-based regulatory structure that 
ensures that you don’t put on layer after layer of regulation; that 
in fact the goal has to be to reduce the number of layers of 
regulation. That’s the commitment that we have given, and 
working with business and working with industry, we are sure 
that that is an attainable goal. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, from my own experience, and 
those of many people that I talk to, getting children or young 
adults involved in business and in the workforce is very  

important. I’m wondering if . . . and we talked previously about 
what you were going to do to encourage education to be 
involved in economic development. Are you working with 
Post-Secondary right now to encourage some of these 
programs, to encourage education and information to be going 
back and forth so that we have more people that want to start 
businesses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the Minister of Education and 
myself, as well as my deputy and the deputy of Education have 
had a number of discussions. In fact we now have a working 
paper that talks about the very issue of entrepreneurial skills 
being taught more directly in the school system. 
 
At the post-secondary education level, I think there’s a good 
deal of that that goes on. If people want to take commerce 
there’s many courses available. I think the weakness in their 
system  and I don’t say that particularly of Saskatchewan, but 
of Canada  is the teaching of entrepreneurial skills at a very 
early age as an option for young people is very, very important. 
 
As I mentioned, we have a working document that will help set 
in place better structures than we have at the present time. Of 
course there are programs within the education system already 
for entrepreneurial skills teaching, but we want to beef that up 
and strengthen it. 
 
So we expect in the next couple of months that you will see an 
actual official announcement, which will be a joint venture 
between . . . or joint effort between Economic Development and 
Education, if all this comes to fruition, that will speak very 
directly to that issue that’s referred to in Partnership For 
Growth. That is, how do we get young people to think more 
about how do they position themselves in the economy to be 
someone who’s hiring other people as opposed to thinking only 
about, who am I going to work for when I complete my 
education? 
 
And I think there’s a lot of work to be done there. And I’ve 
encouraged MLAs and some of them have actually got involved 
in their own school districts and in their own schools. I know 
the member from Swift Current is very involved in his school 
division, working with small-business people to inject them 
more into the school system to act as mentors and role models 
for young people. 
 
And I would encourage MLAs who have the kind of position in 
the community that you do, because I know you’re involved in 
small business, to deal directly with your school division to see 
what you can do at a very personal level to inject that quality of 
entrepreneurial skills into our systems at the local level. 
 
Or if you have ideas, I would be very willing to sit down and 
. . . or my officials sit down with you and go through the 
document that is being prepared because I find it to be quite 
exciting and thorough but always in need of more opinions and 
comments. 
 
So it’s moving along quite well and I know the business 
community is quite excited about it. 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

Ms. Draude:  The news release or the press release you 
received this week about the STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership Inc.) program that’s going to be starting, I 
think you said August 1, said something about consultation. I 
think it was funding. Can you explain that to me, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I think your question was, Madam 
Member, the issue of funding and what will be available 
through STEP or the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership. What there will be in the program of STEP is the 
training or facilitating of people to understand where all the 
sources of export financing are available, both at the federal 
level and also at the international level, or at the provincial or 
local level. 
 
There will be no direct funding program through STEP. But 
what there will be in that organization is the ability for people 
to use the services of STEP to identify the many sources that are 
already available. And we believe that rather than setting up 
another competitive source of funding, what we are much better 
at, and probably more important, is that we would open the 
door for those people interested in international trade or export 
because there are many sources of funding available already. 
 
And many of our exporters simply don’t have access to or don’t 
know about the international facilities or the national facilities 
that might be available for export. That will be one of the roles 
of STEP. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The administrative information that would be 
gained through STEP can be received at this time through 
Saskatchewan’s business offices right across the province. 
Aren’t you duplicating it? 
 
Most of the information that you’re talking about in STEP, 
when it comes to being able to export, categories or steps that 
you have to take to get your product out of the country can 
already be accessed through Saskatchewan business offices that 
have all this type of information. Aren’t you duplicating it then? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The role of the Trade Development 
Corporation will be specific to trade, and really what we’ve had 
in the department to this point is officials, a number of officials 
in the area of trade who . . . if a business person phoned in or 
wanted to find out information, that information could be made 
available through the department. That function will simply 
shift over to the new entity which will be a joint venture 
between the public and private sector. 
 
So there won’t be the duplication that you refer to because 
we’re actually moving the people from being totally 
government oriented, or within the government oriented, over 
to a different structure that will be operated and managed by the 
private sector as well as government. So the structure will 
change fundamentally from the private sector doing their own 
thing, government doing their own thing, into a streamlined, 
efficient system that will focus more clearly on those export 
markets that are viable and most important to Saskatchewan  

exporters. 
 
So the duplication you refer to really won’t be there. In fact 
what there will be is an amalgamation of very many different 
entities, both in the private and public. As you know, the 
international unit out of Health is moving over to STEP, our 
people are moving out of the Department of Economic 
Development over to STEP, and a number of private sector 
increments will come as well. So far from being a duplication 
process, this will actually eliminate some duplication and 
streamline the system. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So you won’t be hiring new people then; it’ll 
be people that will be brought over from difference 
departments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  At the front end it will be very 
similar to what we did with the Tourism Authority where the 
tourism division moved out of the Department of Economic 
Development and became the basis of the new Tourism 
Authority, or what is now called Saskatchewan Tourism. 
 
If you go there today, a year later, you’ll probably find most of 
the people who were in Economic Development are still 
working there, although some through attrition may have 
changed, because they now work for this new board of 
directors. You’ll find two other tourism agencies have now 
joined forces with tourism Saskatchewan, and the private sector 
has put money into Saskatchewan Tourism to allow them to 
hire extra people. And so the unit is actually bigger than it was 
in government and the services they provide are far superior, I 
would argue, although it remains to be seen where this will end 
up. 
 
But I know with the Tourism Authority, it is so successful that 
Alberta has followed the model, British Columbia has now 
followed the model. And it makes you wonder when 
Saskatchewan, on the basis of tourism, can compete with and 
set up structures that Alberta and British Columbia follow, that 
we really should have the confidence that on the export area, 
where I think we have a big advantage over any other province 
because we trade more per capita than any other province  we 
now export over $11,000 per person out of this province  that 
we really do have a leadership role that we can play. And I must 
say that the federal government, as well as other provinces, are 
looking very closely at STEP as an example that they might use 
in their trade development process. 
 
And I think both the Tourism Authority or Saskatchewan 
Tourism and our Trade Development Corporation are good 
examples of what Saskatchewan people can do when they are 
allowed to be creative. These are not government programs. 
These are offerings and suggestions and ideas that have come 
from the community, from business people, from working 
people, to be amalgamated together. And I think that’s why 
they’re getting the support that they are. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and Mr. Minister, I’ve been listening with interest as you’ve 
ended the debate with the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
And I find some of the analogies that you draw, I think . . . it  



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

seems to me you’re drawing a fairly long bow and maybe 
stretching it to the point that it may burst sooner rather than 
later. 
 
And when you start comparing the Thatcher years and the 
Devine years and the demise of the province and the debts and 
what have you, I think, Mr. Minister, a comment you made in 
Moosomin is a little more appropriate and I think at that time 
. . . acknowledging the fact of the difficulties of the ‘80s. And I 
think there are Conservative governments . . . I look back, and I 
look back at the ‘30s and I see when the Bennett government or 
the Anderson government was elected, and unfortunately just 
elected at the beginning of the drought and the Dirty Thirties. 
And what can governments do when you’re facing very difficult 
economic times? 
 
And certainly the ‘80s, while they weren’t positive times as far 
as the conditions that we’re facing  the world recession that 
was taking place at the time, the many factors that the former 
government had to deal with as far as drought conditions and 
the problems that they were plagued with, with grasshoppers. 
And then you just finished telling us . . . asking us, prior to 
Economic Development coming in, talking about the enormous 
amount of money that was being spent in social assistance in 
this province, over $800 million. 
 
And I think it seems to me that with the increase that has gone 
there, it is somewhat problematic, if you will, of the problems 
that you’ve been faced, and the fact that we’ve seen an increase 
in people dependent on social assistance at a time when, if you 
will, the economy has turned around. And, Mr. Minister, we 
should be finding people who are finding jobs rather than going 
to social assistance and that department increasing its spending. 
 
One would have to ask, Mr. Minister, if the increases there have 
come as a result of the poor job done by the Economic 
Development department in this province. And, Mr. Minister, I 
know that when we take a long look at the economy, take a long 
look at where you’re going and your department is going, well 
there are areas I think, Mr. Minister, I’ll certainly give some 
credit . . . there’s some credit due. There are many areas where 
we need to raise some real questions as to what has really 
transpired. 
 
And I look at, Mr. Minister, I look at the fact, while you may be 
able to stand today and say yes, we’ve got 2,000 more jobs I 
believe in the last month or so, and our job figures have 
gradually, finally been rising, I don’t believe you’ve quite 
attained the job level or the workforce that was there in 1991. 
Which certainly conflict with your comments about the 
workforce and about governments of the ‘80s and of the 
Thatcher years being opposed to the working people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think when you look at the numbers, and you look at the fact 
that the province of Saskatchewan only achieved over a million 
people through some very difficult times, and it was about the 
mid-‘80s when we finally hit the magic million persons living 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And we rose above that; 
we’ve dropped back a bit. I believe there’s a marginal increase 
again. 

But certainly, Mr. Minister, the comments you were making 
seemed to somewhat contradictory of what has transpired over 
time. And it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that . . . I’m not 
exactly sure that you can say that governments back in the ‘60s 
and governments in the ‘80s created an atmosphere where there 
weren’t jobs created. Because I think you would have to admit 
there were jobs created. 
 
In fact the Premier last night acknowledged some of the 
decisions and some of the economic development today that 
you are beneficiaries of, such as Saskferco. And he talked about 
the jobs and the increased expansion at Saskferco which is 
going to mean more jobs to the province of Saskatchewan. And 
one has to ask, where did that come from? 
 
It’s interesting to note, while that project was condemned, all of 
a sudden Cargill’s project up at Clavet with the oil crushing 
plant, that’s become a good company in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we see Flexi-coil and what it’s done to expand. We see 
communities like Saskatoon and the economic development 
there. And a lot of that has been not as a result of government 
policy, but it’s been a result of some positive attitudes by 
business people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
He talked about tourism, Mr. Minister. And I would suggest 
that the tourism department is certainly going to have the work 
cut out for it, especially when they invite people to 
Saskatchewan, and then on top of it they put in place a 1-800 
number so that people can call to find out which route they 
should travel because they don’t want to send them over some 
of the poor roads in this province. Although I think they’re 
going to have difficulty telling them which roads to follow 
because I’m not sure there’s a highway in this province right 
now that you would really want to send people down to find a 
tourism destination. 
 
I understand the truckers, if they don’t have to stop in 
Saskatchewan, head into Montana and move across the 
American states and then come back up into Manitoba. 
 
And so there are . . . I would believe, Mr. Minister, that 
certainly your work is cut out for you and the work of your 
department, if we’re going to promote economic development 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is while you may want to 
condemn some of the policies back in the ‘80s, I think a person 
needs to be careful as to how you go about condemning them, 
because I think many times when you’re pointing a finger, 
usually there’s three fingers pointing back at an individual such 
as I may be showing right now. And we need to be careful in 
the fact that it’s maybe nice once in a while to acknowledge that 
yes, there was something positive. Yes, as I indicated, I think 
the job numbers just over the last month may indicate that there 
are some positive things that you can point at. 
 
So I’m not going to come out and condemn you for the lack of 
jobs that have been accumulating over the past number of years, 
realizing that there are times and there’s blips and there’s  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

bumps, but realizing as well that we shouldn’t just stand up 
here and say, well because of your policies we’ve lost a lot of 
jobs. Although I would have to suggest to you, Mr. Minister, 
the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) 
agreement certainly does provide an atmosphere that isn’t really 
conducive and doesn’t create a good working relationship 
between the business community and labour at this time. 
 
And I don’t think it’s our endeavour to just always drive a 
wedge, whether it’s in the former Conservative years of the ‘80s 
or whether it’s in the NDP (New Democratic Party) years of the 
‘90s right now. I think the idea of economic development is 
contingent upon creating a climate where the business 
community feels comfortable and where working people . . . 
when I say working people, I don’t say unionized people. I talk 
about working. The person on the street who wants a job, and in 
many cases many people in this province choose not to be 
involved in unions. 
 
And I guess the concern I have is when we have the SFL 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) and some of the other 
unions suggesting that they need to be protected because many 
people may choose to work outside of a union. And I don’t 
think it’s in the best interests of working people in this province 
to always suggest that we need to have rules and guidelines that 
live or work around labour agreements. And I think there’s a 
place for unions; let them work. Let them prove that they have 
the ability to compete with the non-unionized sector. 
 
So as we get further into this debate in Economic Development, 
I think it’s important that we point out that while the CCTA 
agreement that we have as it exists today, certainly 
discriminates against the employer out there who would really 
like to provide jobs for many young people who are now 
writing their grade 12 exams, and certainly university students 
and many of them who have come to me asking if there’s any 
job opportunities, because they’re looking forward to trying to 
get back to complete their university programs so they can get 
on with their lives. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I know I’ve raised a number of points and 
certainly I’d be interested in your response, as I believe your 
response is just going to generate some more questions. And so 
I’m just waiting for them and I’ll give you a moment to 
respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Just to respond to the member 
opposite who indicated that his belief that the tough times 
during the 1930s were as a result of the drought. Obviously the 
worldwide depression that occurred in the ‘30s was exacerbated 
by drought in certain parts of the province, but had very little to 
do with the drought in Saskatchewan. This was a worldwide 
phenomenon brought on by what many would argue, unfettered 
free enterprise without proper regulation, proper structure to 
stock markets, and without proper protection for workers, 
without proper social nets for families that in Canada created 
disaster for many, many families. It’s true that in Saskatchewan, 
certain areas of the province had extreme drought and this made 
it much worse. And history will tell you that Saskatchewan was 
one of the hardest hit areas of North America because of that 
doubling up of what was a world depression as well as lack of  

crops. 
 
But even those areas in the Regina Plains where there was in 
some areas of the province where crops continued to be 
produced at average production, you will know, being from a 
farm background, that were instances where people shipped 
cattle for example, and got a bill from the shipping company 
because the price they got for their animal at the end of the road 
didn’t quite cover the cost of shipping it. 
 
And so I say to you that the depression that was caused, I would 
argue, and there’s much analysis about it, the damage that it did 
to families was in large part because there were none of the 
social structures or the safety nets that we now have in place. 
 
And of course, that’s what worries us a great deal about 
right-wing governments and right-wing parties talking about the 
dismantling of social programs to take us back to those days 
that we’ve already experienced. And if we don’t understand that 
we’ve already gone that route, with the disaster that occurred 
during that world depression as a result of not having any of 
those processes in place, then we would be doomed to repeat 
them all over again. 
 
And I don’t take away from many of the things that you would 
argue for, and represent, and say that everything you represent 
is bad and that nothing that was done during the 1980s had any 
meaning. Of course that isn’t true. My argument is that the 
balance and the pendulum during those days, swings too far 
away from working people and doesn’t do enough in terms of 
social programs and safety net. And even economists in the 
1990s like Lester Thurow, talks about the need for a better 
distribution of wealth. 
 
The Premier mentioned it last night, where it is now the case 
that 1 per cent of the population receive 40 per cent of the 
income. This is double what it was in the 1970s where 1 per 
cent of the population received 20 per cent of the income. That 
has doubled and is almost back where it was in that period 
leading up to the Great Depression in 1919. 
 
(1215) 
 
And so our comments here today is, it’s not black and white. 
These are not times for hard-core philosophical debates about 
this is right and that’s wrong. It’s all nuances and margins of 
where you want to position yourself so that the proper amount 
of the economy, and the benefits of the economy, go to the 
business person, and the proper amount go to the people who 
work in the factories or work in the telcos or work in the new 
computer companies. 
 
Our argument is, is that if you go to the extreme, if you go to 
the extreme of too much government involvement in the 
economy, that’s not great. But if you go to the extreme of the 
right wing where you say you remove all the regulatory 
processes on environment, on labour legislation, that will not 
work either. And I think the reason our economy today is 
working in sync, where we have a good relationship in general 
between working people, business, and government, is because  



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

we are arriving at an appropriate balance. 
 
Now you may argue the other side, that it’s shifted too far 
towards working people. But I would argue if you go to the 
businesses that are paying minimum wage and interview the 
moms and dads or young people who work there, you would 
have a different opinion about the amount of money that they’re 
taking home and trying to raise their family on. 
 
And I’m sure you’re not saying that we should get rid of the 
minimum wage. But to say that minimum wage is way too high 
and people are flush who are earning something around $5 an 
hour, all you have to do is try to live on $5 an hour and raise a 
family, and you would know full well that this is not an easy 
task. That renting an apartment, let alone trying to buy a house 
and raising one or two kids when you’re at that end of the 
spectrum, that these people are not living high on the hog, that 
they’re struggling along. 
 
The other thing I would argue is that as we can see fit . . . and I 
say that carefully because I want to recognize that when you 
increase minimum wage, there are repercussions and there’s, 
for every effect, there’s a cause, and every cause, there’s an 
effect. And so these have to be weighted and weighed very, 
very carefully. But for right-wing parties to say that we have 
people out there who are earning way too much  give me a 
break. Go out and try it. Go out and try to work for minimum 
wage and we’ll see just how many movies you can take your 
kids to, let alone how many new pairs of jeans or coats in the 
wintertime you can buy for them. 
 
And so I really think this is where we define the difference. 
And I’m glad to see that you’re arguing and defending the 
Thatcher government of the 1960s and 70s because that clearly 
delineates the opposition, Liberal and Tories, as it affects 
working people, with our party. Because I want to make it clear 
that no one will ever get me to apologize for the fact that I stand 
squarely, every day, for the working people of this province. 
That there is no doubt that that’s where our party comes from. 
It’s the basis of our party. We come from the element of small 
business, farmers, and working people. 
 
And anyone who will try to put that wedge in between working 
people and business, which I think you have to admit was done 
during the 1980s for political reasons, for very crass political 
reasons, it just doesn’t work, and it’s not in the best interest of 
working people, and it’s not in the best interest of 
small-business people either because of the money you pay to 
the people at the bottom of the economic ladder quickly comes 
back into the economy to be recirculated. 
 
I’m not sure that that’s always true of the individuals in the 1 
per cent who are taking 40 per cent of the income. I think 
there’s a heck of a lot more leakage on that money going 
outside the province to be spent in other parts of the world than 
there is on the people who are earning low income or minimum 
wage. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, interesting. Following your analogy 
of, if you will, the working poor and the differences between 
the individuals in our society who maybe are taking the smaller  

portion . . . the smaller percentage of people that are at the high 
level. 
 
But I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that number one, 
maybe coming back to the analogy of pointing the finger and 
the finger pointing back, thank you so much for the invitation to 
join you out at your humble abode. I’d be more than pleased to 
have just a portion of that abode to live in. 
 
And I think if you invited people from Elphinstone out to view 
your house, Mr. Minister, they would begin to ask themselves, 
exactly what is our member talking about, the Minister of 
Economic Development, when he talks about working people 
and the difference between working poor . . . I think if they 
looked at what they’re living in and what you’re living in, they 
would say, well I’m not exactly sure that this minister really 
understands where we’re at. 
 
But that aside, Mr. Minister, I think if you take a look at the 
Conservative years and you take a look at what John 
Diefenbaker did for Canada . . . John Diefenbaker, while he was 
a Conservative and while he certainly represented business 
interests, John Diefenbaker also had a heart for the people at the 
bottom end. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, if you take a look at the ‘80s  I’m just 
not sure and I’m going to have to double-check on this  I 
believe the minimum wage also increased in the ‘80s. So you 
can’t really argue that during the ‘80s that people were left out. 
There was certainly an increase in the minimum wage at that 
time, a recognition of bringing the minimum wage into closer 
relationship with what businesses could afford. 
 
And I think at the same time, when you talk about minimum 
wage, we talk about the whole effect of what it may have on the 
small-business community. You talked about the ability of 
people going and supporting our small businesses. And, Mr. 
Minister, I think your government is even aware of the fact that 
if you were to substantially increase the minimum wage, while 
it may help a number of people at the lower end of the wage 
scale, it’s also going to take away from the ability of people to 
find employment in this province because many small 
businesses are not in a position to just absorb a major increase 
in the minimum wage and continue to offer the jobs that they 
have today. 
 
So those are some things that have to be weighed in the 
balances and on the scale, Mr. Minister. And so I don’t think 
it’s just a flat, we increase the minimum wage today because 
we’re trying to help the working people at the bottom. We also 
have to be mindful of the persons who are out there who are 
trying to exist and live based on what income that they have to 
work with and the number of people they would like to employ. 
So there are many factors that come into play. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, the problem I find is, such as when we 
look at the CCTA agreement, the fact that if we’re talking about 
helping working people . . . And I think we all agree that when 
we come to working people, while we bring in the term 
working people, most of the time, like the CCTA agreement, is 
more to look after your union friends and colleagues out there  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

rather than thinking about the person who really is looking for a 
job out there, Mr. Minister. And there’s two differences. 
 
Even the comments the Premier made last night about the 
non-union and unionized contracts and the jobs out there . . . 
And the unfortunate part, while he got up and ranted and raved 
and put on his tough demeanour, the fact was, Mr. Minister, he 
really wasn’t comparing apples with apples. He was comparing 
apples and oranges. 
 
And there are two different options, opportunities, out there for 
people to apply for jobs. And the CCTA does indeed, Mr. 
Minister, inhibit all contractors in this province being able to 
tender on a fair tendering policy. And then let the, if you will, 
the Crown construction . . . or the Crown companies determine 
who they want to hire. And if they really want to show that 
they’re dealing fairly with all people, they would open up the 
tendering program . . . tendering policy to include all 
contractors. And then they would look at who would give them 
the . . . who would be the most qualified contractor that would 
be able to provide the work at the most economical bid 
possible. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, all we’re asking of you is to allow for a 
level playing-field rather than creating a playing-field that isn’t 
as fair on one side, and saying it is because there are so many 
non-unionized contractors who actually are getting work in 
other avenues of government and working outside of 
government. So it’s very interesting, Mr. Minister, as to some of 
the analogies that you bring forward. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the member from Kelvington-Wadena did 
talk about the STEP program and it’s . . . here again we come to 
another program where, I think, your government had indicated 
that you were going to launch this program as of sometime in 
June and now it’s put off to August, and one begins to wonder 
whether or not it’s . . . August is going to move into September 
or we’re into December. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why this launch of this program 
has been put back. Is it because of the fact that the session has 
moved into June? Was the whole launch supposed to be so . . . 
at a time period when there may not be any close scrutiny of the 
program and therefore since the session has moved well into 
June and possibly to the end of June, we’re now moving back 
the official launch to August? Can you give us the reasons for 
the hold-up in the launch of this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just would refer the member to a 
recent report by Bruce Johnstone, the financial editor in the 
Leader-Post, who in a report, commented that the launch has 
been changed from June to August, and in that article he says 
. . . and here it’s only the official launch. If you were to go out 
to the Western Canada Farm Progress Show, you would see 
STEP already doing work and working at the international trade 
reception area. 
 
This is only the official launch and the reason is, as Milt Fair, 
the chairman and CEO (chief executive officer) says is because 
the facilities aren’t ready yet. And it’s nothing more 
complicated than that. The office space that they’re going to be  

moving into, where you would obviously want to go and have 
the official opening, it isn’t ready yet. 
 
And so if you’re looking for some sinister plot here, all you 
would have to do is go and talk to the carpenters and the 
tradespeople who are getting the space ready for them. It’s not 
quite ready, but you will be invited, as will our critic from the 
Liberal caucus, when it opens up in August. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 





 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2851 
 June 19, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities involved are Lumsden, Bulyea, Craven, and 
Bethune, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, from 
Balgonie, from Assiniboia, McTaggart, Coronach, and other 
centres throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from the 
communities of Kelliher, Francis, and city of Regina. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise as well on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The signatures on this petition, in addition to the city of Regina, 
are mostly from Strasbourg, Govan, and Yellow Grass, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Birch Hills, 
Pilot Butte, Regina, Lumsden, Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker : 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Stoughton and of the city of Moose Jaw. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues today in presenting petitions on behalf of the people 
from southern Saskatchewan in their efforts to try and save the 
Plains Health Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, many of 
them are from the Swift Current area, Assiniboia area, and in 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of people from the Shaunavon area, 
and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 
allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the . . . Order. The Speaker 
is having difficulty hearing the . . . Order. I’ll ask all hon. 
members to come to order. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition and I would like to read the prayer: 
 



2852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 
further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 
monies available from the federal infrastructure program 
toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 
allocating these funds toward capital construction projects 
in the province. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
And these come from the people who ought to know  from 
Shaunavon, from Tompkins, and that area. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased as well to 
stand in this Assembly and present a petition to the Assembly. 
And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 
further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 
monies available from the federal infrastructure program 
toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 
allocating those funds toward capital construction projects 
in the province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Regina, from Eastend, Cabri, and it appears to me a number of 
neighbours of the Minister of Economic Development, of the 
Shaunavon area. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reverse its decision to close the Melville court-house; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
allocate adequate funding to the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reconsider closure 
of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce, seated 
in your gallery, Mr. and Mrs. Garnet and Jeannie Ball from the 
Alida area. 
 
Garnet is the cousin to our page, Jocelyn Arthur, and is also 
very involved in the struggle against Allan Rock and Bill C-68. 
In that context he works very closely with the Minister of  

Justice, the minister for the Environment, and all those around 
the province that are also involved in the struggle against Bill 
C-68. 
 
I would ask the members of the Assembly to welcome Garnet 
and Jeannie to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased to introduce to the House today my constituency 
assistant, Susan Veenhoven, who is sitting in your gallery  if 
you would stand, Susan. 
 
Susan and I were given an excellent introduction today by 
yourself and members of the Legislative Assembly . . . not 
members, but staff of the Legislative Assembly, regarding the 
new directives. And we’re most appreciative. And she indicated 
to me that she feels much enriched and much more heavy on 
her return home to Saskatoon, given that she’s now going to be 
taking about 10 extra pounds of paper. 
 
So if everyone would warmly welcome Susan  it’s her first 
time in our Legislative Assembly. Please welcome her today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
through you to the House, to introduce a group of students from 
St. Theresa School as well as their teacher and chaperons who 
are seated in your gallery. They are grade 4’s and 5’s and 
there’s 31 people in the group, Mr. Speaker. The teacher is Ms. 
Leona Farago and the chaperons are Mrs. Hindmarch, Mrs. 
Bourgeault, Mrs. Klein, Mr. O’Byrne, and Mrs. Grad. 
 
I am going to spend some time with them after question period 
to answer questions that they have, which I hope will be of as 
great a quality as the questions that are going to take place in 
question period, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to ask you and 
through you to other members of the House, to join me in 
welcoming these students from St. Theresa School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a special person to the Assembly today. He’s just 
completed his grade 9 exams and I’m sure all members would 
want to join with me in welcoming our son to the Legislative 
Assembly, Paul Simard-Smith, who’s seated in the west gallery. 
Paul. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Sutherland Celebrates 40th Anniversary 
of Amalgamation with Saskatoon 

 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 1996 is a special 
year for the Sutherland community in Saskatoon and I’m  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2853 

honoured to be its representative in the Legislative Assembly. It 
marks the 40th anniversary of Sutherland’s amalgamation with 
the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Prior to 1956, Sutherland was a railroad town located about a 
mile from the city. The people there worked with Canadian 
Pacific Railway or in downtown businesses. 
 
Sutherland was then a typical Saskatchewan town with a 
general store, a bank, hotel, service station, candy store, grocery 
store, Chinese restaurant, and town clerk. Sutherland had its 
own distinction but Saskatoon began to grow and Sutherland 
needed to upgrade things such as roads, sewers, and electricity, 
and only had a tax base of 1,500 residents. 
 
And so the town came up with a list of 20 items it wanted if it 
was to join the city of Saskatoon. They had to consider police 
and fire services as well as bus routes. 
 
There was also concern about being swallowed up by the larger 
city and not having an equal say in this larger configuration. 
Once the city responded to this list, the joining of these two 
communities was completed in 1956. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a story of amalgamation that has worked to 
everyone’s satisfaction. For the past 40 years the community of 
Sutherland has played a significant role in the economy and 
well-being of the city of Saskatoon and will do so for the next 
40 years. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Activities in Humboldt and Muenster 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize two noteworthy events in and around my 
constituency. 
 
The first of these events at which I was present last weekend 
was the 75th anniversary of the Muenster diocese. The 
celebration at St. Peter’s Abbey included an outdoor mass led 
by Abbott Peter Novecosky of Muenster, Archbishop Peter 
Mallon of Regina, and Archbishop Blaise Morand of Prince 
Albert. The Muenster diocese is the third oldest in 
Saskatchewan and the smallest in size. It has provided a strong 
leadership and spiritual guidance to its people, for which we 
owe it deep gratitude. 
 
The second event is the sixth annual Sommerfest to be held in 
Humboldt this weekend. The three-day celebration of 
German-Canadian culture will include a parade, a fun night, a 
volksmarch and much more. I look forward to celebrating with 
Humboldt a little bit of Germany in the heart of the Prairies. 
 
Congratulations to the Muenster diocese and hats off to 
Humboldt for Sommerfest ’96. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Western Canada Farm Progress Show officially opened at noon 
today at Exhibition Park. This is a major, world-class event, a 
showcase for western Canada and for prairie dry land farming 
operations and manufacturers. This is the 19th farm progress 
show and its success has been above and beyond everyone’s 
expectation  and “Above and Beyond” is this year’s theme. 
 
There will be 700 exhibitors in 770,000 square feet of space, 
indoors, outdoors, upstairs, downstairs, and some out in the 
fields for demonstrations, and above and beyond to satellites, 
lasers, and mapping, to catch a glimpse of a future beyond 
belief. 
 
Every year manufacturing and trade delegations come from 
around the world to see the latest in agricultural technology and 
equipment and to look at new ideas and good buys. This year 
there will be delegations from 20 countries and all continents 
 buyers and sellers, importers and exporters  who will meet 
and make deals and negotiate contracts. 
 
The people at Exhibition Park have put this show together and 
have made it a tremendous success. It is also a real partnership 
because it involves agriculture, industry, manufacturing, and all 
levels of government. The international business centre, for 
example, is a joint venture between the three prairie provinces 
and Exhibition Park. A spirit of cooperation has always been 
essential on the Prairies. 
 
I want to congratulate everyone  to Regina and to all the 
people involved in the Western Canada Farm Progress Show  
and may it be an enormous success for everyone involved. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden Students Win Awards at National Science Fair 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
congratulate a number of students from my constituency who 
are gaining recognition as young scientists. Christopher Strong 
and Tyler Nightingale are grade 12 students at Lumsden High 
School. They recently won a gold medal at the national Science 
Fair in North Bay, Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite an accomplishment because there 
were about 400 projects in total at the science fair and as many 
as 100 in their division. This is the first time Lumsden High 
School students have ever won this award for physical science. 
 
Their project is called the “Tri-pivot Ferris wheel.” The purpose 
of the project was to develop, with the help of calculus, 
trigonometry, and computer spreadsheets, previously undefined 
properties affecting a person riding on a non-existent carnival 
ride. Then the objective was to design an original computer 
program to display these properties, including the distance-time 
equation, acceleration magnitude equation, and net force on 
someone riding this Ferris wheel. 
 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Christopher and Tyler will be graduating from Lumsden High 
School this year and are planning to enrol in the engineering 
faculty at the University of Regina. I would also like to 
congratulate two other young scientists who are also 1996 
Saskatchewan Science Fair winners. They are Michelle 
Yaskowich and Robin Bechard, also from Lumsden. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

50th Anniversary of Nipawin Rotary Club 
 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Saturday on June 15, it was my pleasure to attend a banquet 
celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Rotary Club of Nipawin. 
Over the last 50 years, the Nipawin Rotary Club has made a 
great contribution to the quality of life in Nipawin and district. 
As with other Rotary Clubs across Canada, they have sponsored 
the international student exchange program which has allowed 
many of our young people to gain firsthand experience on 
different countries. 
 
It has also allowed people in Nipawin to host students from all 
over the world. This year, Jan Queck from northern Germany 
has attended grade 12 at L.P. Miller High School, and will join 
in the graduation ceremonies with his new friends. The student 
exchange has been an excellent means for creating international 
understanding. 
 
The Nipawin Rotary Club is also very active in the local 
community. They sponsor the annual Courtesy Clerk Of The 
Year Award, which recognizes excellence in the retail sector. 
They organize cultural events like the annual Christmas carol 
festival and the old-time fiddlers contest. The Nipawin Rotary 
Club also sponsors the children’s bicycle safety rodeo and 
events at the regional park. 
 
To mark the 50th anniversary of their club, Nipawin Rotarians 
are donating to the construction work on the petting barn at the 
Nipawin Regional Park, adding to the attraction of this fine 
facility. I would ask all members to join with me in thanking the 
Rotary Club of Nipawin for their 50 years of distinguished 
service and in wishing them all the best in their next 50 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Kiwanis Clubs Strengthen Communities 
 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I had the recent privilege of speaking to the 
Downtown and the Nutana Kiwanis clubs in Saskatoon. They 
had nice turnouts at both events and very hospitable members, 
and the topic was: what is community in this rapidly changing 
world, and importantly, how do service clubs play a role in 
strengthening our communities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the service clubs are already doing much. They are 
dedicated people, compassionate, and there are many important 
initiatives. For example these two clubs in Saskatoon are 
supporting child care for teen moms, youth camps, and 
recreation programs, inner city initiatives, the Saskatoon  

Institute on the Prevention of Handicaps, and Services For 
Seniors, just to name a few of the important things that they’re 
doing. 
 
Impressive role of reaching out, of touching neighbours, of 
making a difference, of supporting others, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know that not only these two service clubs but all service clubs 
across Saskatchewan are playing an important role to strengthen 
our Saskatchewan communities and I know that all hon. 
members would agree with that. 
 
So I commend them today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Improvements in Regina Coronation Park 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was driving home 
last night I was reflecting on how things never seem to change, 
right up until I hit the border of my constituency. And it struck 
me. We’ve got a multimillion-dollar CN (Canadian 
National)-Lewvan Drive underpass under construction right 
now. 
 
I go over a couple hundred yards of very rough pavement that 
will be of course replaced as the underpass is built; hit Pasqua 
Street that was newly paved just last year. Heading north I see 
the new SaskTel Pioneer hall that sponsors a blood donor clinic 
every Thursday evening, smack in the middle of my 
constituency; turn off towards home, drive the last few blocks 
on fresh pavement from last year, and if I look the other way, 
they’re paving more blocks of it this year. 
 
If you go a little bit further north, just beyond the edge of my 
constituency, we have the construction of Winston Knoll high 
school taking place right now. I forgot the upgrade to Ring 
Road and Pasqua Street that was done a few years ago. A 
quarter of a million dollars spent on Pasqua and Highway 11, 
reducing the injury . . . or the accident rate by over 50 per cent. 
 
There’s lots happening, Mr. Speaker, and I’m delighted that 
much of it’s happening in Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Funding 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
members of this House are aware, at least four communities are 
taking legal action to prevent the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government from cutting local health care any further. In fact 
the actions of Radville, Fort Qu’Appelle, Canora, and St. 
Walburg, may be followed by other communities which are 
contemplating legal action. 
 
Will the Minister of Health tell this House how many other 
communities, in addition to the four I have already mentioned, 
have put an ultimatum to this government? And are we going to 
see yet another legal fight along the same lines as those that we  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

saw in the 52 communities when they first closed those 
hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as I think the member knows, 
we live in a free and democratic society. And one of the aspects 
of that kind of society is that people have freedom of speech. 
Another aspect of that kind of society is that people have access 
to the courts. And if they feel they’ve been aggrieved, they can 
go to the courts of law. When that happens those matters wind 
their way through the courts and it really isn’t up to the 
members in this House to comment on what’s happening there. 
 
But I want to say to the member that our view of the situation is 
that it is better for communities to try to get together and within 
the resources available, which ultimately come from the federal 
and provincial governments, to make the best health care 
decisions they can. The member may feel that the best way to 
run society is in an adversarial relationship, to take matters to 
courts instead of talking them out. That is not the view of our 
government; that is not the view, we think, of the majority of 
people in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister forgot 
about the letter that we raised only weeks ago when he 
encouraged a six-year-old boy with hepatitis C to take the 
government to court. And now he’s saying, well don’t use the 
courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, four communities are taking legal 
action because of this government’s chronic underfunding of 
our health care system. Others are bound to follow suit. This 
NDP government has invited such action because it has 
abandoned the most vulnerable people in Saskatchewan. And 
this is just the beginning. On the heels of major health care cuts, 
many health districts are anticipating more cuts next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously this government intends to do little to 
address the needs of the sick and the elderly. Will the minister 
explain why communities have to take legal action before this 
government will open its eyes to the mess that they have 
created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, I have 
provided documentation to the member which demonstrates in 
fact that this government has put $47 million new money into 
the health care system this year to replace money taken out of 
the health care system by the Liberal Party, which is presently 
the government in Ottawa. The member knows that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would say to the member that what we have to do is build a 
health care system that makes sense for people in this day and 
age. Things have changed. Things change for many reasons. 
They change because of federal Liberal cut-backs in health care. 
They change because of the legacy left by the  

Conservative Party in office for which we pay $860 million 
each year interest. They change because technology has 
changed. They change because trading patterns change. They 
change because population centres change. And they change 
because of consumer choice. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in this House before, that 
we’re going to take care of the sick and the old that the member 
likes to refer to. We’re going to continue to have the best health 
care system in the world, with or without the support of the 
Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, what the minister fails to tell 
the House is in fact many people that have contacted the Liberal 
opposition, before they could get any health care, it had to be 
raised in this House. And for that, Mr. Minister, you should be 
ashamed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the court system is forced to deal with this 
government’s failure to meet its health care obligations, one has 
to question who will win in the end. And I think the answer to 
that is clear. No one will win. And the fact is, every dollar that 
this government or the district health board spends to defend 
itself in court is one less dollar that will be there to provide 
services for our sick and our elderly. 
 
Will the minister explain why he and his government will not 
diffuse this legal time bomb by simply providing the adequate 
funding needed to give us a proper health care system that we 
had before your government got into power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well of course, Mr. Speaker, as the 
member well knows, the health care system we have in this 
province, and which we now have across the country, was 
pioneered in this province over the opposition of that party. But 
I want to say to the member that I agree with the member that it 
is better to talk things through. It is better not to try to settle 
matters in court that should be settled by reasonable people 
acting in good faith. And that’s what we’re trying to encourage, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that the response 
of the Liberal Party that was given in this House before, that we 
should go to an American-style health care system  pay as 
you go  instead of having medicare, is not adequate. 
 
And it is not adequate to do what the Liberal Party did last night 
in response to questions from the Premier. When the Premier 
challenged them to say what they would do, they said the 
people would have to wait until 1999 to see what they would 
do. In other words, elect us first, and then see what we’ll do. 
 
We know what they’ll do, Mr. Speaker  user fees, two-tier, 
U.S.-style (United States) health care, and the end of medicare. 
That’s what they want to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Eaglestone Lodge Closure 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I brought to the attention of 
this House several weeks ago the fact that the provincial 
funding to operate the Eaglestone Lodge in Kamsack will end at 
the end of August. In order to ensure that this level 1 and 2 
home continues to serve its 45 residents, the town of Kamsack 
and surrounding municipalities are setting up a non-profit 
society to purchase the facility. 
 
The local health district has asked that a proposed budget be 
drawn up and staff have agreed to take a pay cut to meet this 
financial target. Unfortunately labour laws dictate that a 
six-month period . . . before these union employees can be 
decertified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community cannot wait six months. They need 
a provisional licence to allow them to renegotiate an employee 
wage package and make any necessary renovations without 
closing down the facility. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment to intervene, provide an 
exemption, and do what is necessary to ensure Eaglestone 
Lodge continues to serve the seniors of Kamsack? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with the 
precise, specific situation the member’s referring to. Of course 
I’m familiar with Eaglestone Lodge and the desire of the 
community to continue to operate the facility. 
 
I would say to the member that generally speaking, if the 
employees are represented by a certified bargaining agent, it is 
best for the people that want to take ownership of the lodge to 
bargain with the certified bargaining agent of the employees, 
which would be the union concerned. It is not best, I think, that 
ministers of the Crown intervene in that process. And that’s 
what I would say to the member at this point in time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, this issue has already been 
taken up and they have been told that it will take six months, 
and in that six months this nursing home will have to be closed. 
So, Mr. Speaker, this issue is one out of the control of the local 
health board. 
 
The board, the seniors who reside in Eaglestone Lodge, and 
their families, are looking to you, Mr. Minister, for help. 
Without an exemption or a provisional licence to operate 
Eaglestone Lodge, the facility will have to be closed until the 
union staff is decertified. And again, as I have explained, this is 
a six-month process. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment to take appropriate action 
and demonstrate some level of commitment to our seniors in the 
Kamsack area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I will make a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to 
look into the situation that the member raised. 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, your blatant lack of cooperation in dealing with 
the objections to the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) has forced the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association to take action. As of 12 noon today, they’ll be 
boycotting SaskTel long-distance service, STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) courier service, and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) insurance products. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has already caused a ticking 
time bomb in health care and now you’re intent on doing the 
same to business and labour. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve run from this problem long enough. What 
is it going to take for you to swallow your political pride, admit 
that you’ve made a mistake, and finally scrap this unfair 
tendering policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that nothing could be further from the truth — 
that we’ve run from this issue. Obviously we’ve been working 
diligently on it for some time. 
 
I want to make it clear to the member opposite that we had a 
process in place of analysing and reviewing the agreement. 
Then as we have explained a number of times, a consensus 
started to build, and meetings were held, negotiations took 
place. The negotiations are now at a standstill, but as the 
Premier said yesterday, we are still optimistic that something 
can come and be resolved as a result of discussion, our 
facilitation, and compromise, and consensus building. 
 
What I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, in the dying days of the 
session, is the scrap going on between the Conservative and 
Liberal caucus over this issue. Nothing to do with working men 
and women or construction jobs, but to see who can finish this 
session on the highest note. 
 
Look, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been here almost as long as the 
Freemen at Jordan, Montana  78 days. It’s 76 today. Let us go 
home. Let us go home and do the work of the people in the 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same 
minister. Today’s news release from the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association said, and I quote: 
 

SCA will not be returning to the table with the CLR and 
the trades council. That process is over. No one is anxious 
to boycott. Our options are limited. 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

The news release goes on to say that there is no doubt that the 
government has no interest in listening to the views of the 
majority of the construction industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, the SCA is calling on your government to scrap 
the CCTA, join with the CLR (Construction Labour Relations 
Association) and the trades council and the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association at the negotiating table to forge an 
acceptable compromise. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you make that commitment today, to scrap 
the CCTA and work with the concerned parties to implement a 
policy that is fair for all Saskatchewan workers and employers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, one part of the 
member’s question, I agree with, and that is working with the 
stakeholders involved to come to a compromise arrangement. 
This is exactly what we are attempting to do and will attempt to 
do over the coming days, weeks, months, if necessary. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Member, that what you are doing here today 
. . . not having raised the issue for a number of days, but seeing 
the positive press that the Conservative opposition is getting on 
this issue, trying to jump on the bandwagon because of the 
foolishness that your House Leader has been raising as issues 
haven’t been working. 
 
I say again this has everything to do with the politics of ending 
a session. I was there 12 years, or 9 years, I know what that’s 
about. Give it a break. They won the session. They won the 
session. Even Murray Mandryk says that you birds have lost 
this session. So let’s agree  they won; you lost; let’s go home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Question period is not over. 
And we require all the hon. members to give attention to the 
hon. member for Moosomin. 
 

Hospital Closures 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it certainly 
would be interesting to get into this debate. But another 
question was raised with me this morning that it’s imperative 
that I bring to the minister. And this minister I want to address 
this afternoon is the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan families were hoping that your 
government’s closing of rural hospitals would have come to an 
end, but unfortunately we’re now into round 2. 
 
Mr. Minister, we were informed this morning that as of October 
1, there will be no longer a Wilkie Hospital because you are 
closing their acute care beds. And further to that, Mr. Minister, 
because of your cut-backs, Wilkie’s 30-bed long-term facility 
could be in jeopardy as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, rural people can’t take the uncertainty any more. 
When will this stop? When are your cuts going to be finished?  

And when is your government going to finish closing rural 
hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I find it interesting that the member would 
ask his question in quite this way, Mr. Speaker. Because first of 
all, the health board in Greenhead has come to a decision, but 
they haven’t come to a decision to close down the long-term 
care facility in Wilkie, as the member indicates is imminent. 
They have decided to convert the Wilkie Hospital into a health 
centre. 
 
But I want to say to the member, because the member did not 
indicate this, that they also have announced that the following 
services are going to be available at the Wilkie health centre: 
emergency services, radiology, palliative care, observation, 
alcohol and drug services, public health, occupational therapy, 
wellness clinics for diabetes, heart control, cholesterol; 
laboratory services, out-patient services, dietician services, 
home care, mental health services, physiotherapy, and youth 
services. Doesn’t sound to me like an institution that’s about to 
close, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
unfortunately people in Wilkie do not believe that is the type of 
service or the level of service that they were expecting. In fact, 
Mr. Minister, we were informed that a committee struck by the 
hospital district two years ago reports that Wilkie had the best 
structure for a hospital in the district, as well as the best 
location for a nursing home. Yet now we hear that your 
government is closing this hospital. 
 
The Wilkie Hospital has been running at an average of almost 
80 per cent capacity for years. In addition, the Wilkie Hospital 
and nursing home ran a surplus, Mr. Minister  ran a surplus 
of $110,000 last year while Biggar had a deficit of 130 and 
Unity a deficit of 55,000. There have been no numbers provided 
to support the closure of the Wilkie Hospital  no study, no 
facts. 
 
Mr. Minister, if there was justification for the closure, maybe it 
would be easier for people to understand, but that is not the 
case. Mr. Minister, will you take the time to meet with the 
Wilkie mayor and others and review this decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, no I will not be reviewing 
this decision. This is a decision for the local health board to 
make. And if the member is going to get up again, as he has in 
the House, and say that I’m blaming the health board, I’m going 
to say, no I’m not blaming the health board; I’m standing 
behind the health board. 
 
If the member is going to say that I’m shirking responsibility for 
funding decisions made by this government, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to say to the member, no I’m not shirking responsibility 
because we have to accept responsibility for the budgetary 
decisions that we make here. 
 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

But the board has made a decision, Mr. Speaker, that the range 
of services that need to be provided in Wilkie are going to be 
provided out of a health centre. The difference is, they’re not 
going to have acute care beds in Wilkie. The average daily 
census there has been about 5.4, I believe. They have made the 
decision, Mr. Speaker, that those services are going to be 
provided elsewhere, as they have for the most part for the 
people of Wilkie so far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) or his designate. Mr. 
Minister, we the people from justice county are not quite ready 
to give up yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday you saw how serious we were about 
holding this House up until the Crown tendering review was 
released. You also saw how the Liberal House Leader does not 
support our actions, which indicates to us that we are exactly on 
the right track. It does look, however, like though that the 
member from Melfort has finally clued in to what’s going on on 
this issue and how important it is to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, for weeks you’ve been talking about releasing the 
Crown tendering review. For weeks you’ve been telling us 
you’re going to release a review. And then yesterday the 
Premier steps in and, pouf! — the review and the whole report 
vanishes into thin air. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you do the right thing and release that report 
or review or whatever you want to call it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
Leader of the Third Party that he was doing pretty good until he 
tied himself into the Opposition House Leader. I think you just 
made a very serious mistake. 
 
But I want to say to you again in a very serious way, as I 
mentioned to the member from the Liberal caucus when he 
asked the question, that there has been a process in place, of 
review, that has gone on for many months. Several weeks ago 
though, there was a coming together of the stakeholders and 
they began to meet to look at a compromise situation. 
 
The review was put on hold. If you’d listen, you’d understand 
this and we could get on with it. The review was put on hold. 
We then went into the compromise, the discussions, which as 
you know, broke off a few days ago. We are still hopeful that 
we can get them going and finish this without imposing a 
settlement or a solution on the individual stakeholders. We 
would ask for your support in that. 
 
As to the release of a report, there’s no report. And if you’re 
waiting for that, you just might have to wait a long time because 
we hope still to get a compromise settlement, which will mean 
no report has to be written. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, for months you’ve been saying 
how your union-preference tendering policy is designed to 
improve the situation for working men and women and 
businesses in this province. Mr. Minister, 80 per cent of the 
workers cannot get jobs under this policy because they do not 
belong to a union. 
 
The unionized and non-unionized contractors are no longer 
talking to one another, and you know that, Mr. Minister. And 
this morning the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
announced a boycott of government services like SaskTel 
long-distance, STC courier, and SGI insurance. 
 
So you’re really doing a bang-up job on this, Mr. Minister. 
Things are really improving here. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government is now asking the two sides to 
show some good faith by going back to the bargaining table. 
Mr. Minister, will you show some good faith by scrapping this 
flawed policy and starting over on even footing with all sides at 
the table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it is not possible to 
start over, as the member obviously knows. As there’s no 
written report, let me give you a verbal report and we’ll see if 
we can get clear how this process works, because this is not 
very complicated; this is not rocket science. 
 
We developed a policy known as CCTA. There were problems 
with it and we readily admit that. And we started a review. In 
the middle of the review a process started where the 
stakeholders began to negotiate and we thought a settlement 
was in the works. That didn’t happen. We are now at a position 
of trying to get the stakeholders back to the table. If that doesn’t 
work, then we’ll have to continue the process of review and 
come to some sort of a conclusion. That’s the report. If you 
want me to type that out for you in those terms, I can do it. But 
at this point in time that’s the response and that’s all there is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the whole 
problem is your government has an agreement with the union 
that you can’t change. You entered into an agreement, a 
five-year policy, a five-year agreement, and it’s only one year 
into that term. And that’s really funny because the Minister of 
Labour has a five-year term and you managed to get rid of him 
in just one year. 
 
Mr. Minister, we all know that the CIC conducted a review of 
this policy. We know that CIC must have come to some 
conclusions about how the policy was working. We know that 
CIC must have come to some recommendations about changes 
that needed to be made, and if you don’t want to call it a report, 
call it whatever you like, Mr. Minister. 
 
All we’re asking for is the results of the review, the CIC  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

recommendations, and how your government intends to make 
any changes in this agreement. That’s what we’d like to see, 
and the construction association would like to see that before 
the end of this session. I think that’s a reasonable request, Mr. 
Minister. Will you do that for us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I don’t know what more I can 
say. I can say that the policy was implemented. As is the case in 
some instances, problems were raised. We said we would 
review them and look at it. We’re in the process of doing that. 
A conciliatory process was started before the review was 
completed. We believe that will still bring a result. If it doesn’t, 
then we’ll have to complete the review and bring forward a 
report. 
 
What I do know though, in the review as it was done so far, is 
what happened in terms of union, non-union, in terms of 
tendering in 1995. Of the projects tendered, about 25 per cent 
of them were union, 75 per cent were non-union. That’s of the 
tendered projects. That’s where they went. That’s the facts. 
 
And as far as a written report, there is none. If you want to wait 
for it and hope that the negotiations break down and then a 
written report is made, then we’ll stay here and wait for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
questions today are for the minister responsible for CIC or his 
designate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more things change the more they stay the 
same. I have a newspaper article from the 1970s which proves 
that the NDP has had a plan to discriminate against 
non-unionized workers for decades. And this government has 
now brought this plan to fruition with its Crown Tendering 
Agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, a responsible government would want to know if 
its policies are working favourably. And you say you have no 
written report on the positive and negative aspects of the 
CCTA. If that is the case, Mr. Minister, you should be 
embarrassed by your irresponsible behaviour in not wanting to 
thoroughly evaluate your government’s policy’s impact. 
 
If you have done an objective analysis, why would you choose 
not to share it? So which is it going to be? Are you admitting to 
be completely irresponsible, or are you hiding something? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the longer we talk on 
this the more convoluted the opposition gets. Now we’ve got 
three groups vying to see who won the session. 
 
But I want to say clearly to you, Madam Member, that if anyone 
should be embarrassed about the history of their party as it 
would relate to labour law, it would be Ross Thatcher and Bill 2 
in 1967, which was one of the darkest days for working men 
and women. 
 
An Hon. Member:  ’67. 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  ’67, yes. And I want to say that if 
one wants to review labour law in this province, then you would 
know that your former leader, Ross Thatcher, although I 
understand at the time you were a Conservative, if you were 
involved in politics at all . . . It gets a little convoluted to keep 
track of whether it’s Unionist, Conservative, Liberal, or 
Independent. 
 
But I say to you, obviously this policy was under review  
exactly what you’re talking about doing. We reviewed it. We 
came to an arrangement where a compromise situation was 
brought about, where the stakeholders were at the table. That 
process is on hold at the present time. We’re still optimistic we 
can get it back together. We would urge you to come onside and 
support that process, because at the end, it’s best if we get a 
resolve through compromise rather than imposing a settlement 
on the stakeholders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I can save the House some time if the 
House is of a mind to do so. I could table all of the answers to 
all of the questions today, in keeping with our policy of being 
open and accessible. So if the House is of a mind, I could save 
some time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  The answers to questions 113 to 121 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve heard a number of times how hog numbers 
and the production of hogs is supposed to increase in this 
province, the slaughtering in this province is supposed to be 
increasing; that the expectation is that we are going to move 
from somewheres less than a million hogs to about 3 million 
hogs produced a year in this province by the year 2000. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, what plans you have in place to 
facilitate that kind of an expansion in light of what’s happening 
up in the Humboldt area where a large producer is attempting to 
put together another large hog operation, intensive livestock 
operation, and yet the RM (rural municipality) in the area is  



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

doing what they can to prevent that from happening. If that kind 
of scenario plays itself out across this province, Mr. Minister, 
we’re going to have a great deal of difficulty expanding any of 
our hog operations. 
 
So I believe, Mr. Minister, when you talk about moving to a 3 
million hog production per year in this province, with that kind 
of scenario happening in the province, with that kind of an 
attitude taking place  and that, Mr. Minister, is your 
membership base that is doing that, that is organizing and 
agitating against this particular producer, against this particular 
intensive livestock operation  I believe that we’re going to 
face a great deal of difficulty expanding any hog operations in 
this province. 
 
So what plans do you have in place, what alternatives do you 
have in place, that would allow this hog operation in particular, 
and hog operations in general across this province, to meet 
those expansion plans that you have set forward of 3 million 
hogs per year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member opposite brings up a 
good point, and that’s the increased hog production in 
Saskatchewan and the goals and objectives that have been set 
under Agriculture 2000, the document that was released by the 
Department of Agriculture recently. 
 
As you know, there’s been a big shift in the production of hogs 
away from a multitude of small producers to a much narrower 
band of very large hog producer numbers, individuals raising 
large numbers of hogs. And this is a trend really across the 
world. And obviously we’re not an island where we can ignore 
or want to ignore that. 
 
And so you’re seeing a number of very, very highly intensive 
hog operations coming on stream. I’m not going to list them out 
here but you’ll know the various individual hog producers. The 
former member for Rosthern is very much involved in that 
group and does a good job of it in his own right. He’s expanded 
it a number of times. 
 
The other group I think, that is often missed as a major 
contributor to economic development in this province are the 
Hutterite Brethren, who on colonies throughout the province 
raise a good percentage of the hogs and continue to expand. 
 
I want to say to you on the issue of the recent decision by the 
municipality to stop or to delay the establishment of an 
expanded hog process or a hog production unit in 
Saskatchewan, I think raises a very interesting issue. And that 
is, what are the rights of the farmers to produce food for the 
world, food for the communities, and the right of the 
individuals who live in that community on the environmental 
side? 
 
Obviously all of the increase in production that has occurred in 
the last number of years  and it has been significant, the 
number of barns that have been built, I say again, by individual 
producers, by community groups, by Hutterite colonies  we 
have had no problem with this kind of an issue to this extent. 
 

So one thing, first of all, I would do is not overreact to an 
isolated incident, because at this point in time it is. There are 
many, many projects on the drawing board and going forward. 
Many have gone forward and actually come to fruition without 
this kind of a problem. 
 
That’s not to say there isn’t a problem of the environmental 
concerns of neighbours versus the expansion of hog barns or 
other intensive animal units. What we’re doing in that area, in 
conjunction with the Department of Environment, Economic 
Development and Agriculture is looking at ways and means to 
eliminate the problems that are associated with intensive hog 
units. 
 
And there are some very, very exciting new things that have 
been achieved and accomplished that really eliminate many of 
the problems of odour and waste disposal that we have 
historically known about as it relates to cattle and hog 
production. 
 
So I think rather than overreact and get terribly worked up 
about this issue, what we have to do is go out to those 
circumstances where the problem exists. And again, rather than 
throw gasoline on a situation and make it even bigger and 
brighter than it already is, is try and work out rational solutions; 
that is, what are the environmental issues that the people are 
concerned about, if that was the issue  because environment 
is one of our top, key concerns in this province and in our 
government, proper environment, because one of the beauties 
of Saskatchewan, one of the reasons people like to live here, is 
because of the quality of the environment  versus what are 
the needs of the community in terms of production of food, and 
even in some ways more importantly, the jobs that are created 
as we go through that process. 
 
So I share your concern about this incident. But it is isolated 
and one that I think we can work our way through as we take 
the hog production, as you mentioned, from around 1 million to 
2 million, which is our goal and objective over the next 10 
years or so. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew:  Mr. Chairman, I beg leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank my 
colleagues in the legislature for granting leave. 
 
It’s my great pleasure today to introduce to you, Mr. Chairman, 
and to the members of the legislature, 23 grade 5 students from 
St. Agnes School. St. Agnes is in Moose Jaw. Many will 
wonder why the member for Regina Coronation Park is 
introducing, but of course it will be known I’m introducing on 
behalf of Mr. Speaker who cannot be with us right now. 
 
Accompanying these students are teachers Maureen Gilpin, Jan  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

Mansell; and chaperons Cathy Cole, Mike Applin, Myrna 
Hatley, and Carla DeLaurier. 
 
Mr. Speaker will be meeting with this group in a few short 
minutes for photographs and a short visit. I ask all members of 
the legislature to welcome this group of grade 5 students from 
St. Agnes School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it seems to me that in this particular case of the hog 
operations, the environment is used, in many cases, as a red 
herring in this particular case. 
 
The idea that no two large hog operations can be closer than 16 
kilometres together does not have any environmental basis for 
that decision. It’s simply a decision that says we can have one 
hog operation in the RM and that’s it, unless they’re at the 
extreme ends of the municipality. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, that it’s simply being used as a red 
herring in this particular case, to say that the environment is the 
reason for it. I can certainly understand why people in the RM 
would have some concerns over the odour. I can certainly 
understand how they may be concerned if the extensive 
livestock operation, be it a hog operation or a cattle operation or 
whatever it might be, chickens or turkeys, was close to a stream 
bed or a river, that it might cause some problems downstream. 
 
But to simply say that the hog operations can’t be closer than 16 
kilometres, then I think that flies in the face of environmental 
concerns, and the environmental concerns are simply being 
used as a red herring. 
 
But let’s move on to something else along the line of the hog 
operations though, Mr. Minister. If we develop the 3 million 
hogs being produced per year, we are going to need to have the 
facilities to process that kind of a supply. And hopefully we will 
develop the 3 million hogs and hopefully we can develop the 
processing plants to deal with that. Which brings me to an 
agreement that was made last year with Intercontinental Packers 
to develop a new processing plant or an enlarged processing 
plant at Moose Jaw, the Western Canadian Beef plant. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could explain to us what the 
program was that you put in place to help out at Western 
Canadian Beef to get them back to work when they were on 
strike before the election. I believe they had been on strike for 
18 months or some number like that, a considerable length of 
time. 
 
The agreement was put in place to provide new jobs there. 
Perhaps this agreement allowed the company to pay a higher  

salary to their employees. 
 
Anyway, whatever the case was, they went back to work just 
prior to the election with a promise that there was going to be 
something like 140 or 150 new jobs created at the Moose Jaw 
plant. So I wonder if you could explain that agreement that you 
put together just prior to the election? 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, just on the issue of processing, 
I want to say to the member opposite that obviously processing 
of the meat products is very important, and you’ll know that at 
Wynyard we have a very, very important processing for 
chickens and turkeys, one of the best anywhere. Not as large as 
some in the United States and other parts of Canada but a very, 
very important processing plant. 
 
In some of the smaller areas too, if you look at Melfort, 
Thomson Meats, and Drake Meats in Drake, Harvest Meats in 
Yorkton, and the myriad of smaller shops that process 
Saskatchewan-grown meat, you need only look around Regina 
and Saskatoon and there’s many, many, many processing places 
in our province that do an excellent job. 
 
What’s interesting, that some are now starting to capture 
international markets. Thomson Meats, for example, now has a 
component of their product, both beef and pork, that go into the 
Asia market, particularly the Japanese and Korean. And there is 
a whole area of specialized meats that is now opening up. 
 
You really, I think, have two levels of processing going on. You 
have the big picture processing that produces boxed meat or 
special cuts of meat, the Mitchell’s Meats that you’re referring, 
and then a lot of the specialized that adds even a higher value, 
that puts the meat in a specialized package for a very, very 
particular market somewhere in the world. 
 
Both of those we’re very interested in going after and both are 
very important to our farmers and to the people who work in 
those plants. 
 
In the case of Intercon, the deal that you’re talking about which 
was worked out before . . . the arrangement worked out before 
the last election, an arrangement was made with the 
management of Intercon that we would arrange for them, 
because of the strategic location of the plant and the need for 
the plant in Saskatchewan . . . because as you know if we didn’t 
have this plant to do the kill and processing of the pork and 
beef, it would mean that the farmers who produced beef in the 
central part of Saskatchewan would then have to see their hogs, 
their live animals, shipped for hundreds of miles, which would 
mean two things  very much increased cost of transportation 
and obviously a severe deterioration of the product as it moved 
from point A to point B. Because as you know, having a farm 
background, the number of hours that an animal stays on board 
a truck, with every hour there’s weight loss, and even more 
importantly, bruising and damaging that happens. And the 
farmer would have lost an extreme amount of money. 
 
We decided that this was such an important industry that we  



2862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

would support it by offering a forgivable loan if a certain 
number of jobs were created. Now I want to make it clear to 
you that the jobs need to be created within the next three years 
and be maintained for three years before the loan is forgivable. 
And it’s forgivable at a rate of 12,500 per job created. The job 
has to remain in place for three years, and the jobs have to be 
created within the next three years. 
 
So that’s the program, and if you’ve got any further questions, 
I’ll try to answer it on that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I find your 
comments interesting about the distances travelled with the live 
animals. Indeed it’s best if we can keep the processing here and 
provide all the value added. I agree with that. In fact we need to 
encourage it as much as possible because we simply cannot 
remain hewers of wood and drawers of water. We have to 
provide secondary manufacturing and processing and final 
manufacturing in the retailing of the products here. 
 
But the idea that the animals suffer an extreme weight loss and 
damage to bruising and other damages to the animals when they 
remain in their trucks for hours, I think to what’s happening in 
the western part of North America. My brother was driving a 
truck out of Lethbridge. They picked up hogs in that area and 
shipped them and drove them to Los Angeles. Now that is a 
significant distance, Mr. Minister, and they had to do that 
within a short period of time. But nevertheless those animals 
were on that truck for approximately 24 hours. 
 
Now to simply move an animal 100 miles or 200 miles in 
Saskatchewan does incur some weight loss, I agree, and there 
may be some damage. But to describe that as extreme, I think is 
a little bit extreme, Mr. Minister. Because cattle and hogs move 
great distances on this continent to move from the places where 
they are produced to the places where they will be processed 
and utilized. 
 
I’d like to take a little more look at the agreement with the 
Intercontinental Packers group out of Moose Jaw. You say this 
is a forgivable loan for jobs to be created over a three-year 
period and that they have to maintain those jobs for three years. 
 
I wonder if you can give us the numbers, please, Mr. Minister, 
as to what the starting number was when the agreement was 
signed, so that we have a base figure to measure from to 
determine whether or not those jobs were created, and exactly 
how many jobs, new jobs, were supposed to be created under 
this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I want to say to the member 
opposite that if I use the word “extreme,” I’m referring to the 
overall amount of monies that would be lost to farmers on 
moving let’s say a million hogs a 60-mile radius of Saskatoon 
or a 100-mile radius, versus shipping them to Edmonton which 
is 600 miles away. If one were to do the calculation on the 
freight cost of that movement of a million hogs plus the weight 
loss plus any damage that obviously would occur, because some 
does occur, the loss to the economy of Saskatchewan would be 
extreme. 
 

And I think there’s little doubt that the cost is fairly significant, 
not unlike of course having the crushing plant for canola 
located at Saskatoon versus having it located at Red Deer. 
When you do the calculation on the number of dollars that 
farmers would have had to spend on freight, moving that 
quantity of canola from their farms in central Saskatchewan to 
Saskatoon versus moving it to Red Deer, over a 20- or 30-year 
period, the numbers are quite staggering. 
 
And I know the member isn’t arguing. I don’t think we’re 
debating anything significantly different, but only to point out 
that having these plants close to your production is very, very 
important for the economy of Saskatchewan and for the 
producer. 
 
I want to get for you the exact number because we have a 
number that we started out as the baseline for the forgivable 
loan. I’ll get it for you and report it as soon as I get it available. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m hoping 
your officials are looking for that now. 
 
When you look at this weight loss, obviously, Mr. Minister, 
there is a cost associated with that. But when animals are 
shipped out of this country a distance down to Los Angeles, 
which must be close to 1,500 miles, it says that somebody 
believes that they can purchase the animals here, pay the 
freight, do the processing there cheaper than what we can do 
that same processing here, and then ship the finished product. 
 
So obviously they feel that there is an advantage to processing 
the animals there rather than processing them here. It must say 
something about our cost of processing. It must say something 
about the cost of their fuel, that it be cheaper to ship the freight 
south than it is to do the processing and ship the finished 
product from here. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, since that is happening, we need to take a 
very serious look at what is causing those animals to go south 
before they’re processed. And that would be your department, 
Mr. Minister, that should be looking at that as the economic 
development. 
 
How do we change our policies in this province? How do we 
change the policies in Canada to keep the animals in the area 
that they’re produced and do the processing there and ship out 
the finished product? Because there are a large number of 
animals going south, both cattle and hogs, for processing in the 
U.S. 
 
So what do we have to do? What do we have to change? What 
tax regimes have to be adjusted to keep the animals here? And 
indeed, Mr. Minister, what labour regulations do we have to 
adjust here to keep those jobs in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
Rather than shipping our live animals out, we need to be 
processing them here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member will obviously know 
that his example . . . you want to be very careful in using an 
example where some truckloads of hogs will go from here to 
Los Angeles or from here to Toronto versus what . . . (inaudible  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2863 

interjection) . . . Well we’ll get for you the exact percentage of 
what are slaughtered in the province and what are moved. 
 
But obviously if the plant in Los Angeles had to move all of 
their hogs for processing 1,600 miles, it’s very different than if 
they’re filling their plant to capacity and the last 5 per cent or 
the last 3 per cent are coming from 1,600 miles. 
 
And so you have to be careful in how you use these numbers, 
because obviously we probably get some loads of hogs from 
Montana or from North Dakota. That doesn’t mean that the 
labour laws in Montana or North Dakota are somehow out of 
whack. And so taking these large leaps in logic where the mind 
grinds and misses big chunks of gears to get from one spot to 
another, we have to be a little more sophisticated than that. 
 
The fact of the matter is that when it comes to building a 
crushing plant for canola . . . Let me use this as the example. 
Most recently where we were competing head to head with 
Alberta  because Red Deer was the other centre for the 
synchrotron, the light synchotron, which we have just had 
announced  the technical people who did the analysis looked 
at Ontario or Saskatchewan and decided that Saskatoon was the 
better place to do it. 
 
(1445) 
 
You shouldn’t be quite so negative about the advantages that 
we have in Saskatchewan because there are many, many things 
that we do in the province, whether it’s call centres, or I say 
again the synchotron equipment that’s looking at locating in 
Saskatoon, or Cargill putting their crushing plant . . .  
 
And we didn’t put hundreds of millions of dollars. You may say 
well, we put a fertilizer plant in there. But you have to 
remember the deal that you had to give to Cargill to make that 
deal work. 
 
When it came to the crushing plant, our component and what 
the taxpayers put in was training for the people who are going 
to work in the plant. Other than that we competed head to head 
with Alberta  no large grants, no large loans. And they said 
. . . they looked at it, the labour law, the power costs, the gas 
costs in Alberta and Saskatchewan, and said, we’re putting our 
money into Saskatchewan. And so that doesn’t mean that we’re 
going to win every competition; but to say that Saskatchewan’s 
bad and we’ve got to change all our labour law and nobody’s 
coming here flies in the face of what is actually happening. 
 
And I just say to the member opposite that I think there are 
many, many positive things about companies expanding. I know 
with Flexi-coil, when we were dealing with the expansion of 
Flexi-coil in Saskatoon, they too looked at Alberta and North 
Dakota, did analysis on wages, labour law, power, everything, 
cost of living, and decided that Saskatoon was the better place 
to do their expansion. 
 
And so I would be a little careful about getting too negative on 
your home province, because it’s really that kind of an attitude 
that has in many cases hurt communities. And you’ll see this 
around the province, with some communities are flourishing  

and going ahead by leaps and bounds and others, you see them, 
you go to the restaurant and they’re complaining and whining 
and snivelling  those communities are going downhill. 
 
And if I were you, I would get on the side of those people who 
are positive and optimistic about the province. Because I’ll tell 
you, you go around Saskatoon today or some of our 
communities . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  How about Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, Regina too. I’ll tell you I was 
just out this morning at the Canada Farm Progress Show and 
people are walking around with their fingers tucked in the 
suspenders and they feel pretty darn good about what’s going 
on in their province. 
 
And I just urge you guys, if you want to move from five seats 
even over to be the official opposition, try to be a little bit more 
positive. And I say this sincerely. When you started the session 
. . . And I’ll tell you why you people will have won the session 
versus the Liberals, who have more seats, is because of how 
negative they have been about the economy of Saskatchewan. 
And I think you know that. 
 
But you take the Opposition House Leader and the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena coming in here every day, being 
down in the mouth and whining how bad it is. They don’t fit 
with the culture and the mood of the public. 
 
And so my one word of caution, because I know the member 
opposite isn’t a negative person, is get up on the upbeat 
position on the economy and support some of the things that are 
going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well out at 
Farm Progress, as my colleague said, this is the rural people 
who always believe next year is going to be better and they 
always and must always have a positive attitude, particularly in 
light of the government that we have today. It’s in spite of the 
government that we have today that they have this positive 
outlook on life, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned the Cargill agreement with canola, 
and I’d like to just divert to that for a second before I get back 
to Intercontinental at Moose jaw. 
 
How much of a grant did you provide them for training, for the 
development of that plant? And what is the total cost for the 
development of that plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member has raised the issue of 
training for the Cargill project. I don’t have the exact number 
here because that would have come through the department of 
Continuing Education. But I will get that for you. 
 
In my note I have here, I don’t even have the exact wording 
about how that might have taken place. And I don’t have the 
number, but I will get that for you, if in fact there were . . . 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

An Hon. Member:  How much did the whole plant cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  What was the cost of the entire 
plant? Just one minute. Yes, the total cost of the project was 
$53 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you. Mr. Minister, you 
talked about comparing this particular plant to the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer company out west of town here. The 
government in that case didn’t provide them any grants; they 
provided them with a loan guarantee on which Cargill, or the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer company, paid a commercial interest 
rate same as they would pay for a loan guarantee from 
somebody else. I believe it was 2 per cent, but I could be wrong 
on that. But it was the standard commercial rate at the time. 
 
Beyond that point, the government put in $64 million of capital. 
That money has been . . . the value of that investment has 
increased tremendously since that time. In fact as you, Mr. 
Minister, have been standing in this House bragging about what 
such a good corporation that is, what a good enterprise that is; 
in fact it has been expanding. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, that was a good project to be involved in. 
It has not cost the government any money. In fact it has made 
the government significant amounts of return. 
 
When you look at the agreement you entered into with Cargill 
for the canola-crushing plant, you’re providing them grant 
money. Now you’ll get a return out of that from tax money 
when people are working or when the plant makes a profit, but 
there’s no direct return because of the monies invested into that 
particular plant, Mr. Minister. If you look at it in that sense, 
your investment in the canola-crushing plant has returned less 
value than the investment that has been made in the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer company. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, that perhaps when you start comparing 
apples and apples, your comparison is not quite as flexible or as 
good as the previous operation. 
 
The synchotron deal in Saskatoon is another example, Mr. 
Minister, where perhaps it’s the critical mass that has been 
developed in the ‘80s on the electronic side that has created the 
opportunity for that company to move into Saskatoon, to take 
advantage of the people with knowledge, the people with 
expertise, and the community mind-set in Saskatoon that would 
allow this company to grow and to flourish. 
 
Flexi-coil, Mr. Minister, you talk about that company’s 
expansion. I believe that your department also provided them 
with a form of a grant. Or if it wasn’t your department, then it 
was the Education department in a training situation. I wonder 
if you could outline what kind of grants Flexi-coil received 
from the government for their expansion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the member opposite talks 
about the importance of the Saskferco plant, the fertilizer plant 
here in Saskatchewan. I don’t disagree with you. It’s an 
important plant, it employs Saskatchewan people, it makes 
good product. And I have never argued with you about that. 

My point in talking to you was about the advantage, in fact, of 
having these kind of entities in the province, as opposed to 
somewhere else, especially as it would relate to meat processing 
or oilseed crushing, because of the cost of freight of moving 
them to a plant that might be 4 or 500 miles away. It’s just very, 
very expensive. And not only expensive to the farmer, but also 
to the taxpayers who have to build the roads to maintain that 
longer distance of flow of product. 
 
When it comes to the expansion at Flexi-coil, my understanding 
is that the expansion took advantage of the new 9 per cent 
investment tax credit for manufacturing and processing 
investments, and also, as it would relate to the training that we 
talked about for the Cargill plant. These were programs for 
training that were available to companies. These were not 
special, one-off arrangements. Just as the 9 per cent M&P 
(manufacturing and processing) was also not a one-off but 
something that we implemented for all processing and 
manufacturing people in the province. 
 
And I think this is really what the public want to see. And what 
concerns them is when special arrangements are made that give 
advantage, especially if it is in a competitive situation within 
the borders of Saskatchewan. I’m not going to go into the 
former Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, but 
some of the problems we had there was that we were using 
taxpayers’ money in great amounts to allow an investor to use 
other taxpayers’ money to go and invest in a community that 
would compete with, and sometimes actually do in, other, 
existing businesses. 
 
So these are programs that are basically available to everyone in 
a general way. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could perhaps get us the information on what the training 
grants were to Flexi-coil. 
 
The idea that government tax dollars should be used to compete 
against existing commercial interests, I agree with you, is a 
wrong way to go. And I would hope that your government 
would keep that in mind when you look at STC and the 
direction that STC is moving today. STC has moved into the 
freight and express business, which is in direct competition 
with others in the province. There are already other people 
providing freight transportation. There is already others 
providing express courier services. STC, subsidized by CIC, 
Crown Investments Corporation, is moving into those areas that 
are already being provided by commercial interests in this 
province. 
 
And it’s not one commercial interest that has a monopoly, there 
is a variety of people that are providing freight service across 
this province and courier service, express service. And yet 
government dollars are now going to subsidize STC to deliver a 
service that is already being provided by private interest in this 
province. 
 
So when you make that comment, Mr. Minister, I think you 
need to look then at the entire package of your government 
when it comes to dealing with business in this province. I think  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2865 

it’s very important then that you take that message back to the 
minister  I believe it’s the minister from Yorkton that is in 
charge of STC, but I could be wrong on that  but take it back 
to whatever minister is in charge there and point that fact out to 
them, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let’s go back to the Intercontinental agreement. Perhaps your 
department has come up with the numbers, your officials, of the 
baseline for the jobs in Intercontinental. Or do you have to go 
back to the department to get those numbers out. Okay, your 
official is out looking for them, that’s fine. 
 
Perhaps then, Mr. Minister, you could also take a look at the 
costs associated with the training. Who provided the training? 
Was there a training agreement with Intercontinental? If so, 
how much was it for and who provided it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member raised the issue of 
STC, and I think it’s an important one and leads us to the 
Crown review that is going on at the present time. And 
obviously when your government was in power, we had STC, 
or Saskatchewan Transportation Company, which delivered 
service to rural Saskatchewan at a subsidized cost. And there’s 
a lot of discussion about which routes should remain, whether 
we should have more or less, and some runs make a little bit of 
money; most of them lose money. But I think overall it’s 
thought that that service to our rural communities, if you were 
to take it away, would probably be detrimental to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know during the Blakeney era when I was a member in 
rural Saskatchewan, we extended the bus line to some 
communities. I remember Climax and Frontier getting on the 
bus line when they hadn’t been before. Some people argued that 
we shouldn’t have done that because that was costing too much 
money. And then that was cut back a bit when the Devine 
government was in power. 
 
And this debate goes on in that the hearings that are being held, 
that’s one of the issues that is being discussed. Should the 
taxpayers at large be responsible for subsidizing a 
transportation system throughout rural Saskatchewan? Or 
should the bus line go out and try to make some money doing 
courier service or other freight services in order to use that 
revenue base in order to cross-subsidize the transportation that 
is losing money. 
 
(1500) 
 
You have your point of view and I respect and appreciate your 
position. I may not agree with it, but I do respect it because it’s 
one of the many views that are held, and it’s not an individual 
view. There are many, many people who feel as you do. In fact 
there are others who would go further and say look, not only 
shouldn’t STC compete out there for courier service, we 
shouldn’t subsidize it either and we should wrap the whole 
thing up. And those lines that can make money, turn it over to 
the private sector and let STC go. And sell the buses and use 
whatever bit of money you could get back to pay down the debt, 
although with STC I think it might work the other way. 
 

But this is a very good debate because that’s really what the 
Crown review is all about. But I’m not sure that I would agree 
that we shouldn’t have a corporation, if you’re going to have a 
corporation that would go out and broaden its area of revenue 
generation. Although I think the review will help us focus that 
debate in a very, very clear and concise way. 
 
Obviously recommendations will come forward from the 
consultants and the people who are doing the review will 
overlay that with the views of the public in Saskatchewan, 
including the members of the opposition, because I’m hopeful 
that your caucus is putting in submissions to that review 
process. They’ll be taken into serious consideration, and then 
our caucus and cabinet will have to come forward with some 
sort of a concise positioning for our Crowns to position them 
for the next century. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. When it 
comes to broadening the service of STC, I think there is one 
way to do that. If STC wants to get into freight service across 
the province, if they want to get into courier service across the 
province, into express service as well as passengers, Mr. 
Minister, I believe that way is to privatize it. If that’s what they 
want to do, if they want to get in and compete against the 
commercial interests that are already there. 
 
Bus service across this province is very limited. You have to get 
a running rights and only one person has the running rights. So 
in that sense you have a monopoly once the running rights have 
been acquired. STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) 
holds most of the running rights in this province; therefore they 
have a monopoly situation. 
 
In that context they can provide a social service to the province 
even though it may be running at a deficit situation, because 
they’re not competing directly in most cases against another 
commercial interest. They are providing that service as a 
monopoly and as a social service in the same extent that 
SaskPower delivers electricity 400 miles from the other nearest 
customer some place. They do that as a social service, not as a 
commercial interest. 
 
But when you’re going to get into the commercial interest side 
of things, I believe that that’s the wrong place for the Crown 
corporations to be active. If they’re going to be active, then they 
have to operate as a commercial interest, make it or break it 
without the taxpayers’ dollars backing them up to bail them out 
whenever things fail. 
 
So if you’re going to expand STC across the board into all 
forms of transportation  passengers, freight, courier  then 
privatize it and let them compete. If that’s not the case, if 
they’re going to stay away from the commercial side of it and 
the government wants to retain them because of the social value 
they provide in transporting passengers in those monopoly 
areas, well then say so and we can debate that as a separate 
issue. 
 
Because there are opportunities, Mr. Minister. My own 
community, the road that I drive every week to come to Regina, 
STC pulled the bus out. But a private operation started up and  



2866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

is providing more bus service than STC provided  provides 
limited freight service, passenger service, and makes a profit 
doing it, Mr. Minister. Makes a profit and pays taxes besides, 
which is more than STC does. STC is a black hole in which the 
money disappears. 
 
This particular operation, and there are a few private operations 
around the province that do provide service to the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Their subsidy? They don’t have a subsidy . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well they’re still making a profit at 
it. 
 
The minister from Regina Albert North perhaps, I believe  
unless they changed the name on it  it’s a subsidy. If that 
subsidy is in place, that subsidy also goes to STC then; it’s not 
simply limited to individuals . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well I’m sure that the member will want to stand up and ask the 
Economic Development minister some questions to get an 
explanation on it. 
 
Anyways, they’re making a profit on it, Mr. Minister, and 
they’re providing an excellent service. If STC wants to remain 
in the carrying passengers monopoly, I think that’s a separate 
debate. But if they’re going to get in the commercial side, I 
think it needs to be privatized. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps . . . I see your officials are all back 
and perhaps you’ll have the answers now on the 
Intercontinental deal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the baseline for employment 
numbers on which the forgivable loan was made, at the time of 
the agreement and the baseline, the average for that year was 
940 in Saskatoon and 130 in Moose Jaw, for a total of 1,070. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Exactly how 
many jobs under the $5 million loan were to be created under 
that particular agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Up to a maximum of 400. So if you 
can imagine a forgivable loan of $5 million, that would be the 
maximum that would be forgivable. And that would be if 400 
jobs were created and maintained for three years. And I think I 
mentioned earlier that they had to be created within a three-year 
period; actually it’s a two-year period. I just want to get the 
record correct now that I have a briefing note here. It’s 400 
jobs; forgivable at 12,500 per job; have to be created within the 
next 24 months or 2 years; and once created have to be 
maintained for three years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that a 
significant number of these jobs were to have been in place by 
June of this year. I’m not sure if it was June 1 or June 30, July 
1. I wonder if you can give any indication of how many of those 
jobs have been created to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  What I have to tell the member 
opposite is the numbers are averages over the year. And so 
when we say that they’re 1,070, that’s really a block of jobs 
averaged over a year. And on any one day this will vary quite a 
bit because of seasonal availability of product or seasonal  

demand for product. And so this is . . . I could give you some 
numbers that it is today, but it really would be insignificant as it 
would be related to the arrangement because we will do this on 
an annual average basis. 
 
And it’s not unlike, I suppose, job numbers for the province. 
And every month, you know, we get the job numbers and some 
months we’re excited because we’re up 12,000; sometimes 
we’re depressed because we’re down 3,000. But the only 
number that matters at the end of the day is average year over 
year. And I’m sure the member understands that. 
 
At the present time we’re not in a position to make that 
comparison but the only thing I can guarantee you is that if 
there isn’t that increase that we talked about then the loan is 
repayable at commercial interest. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m 
concerned about this particular arrangement because I don’t 
believe there are very many jobs yet created at the Moose Jaw 
plant for this $5 million deal. And fact is the new jobs that may 
have been created at Moose Jaw are mainly jobs that have been 
transferred from the Saskatoon plant, from the closing down of 
one of their lines in that particular plant. 
 
And fact is one of the people who supposedly was being trained 
to take a position in Moose Jaw  the training took place last 
fall  has yet to have been called in to work. He may have 
been called in in the last two weeks which was within the 
period of time . . . the last time I talked to him. But so far they 
hadn’t received a call to go to work yet. He had taken the 
training through SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) at a considerable cost and yet they’re 
sitting there waiting. 
 
A number of the people that were in his class have left the 
province to find work elsewhere or have found perhaps another 
position here  took the training and are no longer available to 
Intercontinental to work because the jobs have never become 
available, Mr. Minister. So what has been happening there? 
Why have the jobs not become available in the time frames that 
they originally outlined? You have all these people that have 
taken the training and yet no jobs are available for them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member opposite worries about 
whether or not the jobs are being created at Intercon or whether 
they’re just being moved from Saskatoon to Moose Jaw. But let 
me tell you that the agreement is based on a combination of the 
two centres and the combination of the two centres at the time 
of the signing was 1,070. So let’s say that 300 jobs moved from 
Saskatoon to Moose Jaw and there’s no net increase in the 
number of jobs, and after three years you’re still at 1,070; then 
it hasn’t cost us any money because the loan is repayable at 
commercial interest. 
 
If at the end of the period there’s 200 new jobs, then $2.5 
million will have to be forgivable. And so the sense that we 
may somehow pay out the money and then never get it back and 
no jobs are created, that can’t happen. The beauty of the deal, if 
there is such a thing in a deal like this, is that if the jobs aren’t 
created and maintained for three years then the money  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2867 

will have to be returned to the coffers of the province on behalf 
of the taxpayers of the province. 
 
Your concern about young people getting jobs is one that is 
shared by every family and every member of the province. And 
I’m sure while it may be more accentuated in the province and 
states that have a very high level of agriculture . . . because as 
you know, with the continued mechanization of farms and 
growing farm size, those areas of the country in the world that 
have the largest farming population are obviously the hardest 
hit when it comes to depopulation. Because as you lose in 
Saskatchewan, which we have for about 40 years, 1,000 farms a 
year, and there’s no sign that that’s going to slow down or 
change . . . It’s been that way since the mid-1930s, every year 
regardless of who was in government  Liberal, Conservative, 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), NDP. Good 
times or in bad, we seem to lose 1,000 farms a year. And 
whether you have big subsidies from the Devine government or 
whether GRIP’s (gross revenue insurance program) there or not 
there, we seem to lose 1,000 farms a year and a lot of it is 
driven by the economy  the world economy of farming — 
which means that farms are getting bigger and bigger and 
bigger, and there’s no sign in sight that that is going to end. 
 
Therefore in Saskatchewan, unlike Manitoba or to a lesser 
extent Alberta, where they have oil to the extent of hundreds of 
times as much as we have in Saskatchewan, even in Manitoba, 
the fact of the matter is that we produce 60 per cent of all the 
grain that Canada exports, and so we are very, very much more 
impacted by rural depopulation than other jurisdictions in 
Canada. 
 
That means that as we lose population from our farms and farm 
workers, that the other side of the economy has to outperform in 
order to even keep us level. And if we’re going to have the 
increase of 30,000 jobs, which we believe is attainable, by the 
end of the year 2000, then it’s got to be driving at a pretty good 
clip. 
 
And the member opposite knows that in the first three years of 
the Partnership for Renewal plan, the economy has created, net, 
about 3,500 jobs a year. And if we keep on from 1996 to the 
end of the year 2000, which is five more years, at a rate of 
4,000 jobs a year, we will hit that number of 30,000 jobs 
between 1992, the initiation of Partnership for Renewal, and 
the end of the year 2000. 
 
That’s our goal and objective that was set by business, working 
people, and government, in partnership. We all signed off on it. 
If anybody’s on the hook, it’s all of us because we all believe 
it’s achievable, and after the first three years we are pretty much 
on target. We’ve got the books of the province balanced, which 
means we should go into an up-tick in terms of the number of 
jobs being created, and we think that’s an achievable goal. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, the danger with the 
farm economy, you talk . . . losing 1,000 jobs since the year 
sometime in the ‘30s. Well, Mr. Minister, I believe in a lot of 
cases, those farmers that were on the land in the 1930s are still 
the farmers that are on the land today, and we’re reaching a 
crisis point in that situation, Mr. Minister. 

You compare oil in Alberta as having such a significant 
economic impact that they can create jobs for their youth to 
keep them in the province and to create an economy that 
continues to grow. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we have that same opportunity in 
Saskatchewan only it’s not oil; it’s uranium. And yet we refuse 
to take the opportunities to develop the economies of the 
uranium industry, to provide the jobs for our youth, and the 
prosperity that could result from any development, secondary 
manufacturing and processing, and retailing of any commodity, 
and that includes uranium, Mr. Minister, not just oil. 
 
You talked about your job creation process  3,500 jobs per 
year for the last three years. Yes, you have created some jobs in 
that time period, Mr. Minister, but what you failed to mention 
was the 16,000 jobs that you had lost in the two years prior to 
that. You have still not quite yet returned back to the 1991 job 
figures. The last figures I remember, you had returned back to 
within about a thousand jobs of the 1991 figures, but you were 
still short about that thousand jobs, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1515) 
 
So if you’re going to create 30,000 new jobs by the year 2000, 
which is only four years away  actually three and a half  
you are going to have to develop some very, very significant 
economic development in this province. And I certainly don’t 
see that happening yet, Mr. Minister. 
 
I certainly wish you well in doing it, because we could certainly 
use the jobs and the prosperity that would result from it, and I 
wish you well on it. And if we can be of any assistance in 
helping to develop that, we certainly are prepared to do so. In 
fact we even have some ideas that we’re prepared to share with 
you on how that might be developed. But from what I see from 
your economic plans right now, it will be a hard stretch, Mr. 
Minister, to develop 30,000 new jobs in another three and a half 
years. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps we can go back to Intercon. We seem 
to be moving back and forth from it a fair amount in the last 
hour or so. I think that I need a little more information on that. 
You’ve given me some numbers to work on, but I’m wondering 
how much subsidy was provided for the training of the 
Intercontinental workers that were to take these 400 jobs that 
will be developed over the three years at Intercontinental? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  In the review that we did, actually 
there was no training dollars involved in the Cargill deal. It was 
only the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Intercon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  On Intercon? Just one minute. On 
that training, I’m still working on that, to the member opposite, 
the member from Souris-Cannington, because it’s from another 
department. I’ll try to get it for you as the day wears on here. If 
not though, be sure to ask Continuing Education because that’s 
where that program is actually located. 
 



2868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

But just in terms of the population  the member mentioned 
that in terms of population, jobs . . . Just looking at the statistics 
on the month in review that is done on population  and this 
goes back all the way to 1976  but in the period from 1976 to 
1982, the population, in that last seven years of the Blakeney 
government, grew every year; the population went up for the 
last seven years. In the first five years of the Conservative 
administration, the population continued to grow. Then it 
decreased for four years. And in the first five years of our 
administration, the population has gone up every year. 
 
And so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . pardon. No, no, it’s gone 
from 1.006 million to a little over 1.018 million. 
 
But these are the kinds of numbers that you look at in this 
province, and so anyone who says they’re going to get elected 
and somehow there’s going to be 2 million people or we’re 
going to create hundreds of thousands of jobs the way Ontario 
or British Columbia . . . I mean all that you know about that 
individual who’s promising that is they’re either telling fibs or 
they’re very naïve. 
 
Because we’ve done economic profiles till you get tired of it, 
with all sorts of optimistic economists and not-so-optimistic 
economists. And what they tell you is that at the extreme, the 
population of Saskatchewan could grow to 1.2 million, on a 
very, very, good set of analysis, by the year 2020, or it could 
shrink to 850,000. And anyone who goes outside of those 
parameters and says somehow they’ve got a plan that’s going to 
put it at 2 million or 5 million, all you know is they don’t know 
very much about the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you can learn about the history, going back for 50 years, 
and I say again, with all sorts of different administrators and 
governments, and what you know is that the population of 
Saskatchewan will likely remain very stable and not very many 
big increases or decreases. 
 
And so I think the member opposite knows that. I know he does 
because he’s well aware of the population base, how it shifts 
from rural to urban; and at that, the urban centres aren’t 
growing rapidly. 
 
But what’s even more important in the long run is the fact that 
the quality of life in Saskatchewan is enviable to anyone else 
anywhere in the world. And he knows that the analysis done by 
the United Nations indicated that Canada, based on their 
criteria, is the best place to raise a family. Those same criteria, 
placed on provinces across Canada, indicate Saskatchewan the 
best place of provinces to raise a family. 
 
One should not be surprised that whether you have 1000,100, or 
1000,200 is not the important thing, but the quality of life. How 
our families are able to cope with the pressures, the 
environment; what’s the living standard, the wage level, when 
all those things are considered  the quality of health care and 
education  Saskatchewan is the best place to raise the family 
in the best country in the world. And that is undeniable. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t think 
anybody who lives in Saskatchewan disagrees that this is  

indeed the place that they would hope to remain to raise their 
families and their children for however long they wish to 
remain here. But unfortunately, economic circumstances, for a 
good many people and indeed too many people, have forced 
them to leave this province. 
 
When you look at the population numbers of this province  
you say around a million  if you look back in the 1930s, we 
were almost at the same numbers. Sixty years ago, Mr. Minister, 
we were almost a million people. Very little has changed, and 
indeed with the ups and downs of the political process in this 
province every party has had an opportunity to take a shot at it, 
and none of them have moved us beyond the million, really. 
 
But when you look at those numbers that you quoted for 
populations, the rises and decreases in them from the 1970 
onward, I think you can draw that curve on a graph. And if you 
took grain prices and drew the curve for grain prices, they 
would follow that same track. 
 
Prices rose during the ‘70s, they stayed high during the early 
‘80s, crashed throughout the mid-‘80s to the early ‘90s, as the 
population dropped. The price of grain started to turn around in 
the early ‘90s and the population has started to rise again. It 
follows almost identical curves, Mr. Minister, as grain prices do 
in this province. 
 
And that relates back to the idea of developing more processing 
here. If we develop more processing here, perhaps we can get 
away from that syndrome of drawers of water and hewers of 
wood, because the processing people are still, in most cases, are 
going to continue to eat. It’s a matter of how much we can sell 
our raw product for. If we can develop it and process it here, we 
would certainly develop a better economy. 
 
The use of energy though, throughout the world, is growing. It’s 
not decreasing and it has never decreased since we started using 
electricity. With uranium, we have a material that we could 
process and develop and then dispose of, which would create a 
significant economic impact in this province. Because the use 
of energy continues to be needed. 
 
With coal-fired operations, Mr. Minister, we do create a 
significant amount of pollution. With coal-fired plants around 
the world, we are creating a very significant amount of 
pollution. Too many of the coal-fired plants around the world 
are old, old technology, are not state-of-the-art, and put out a lot 
of sulphur products when they’re burned. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, if we were to take advantage of the uranium 
we have in this province, to extract it, to refine it and process it, 
to rent it out  not sell it  rent it out to someone to use for 
the generation of electricity, then again take possession of that 
for the disposal of that, Mr. Minister, I believe we have a 
significant opportunity there for economic development, an 
opportunity which we are missing. Because obviously we 
continue to mine the uranium, we continue to extract it from the 
ground, and then it leaves our province  never to be returned, 
never for us to gain another dollar from it. 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2869 

And we have an opportunity, Mr. Minister, in this province to 
do more than just take it out of the ground. We have an 
opportunity to process it here from yellowcake into a material 
that can be used in the electrical plants. We have an opportunity 
after that point to bring it back again for disposal or 
reprocessing, because very little of the actual energy in the 
uranium is used in the initial creation of electricity. It forms a 
coating on the outside of it that seems to impede the processing. 
 
But if we were to reprocess it, we could make a significant 
amount of added prosperity in this province, create a significant 
amount of added wealth in this province which would benefit 
us all, Mr. Minister. So I think that’s one of the areas that your 
government needs to be reviewing and working together with 
AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) to develop in this 
province. Unfortunately it seems that ideology stands in the 
road of that particular process, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would like to read though . . . as I said earlier, we seem to 
move from Intercon off on another track and back again, Mr. 
Minister. I have some numbers here as it relates to the training 
costs at Intercontinental for those people that supposedly the 
jobs are going to be created . . . And a significant amount of 
these dollars though, Mr. Minister, are being provided by this 
government for that training. 
 
I have here a cost for one worker. The instruction costs for that 
particular worker were $2,561; material and supplies for that 
worker, $2,384; administration fees, $168; printing costs, $6; 
agency service fees  I’m not exactly sure what these agency 
service fees are, Mr. Minister, but they’re $19,456. Travel costs 
for this particular student, $178; and this is for the 
meat-processing worker project at Intercontinental Packers. So I 
think it’s very important that we find out if all of these dollars 
are being subsidized by the department, your department or the 
department of further education, Advanced Education. Who’s 
paying these costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We’re going to do that for you and 
. . . but I do want to say and I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk to you 
for a moment about the AECL deal, which I had the privilege of 
renegotiating after the change of the government in 1991. 
 
And to say that we were opposed to the deal is the farthest thing 
from the truth. I was involved with Jake Epp in Ottawa and I 
met with Hugh Segal, the then prime minister’s chief of staff, 
and when we were talking and negotiating the restructuring of 
the deal, I’d like to think that we made a bit better deal than the 
previous administration, but I mean it’s not worth getting into at 
this point. But the deal that had been negotiated by the Devine 
government, we came and renegotiated the deal. 
 
A hundred and fifteen-and-some people worked in a scientific 
community in Saskatoon with a joint partnership. And I say 
again that we were the only provincial government  the only 
provincial government — ever to put money into an AECL 
project. Now anyone who can explain that somehow that’s a 
government that’s opposed to AECL, when we’re the only 
provincial government that put taxpayers’ money into a project, 
seems to baffle most people, how you would accuse us of 
somehow being opposed when we put $20 million on the table,  

unlike Manitoba, Ontario, any other provincial government, 
who left it totally to the federal government to sponsor these 
kind of deals. 
 
I just want to say to the member opposite that we will get the 
training dollars, but what you should know is that training, 
whether it’s SIAST or the universities or continuing education 
at any level, costs a lot of money. And you can say that 
taxpayers has no responsibility for training, but you need only 
look at the graduates coming out of medical school. I think 
there was a study done in one of the Maritime provinces that 
indicate that it cost almost a million dollars to train a doctor. It 
cost the taxpayers a million dollars to train a doctor. You would 
really have to then say, why wouldn’t you train people for other 
professions? What is wrong with training somebody for the 
meat processing industry or other industries if it means a job at 
the end of the line? 
 
And what we’ve done in this government is moved our 
education system, especially in the continuing end of it, to be 
very flexible, that if it’s training that’s holding people back 
from getting jobs, we can now actually take our programs on 
site and train people for a specific job in a specific plant. 
 
And far from being critical of that, I would expect that you, sir, 
as a member of the third party, would be congratulating the 
Department of Education for not being stuck back, as many 
Education departments are in many countries, of training people 
for jobs that don’t exist; to being able to be flexible enough that 
if Cargill or someone needs trained people on the spot, the 
money we’ve put into that education training program results 
100 per cent in a job at the end of the training process. 
 
And for my money, in terms of education and training, I think 
these are the best training dollars that we can put on the table. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed I 
do agree that on-the-job training is an excellent program. I think 
apprenticeship programs should be encouraged. 
 
But one of your statements there is exactly my concern, that 
we’re training people for jobs that don’t exist. At the 
Intercontinental plant yet, I haven’t seen any new jobs starting 
there, any jobs for those people that took the training last fall, 
for which the numbers I quoted were in place for, and yet these 
people, as of two weeks ago or so, were not yet getting jobs 
there. 
 
And I’m not sure how many people went through the training 
program. I believe it was in the neighbourhood of 100 to 150, 
and yet the jobs are not in place yet. They’ve received the 
training, we’ve spent the money on them, and yet the job isn’t 
there. 
 
A significant number of them are leaving the province because 
now that they have the training, they can go some place else and 
do those jobs, or else they’re finding jobs in other sectors in the 
province and they’re not going to be available when these jobs 
come on-line. We’re simply then going to have to turn  



2870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

around and train new people to fill these positions because the 
people that were already trained are no longer available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the member opposite says 
people take their training here and then they leave. I mean I’m 
not sure what he suggests on that issue. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Let’s get the jobs up and going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the jobs, as I say, in terms of 
how many jobs are being created in the province, we’re on 
target  3,500 jobs a year. We’re hoping to move that up to 
4,000 a year, to hit our goal of 30,000 by the end of the year 
2000. 
 
But I think it would be a very, very difficult process to do what 
you say and that is train only people who are going to work in 
the province of Saskatchewan, or somehow monitor them and 
put a collar on them so they can’t go somewhere else. I just 
think that there are many people who move freely, and in fact I 
think very quickly would be in breach of the trade barriers that 
mean people should be able to be mobile in this country and 
move between provinces with their training. 
 
In fact what we’re trying to do is break down even more the 
barriers that disallow labour movement from one jurisdiction to 
the other, or professional people from moving from one 
jurisdiction to the other. For my bet, it seems strange that 
lawyers who get their training in Saskatoon at the university 
have to do anything to go and practise law in Alberta other than 
get a job with a firm. 
 
And I think barriers being removed between provinces really is 
where you should be at, knowing your background, and now to 
come here and say we should put more barriers up to make 
people stay in cubby-holes and they shouldn’t be able to move, 
seems a little strange to me. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well indeed it should, Mr. Minister, 
because I wouldn’t agree to that. And fact is my concern here is 
that we’re training people for specific jobs that you have 
agreed, with a loan, to create and yet those jobs aren’t available. 
That’s what the problem is. 
 
It’s not the fact that the people take their training here and move 
some place else. It’s the fact that you put $5 million on the table 
to create 400 jobs and those jobs have yet to be created. We’ve 
paid out additional money to train people to fulfil those 400 
jobs and the 400 jobs are still not available. That’s where the 
problem lies. 
 
When you talk about people taking training in this province and 
moving elsewhere, people have been our biggest export 
commodity since Saskatchewan reached the first million dollar 
mark some time in the 1930s approximately. That has been our 
biggest export and that’s why we remain at a million people. 
And the training has been provided here and the people who 
leave Saskatchewan become some of the most successful 
people in the world. And we should be proud of that, and we 
should encourage those people though to come back and to 
reinvest in this province. 

But for those people who remain here, you promised 400 new 
jobs for 5 million bucks within the next three years. Some of 
those jobs were scheduled to come on-line this spring and early 
summer, before July 1, and yet those jobs have not yet come 
on-line for the people that have been trained for them. They’re 
sitting there waiting for those jobs — the few that are left that 
have taken the training that haven’t gone elsewhere, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
That’s where the problem lies  in the inability of the company 
you made the agreements with to get the job done and to get 
those jobs on-line. So, Mr. Minister, what are you doing to 
encourage Intercontinental Packers to eventually . . . to get 
those jobs going as quickly as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the indication we have is that 
the jobs are coming on stream. And as I mentioned a number of 
times in the House, that after July 1, there will be a number of 
new jobs created that will pick up those people who are in the 
training program. 
 
And I think if the member . . . This is what everyone is hoping, 
and of course it depends on the economy and the sales and 
exports and all of that. But the hope is that the 400 new jobs 
will be created. And I think by the end of 1996 the picture will 
be that those who are trained will have jobs in the industry. 
 
So I just ask you to be patient. But I do agree that the more jobs 
we can create, the more people we can keep at home, the better 
the system. 
 
My only word of caution is that I think for too long politicians 
in this province . . . and I say this not in any pointed way. But 
really from the early settlement there has been exaggeration of 
what the expectation of the economy should be, all the way if 
you go back to the days of settlement  what some would 
argue  false posters and brochures that were sent to Europe 
showing orchards and various things about Saskatchewan. And 
lo and behold, when the people from eastern Europe got to 
those areas of the province and found that there weren’t 
orchards and that in fact they had to rip out the trees and pull 
out roots in order to plant their crops, and pick stones, they 
were a little bit surprised. 
 
And that then was carried on up to Grant Devine promising to 
build a factory in every town and we remember that promise. I 
think we have to be a little bit careful and a little bit more 
honest in talking to the people about the economy of 
Saskatchewan. And so while I’m optimistic, I think there’s 
balance between that and giving people false hopes built on 
false premisses. 
 
I think everything we do in economic development should be 
done on study, analysis, facts, and I know that’s what the 
member opposite is talking about here and I think the meat 
industry is one of those areas. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 
it’s very easy for politicians to have patience in this particular 
case, after all we have jobs that are guaranteed for the next 
three years, other than the member from North Battleford  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2871 

whose job was cut somewhat shorter . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Now the member from Cypress says he’ll have his job for 
another 20 years. The member from Wood River, I would think 
perhaps his job security has been decreased dramatically. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, patience for the people who took 
the training and are waiting for those jobs is running very thin, 
Mr. Minister. They are the people who must suffer the 
consequences of these jobs not having been made available. 
They took advantage of the training opportunities last fall with 
the expectation that once they had completed their course, there 
would be a job there for them to go to. And that has turned out 
not to be the case. They are the people, Mr. Minister, that you 
need to talk to, to explain to them why they must keep their 
patience up, why they should sit there and wait for Intercon to 
develop those jobs. 
 
Some of those people, Mr. Minister, are the youth of this 
province that will build this province over the next 50 years. 
And some of those people, Mr. Minister, are people that the 
former member . . . the current member from Saskatoon 
Eastview Haultain  just plain Eastview now maybe  who 
while he was minister of Social Services helped to move 
through this training system. They’re sitting there. They’ve 
probably had to go back on social assistance now, Mr. Minister, 
because these jobs have not yet become available. 
 
You need to get those jobs up and moving, Mr. Minister. And 
simply saying have patience — we’ve had patience for over a 
year since this original project was announced prior to the last 
election, and still the jobs have not been created, Mr. Minister. 
How many of these proposed jobs, Mr. Minister, will actually 
be jobs that will move from the plant in Vancouver when it 
shuts down in the next year or two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  None of the jobs that are in 
Vancouver are anticipated to at this point in time  to be 
part of the 400 increase. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you 
please repeat that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’m saying that at the present time, 
none of the jobs that are contemplated at either Saskatoon or 
Moose Jaw have anything to do with Vancouver. Obviously if 
some company, including Intercon, wants to shut down an 
office somewhere else and move it to Saskatchewan, we would 
be more than happy to accept them, as I know the member 
opposite would be. 
 
And I think a good example of that, although one might 
question the business deal that was made around it  as some 
have done here  is Crown Life, where Crown Life obviously 
didn’t please the people in Ontario and Toronto very much. But 
the fact that we have 1,000 new jobs here is a pleasant 
experience for the province of Saskatchewan  or CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) call centre, or the Sears 
call centre. 
 
And so I’m sure the member opposite isn’t saying that he would 
be opposed to jobs moving from Vancouver, and I think if that  

did happen you and I would go there and greet them as they 
came into the province to work here in the meat processing 
industry. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, certainly 
jobs moving into the province, as in the case of Crown Life, 
were indeed welcome to this province. They added another 
aspect to the economy of this province that was more limited 
than it had been previously. We had one major insurance 
company here before and bringing Crown Life added another, 
which diversified our economy. And I believe that the previous 
administration under Grant Devine did an excellent job in 
bringing that particular industry to this province. 
 
But I need to ask, Mr. Minister, when those jobs . . . if they 
come from Vancouver when that plant closes down, as is 
projected to happen  will those jobs, whatever number that 
might be, be classified as the 400 new jobs to be created under 
your $5 million forgivable loan to the Intercontinental group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I have to . . . I was just consulting 
with my officials. Dan, I wonder, could you repeat the essence 
of your question? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, the essence of 
the question was, if the 400 jobs are part of the closing down of 
the Vancouver plant, if that plant closes down in the next two 
years  no, one year, because the agreement was a two-year 
agreement with Intercontinental for the 400 jobs  will they be 
counted as part of the creation of 400 new jobs in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We wouldn’t . . . whether or not 
B.C. (British Columbia) opens or closes, expands, shuts down, 
has really nothing to do with this agreement. All we will 
narrowly do is see whether or not there’s an increase or a 
decrease in the number of jobs. 
 
Where the jobs come from is really immaterial to us. It’s not 
part of the agreement. What we would look at is 1,070. If it 
goes to 1,100, we would pay for 30 jobs; if it goes up by 400, 
we pay for 400. 
 
So it really doesn’t . . . to us it’s an immaterial question where 
the jobs would come from or be created from. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it seems like that’s 
simply paying Intercontinental then to . . . subsidizing them to 
close down their plant in Vancouver and moving the jobs here. 
 
Now if they were closing down the plant in Vancouver and 
moving 400 jobs and they then turned around and created an 
additional 400 jobs, I think you’d have done something 
significant. But simply paying them $5 million to close down 
the plant in Vancouver and move those jobs here, I would have 
to wonder whether or not that wouldn’t be against some 
Intercontinental trade agreement that we have as to poaching of 
jobs from one jurisdiction to another, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I believe that your government has signed some 
agreements that deal with the movement of jobs across the 
province  the attempts by areas such as New Brunswick to go 



2872 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

into other people’s jurisdictions to seek to entice companies to 
move into their area. I believe that there has been some 
agreements signed that would move to prevent that from 
happening, Mr. Minister. Can you comment on that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I want to say to the member 
opposite that so far, 120 people have been trained for the 
increased positions. I don’t think any of these are people who 
have come from British Columbia or anywhere else. There are 
120 positions, Saskatchewan people, and we would anticipate 
and do anticipate that the 400 new jobs would come not from 
Vancouver but from Saskatchewan people who would be 
looking to work in this industry. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  What kind of agreements has your 
government signed, Mr. Minister, related to the poaching of 
jobs from one jurisdiction to another? Have you signed any 
agreements at all? Or what is in place now to discourage that 
from happening. Because we see New Brunswick moving into 
Quebec and Ontario in the past to try and pick up some of those 
corporations that may be considering a move some place, 
looking to see what advantages they can gain. What has your 
government done along that line to prevent that from happening 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  As you know, the interprovincial 
trade barriers agreement that we have worked on for many, 
many months is quite comprehensive when it comes to 
poaching jobs from other areas. It’s also comprehensive in 
terms of penalties and dispute-settling mechanisms that would 
occur. And obviously British Columbia has a dispute going 
with New Brunswick right now. And if there were those kinds 
of concerns, then there are mechanisms to solve the problem. At 
this point in time, obviously there’s no need to be very 
concerned about it because no jobs have come from British 
Columbia. 
 
One would argue whether or not the Devine government could 
do with Crown Life what it did to get them to come here, with 
loans and grants and that kind of thing, under the new trade 
agreement because some might argue that that was poaching 
jobs from another jurisdiction. And the argument of course 
being that a have-not province getting revenue sharing from 
Ontario to Saskatchewan, then using that revenue sharing from 
Ontario to go back to Ontario and offer incentives to people to 
come to Saskatchewan  some would argue that that wasn’t 
quite fair. 
 
I don’t make that argument, but I’m sure there might be 
someone in Ontario who may make the case that Devine was 
actually poaching jobs using revenue sharing to do the trick. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s only . . . 
Okay. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Pringle:  With permission, with leave, to introduce 
guests, Mr. Chairman. 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
thanks to the minister and the opposition for your cooperation. 
We appreciate that. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. Chairman, and through you to 
members of the Assembly, 29 grade 7 students from Caswell 
School in Saskatoon, on behalf of the Minister of Finance, who 
happens to be meeting with the other Finance ministers today, 
and the teacher, Mr. David Forbes, and six chaperons. I’ve not 
been provided with the chaperons’ names, but I want to 
welcome you as well with Mr. Forbes and the students. 
 
This is a great school. I had the pleasure of visiting a class there 
about two months ago, where some of the students were 
debating the issue of welfare reform in the debates, and I might 
add, did a very good job. And all of us were proud of the job 
that you did. 
 
So I’ll be meeting with the students at 4:30, I understand, in 
room 218. And I would invite all members to give this class a 
very warm welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
it’s only poaching if it’s against the rules, if it’s against the law. 
And obviously at that point in time there were no rules against 
it or about the movement of jobs from one jurisdiction to 
another. So in that sense it was not against the process. So it’s 
only poaching if it’s against the rules. 
 
But I hear the member from Regina South chirping from the 
back there as he normally does. He just really wishes that he 
could get up to the front row, but I’m afraid that he’s going to 
have to wait probably three or four elections before that can 
happen because his party will no longer be in power . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it’ll be after the turn of the 
century, and significantly after. He will be like the farmers from 
the 1930s that are still on the land looking for that bumper crop. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to this $5 million grant that was 
given to Intercontinental for them to develop 400 new jobs, will 
the same opportunities be given to other meat processors, be 
that in the feather industry or in the red meat industry in this 
province? You’ve mentioned Thomson Meats; you’ve 
mentioned Drake Meats. Will any of these, perhaps even some 
of the other large organizations such as Burns, that may be 
interested in putting in a plant or expanding a plant in this 
province, will they be given the opportunity to access the same 
amount of money, $12,500 per worker? 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2873 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I want to say to the member 
opposite that when it comes to the processing industry, 
especially companies like Thomson Meat and Drake Meats, the 
poultry industry at Wynyard, I go there on a very regular basis 
and discuss projects with them  I might add, all of which are 
looking at expansion at the present time. We have a very, very 
excellent working relationship with them, and when it comes to 
what they need to do their expansion, whether it’s training or 
export assistance, we have been there and will be there in the 
future. And we deal with these requests as they come forward. 
 
I think it’s fair to say at the present time that we have no 
requests before us. And any kind of requests that come forward 
from the industry are looked at in a serious way. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well would these negotiations have to 
be carried out on an individual basis, one at a time, to negotiate 
such an arrangement, or is such an arrangement available if 
somebody comes to you to seek this kind of an expansion? You 
talk about the Wynyard plant and their operation. When I look 
at the large scale poultry operations I think of your home, Mr. 
Minister, and it’s certainly large enough to carry out a large 
scale poultry operation in it. And perhaps if the mortgage 
payments get a little too large at some point of time, you might 
even consider that, Mr. Minister. 
 
When we look at the hog operation that we discussed earlier, at 
Humboldt, and some of the other hog operations that are being 
proposed around the province that create a significant number 
of jobs, you mention my previous colleague, the member from 
Rosthern at that time, Bill Neudorf as being a significant 
operator in the hog industry. 
 
If any of those came to the department, would they be entitled 
to the $12,500 forgivable loan for job creations? Because when 
you look at the one at Humboldt, that proposal there is to 
generate approximately 20 jobs. Well that would amount to a 
significant amount of money for that individual  a quarter of 
a million dollars approximately. So would that opportunity be 
available to them if they were to approach the department? 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, to 
you and through you to members of this House, I would like to 
introduce to you in the Speaker’s gallery, 30 people  20 
students and 10 adults from the Cabri area. I am personally 
fairly familiar with the Cabri area, having lived in Swift Current 
for numbers of years, and had a lot of good hunting in your part 
of the country. So I know where you live and I appreciate that 
part of the country very well. 
 
These are grade 5 students, and the teacher that is with them is 
Arlene Peltier. We welcome you to Regina and to the 
legislature, and hope that your tour of the legislature, what you  

see happening here and the rest of your activities in Regina will 
make it a meaningful day. Will you join with me in welcoming 
the adults and the students from Cabri, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member asked whether or not 
his colleague from Rosthern would be eligible for a grant from 
government or not. I’m not sure what . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, no, I’m talking about your friend and my 
friend Bill Neudorf. And I remember joking about an incident 
with that member when his tractor went into the dugout. And 
we used to kid him about whether he had a periscope on top of 
the tractor or not, so he could see out when he was in the 
bottom of the dugout. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, the mention of Bill Neudorf, who I say 
respectfully is doing a good job in the hog production area, we 
remember fondly; and was also one of the wise members who 
decided not to run for re-election. That always surprises me 
when people have that kind of wisdom to do that. 
 
But I say to the member quite sincerely, that we have a number 
of programs that companies and manufacture processing are 
eligible for. And I mentioned the 9 per cent remission on E&H 
(education and health) tax that applies to processing and 
manufacturing material. That change we brought in is available 
to everyone. We have training programs. 
 
The issue, as you remember, as it would relate to Intercon, was 
a special situation as it related to the decision on hog 
production, to move our hog production very significantly from 
about 1 million production a year to 2 million production. This 
was seen as a key bottleneck to that kind of expansion and was 
an arrangement that was made in response to that kind of 
pressure. 
 
But if you have people in the industry who have ideas or 
proposals, that’s what our department is all about, is working 
closely with them to try to bring those projects to fruition. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I wonder if I could have leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to welcome our guests from the Cabri area. I too am quite 
familiar with that area having worked for a number of years 
with Mobil Oil at the Success and Fosterton fields. In particular, 
I remember Dean Swanson who was one of my  



2874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

supervisors there who was a resident of Cabri, and Glen 
Koehler who just lived a half a mile from the plant there at 
Fosterton. 
 
I would like to again welcome them. I hope your trip to Regina 
is enjoyable and that you have a good summer. Thank you very 
much for coming in. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
you stated earlier though in the deal with Intercontinental 
Packers that this was not a one-off deal; that it was available to 
anyone who met the criteria basically for this type of thing. That 
this was not a project or a program that was designed 
specifically for Intercontinental Packers. 
 
So I think if it’s not a one-off deal, if it wasn’t designed 
specifically for Intercontinental Packers, then surely someone 
else who’s in . . . let’s limit it right down to the processing side 
of the livestock industry. If someone came to you from the 
processing side of the livestock industry, would they qualify for 
this $12,500 per job that Intercontinental Packers is getting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I would, before I start my 
comments, just like to say hello to our folks from Cabri as well. 
Coming from down in the Shaunavon area, that spot’s pretty 
close to home. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that . . . again, I want to 
explain this and make it very clear, that the reason that this is 
different is because of the strategic positioning that we had for 
processing of pork and processing of livestock in the face of the 
reality that under Ag 2000 we were targeting a hundred per cent 
increase in the hog production in the province. We wanted to 
make sure that the processing piece of the action was in place 
and therefore this arrangement was made. 
 
And as I was explaining, that in a general way that one-off 
arrangements with industry is not the way we have gone in a 
general way. This was seen as a very, very significant piece of 
the action, a bottleneck that we didn’t want to occur in terms of 
processing and kill of pork, and therefore the arrangement was 
made. 
 
And I think it was a very good one because it really is a 
win-win situation for both the company and for the taxpayers. If 
they don’t create the jobs, it doesn’t cost any money. If they 
create the jobs, the $12,000 comes back through the system 
many, many times over very quickly. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite that I think while this 
arrangement may seem to him to be a one-off arrangement, 
obviously it was done in a very strategic way in a strategic  

industry in order to avoid a bottleneck that would occur as our 
hog production increased. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s certainly 
valuable to have those jobs in place if they are ever created, 
because you yet have no indication that those jobs are being 
created or will be created in the next year. 
 
Now if it doesn’t cost anything, if it doesn’t cost anything to 
create these jobs because it’s a loan, because it’s a forgivable 
loan if the jobs are created, why then would you not offer the 
same opportunities to other job creators in this province, to 
someone else who wants to say put in . . . to expand a 
processing plant in the poultry industry? Surely a job in 
Wynyard is just as valuable as a job in Moose Jaw. If a job in 
Moose Jaw is worth $12,500, surely the job in Wynyard is 
worth $12,500. 
 
Or perhaps, Mr. Minister, perhaps the catch is that there’s no 
election coming up right now to have an impact on creating the 
job in Wynyard today rather than a year ago when there was an 
election coming up. And that’s why the jobs were created in 
Moose Jaw at a cost of $12,500 grant . . . forgivable loan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if a job in Moose Jaw is worth $12,500, 
isn’t a job in Wynyard worth $12,500? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate 
clearly, as you well know, obviously this had nothing to do with 
an election. It was an arrangement that was being negotiated for 
some considerable time. 
 
We had consulted with people in the industry across the 
province. We had consulted with farming groups, with the pork 
producers. And I came to the conclusion, as I say again  I 
don’t know how many times I can say this  that first of all if 
the jobs aren’t created, it doesn’t cost anything. 
 
The fact of the matter was that if we hadn’t made the 
arrangement, we saw that there could easily be a bottleneck in 
the system where we would increase our production rapidly in 
the province and then not have the kill plant and the processing 
plant. And we believed, and this is not only the government but 
in consultation with the industry, that this was a necessary step 
to make the process work, and the decision was made. 
 
Now if you’re saying you don’t like the decision, that’s fine. I 
mean you’re perfectly entitled to that. But what I can tell you in 
a very broad and general way . . . now I am worried because the 
critic for the Liberal Party is handing notes to the critic for the 
Conservative Party. That doesn’t really surprise me, but it 
worries me a little bit because the questioning, I think, was 
winding down, and this may breathe new life into an issue that 
was going away. 
 
But seriously, Mr. Member, I want to say to you that you’re 
perfectly entitled to say that we don’t think you should have 
done that. But I want to say that the decision was made based 
on a criteria, a special arrangement, because it was a special  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2875 

circumstance. That it was a targeted area by the Department of 
Agriculture to increase, very dramatically, hog production in 
our province over a short period of time. And we didn’t want to 
get left in the lurch where having increased the production, 
somehow the processing went to another province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I find your 
comments interesting. This was a special arrangement for a 
special circumstance, and yet it’s not a one-off arrangement. It’s 
not just an arrangement for Intercontinental Packers. It’s a 
general arrangement, but it’s only for special arrangements for 
special circumstances. You can’t have it both ways, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Either it is a special arrangement just for Intercontinental 
Packers and is not available to anyone to anybody else, or it is 
available to anybody else. Now you’re trying to say no, no, no, 
it’s not just a special deal with Intercontinental Packers, it could 
have been Drake Meats, it could have been Burns, it could have 
been Maple Leaf Foods, it could have been whoever. Then you 
turn around and say, oh no, no, no, it was a special 
arrangement, a special circumstance because we had a 
bottleneck in a particular industry, Mr. Minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I still contend that if a job in Moose Jaw is 
worth $12,500 just before an election  just before an election, 
because the strike in Moose Jaw had been ongoing for 18 to 24 
months. It’s really a coincidence that that strike ended weeks, 
just a few weeks before the election. And yet it’s just a special 
arrangement, a special circumstance, that you could give $5 
million to Intercontinental Packers just before the election, just 
before their strike ended, again just before the vote. 
 
But it’s not a special . . . it’s not a one-off, it’s not a unique 
circumstance; it’s available to anybody. So does that mean that 
you have to have a strike ongoing for 18 to 24 months that’s 
going to come up in an NDP constituency just before an 
election if you want to get the $12,500 forgivable loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, I really look at this as part of 
our economic development strategy. No, I think this 
arrangement to avoid a bottleneck in the industry will much 
more help your friend Mr. Neudorf, because he will be able to 
have his hogs go into the plant in Saskatoon. If this increase has 
occurred and there’s a bottleneck and he has to ship his hogs, as 
you say, to Los Angeles, nobody can say that he’s better off 
than doing it in Saskatoon. 
 
So the main beneficiary of this is not some constituency in 
Saskatoon, or I’m not quite sure what you’re referring to, but 
will be the farmers in Saskatchewan. The same as the 
arrangement that we made with Cargill or the same arrangement 
you made with Cargill when you did your loan guarantee. And 
so I’m not quite sure what you’re arguing. 
 
On one hand you say we should be doing more arrangements, 
more deals, getting more jobs. We do it, then you’re critical of 
that and say you shouldn’t have done it. You can’t have it both 
ways. Either creating jobs is good and the government should 
have a role to play, or we shouldn’t. But you can’t say to us on 
the one hand when we don’t have a job creation strategy that  

we’re wrong because we should have one, and then when we 
have one, you say you shouldn’t have one. And this is what I 
hear from the member from Kelvington-Wadena as well. And 
sometimes I don’t think I can win with you people. When I 
create jobs, it’s bad, and when I don’t create job, it’s bad. 
 
And so I think we’ve been going back and forth on this one for 
a long, long time. And I say that as well, having chatted with 
both of you about the need to attend a farewell party for a 
certain individual from my department in the next few minutes, 
I’ll take a couple of more questions, and then we’ll turn it over 
to the minister in charge of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management). 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You know 
very well what I’m talking about. You’re the one who said that 
this was not a one-off project, that it was available to others. 
And yet when I query you about that availability, all of a sudden 
it’s a special arrangement with special circumstances. If job 
creation is important, and I believe that it is, it should be done 
though through creating economic environment in the province 
which will allow the jobs to be created rather than direct 
government intervention. But since you want to participate in 
direct government intervention, well then that direct 
government intervention should be available to all those who 
want to create the jobs. 
 
Now if that is the poultry processing plant at Wynyard and they 
want to create a hundred jobs, surely those jobs are of equal 
value to Saskatchewan as the creation of 400 jobs in the pork 
and beef packing industry in Moose Jaw. One job has to be 
equal to another job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I don’t know if they’ve run 
out of questions or if they don’t like my answer. And obviously 
you don’t like my answer because you keep asking me the same 
question again. But I only have one answer, and that is that this 
was seen as a very, very strategic part of the industry . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well call it what you want. 
 
But the fact is, is that we made a decision, I say again, a 
strategic decision that a forgivable loan as the jobs are increased 
in this one area to benefit all the farmers of the province.. . . 
And that’s why it is an industry decision that was supported. 
 
I mean there may have been a lot of people who didn’t like the 
decision, but quite honestly when I go through my file, there 
were many more people saying that this was a good decision — 
to support the industry — than those who opposed. 
 
The other thing is, we did have an election right after it, and one 
of the judgement calls of whether your decision making . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well look at our caucus. How many 
are from rural Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Not many. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Of course there are. There’s more 
rural members than from your caucus, I can guarantee you that. 
And in large part, it is because they like the economic policy.  



2876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

I’m not saying everybody did. Not everybody did. I mean 
obviously in Souris-Cannington and Moosomin we had a few 
little problems, although we’re working on those right now as 
we speak. 
 
But I’m saying to you that again you have every right to 
disagree with that policy or dislike it and try to promote that 
among farmers and other people, that we shouldn’t have done 
it. And that’s fair enough; you’re never going to have 100 per 
cent support for any economic policy or any policy, and I don’t 
expect that. 
 
But I’m telling you why we did it, and I’ve told you a number 
of times and I can’t add much more to the debate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, you 
do have a bit of difficulty in a couple of our constituencies, to 
win there. In fact those few, those very few, NDP supporters in 
my constituency, leave and have to run in Saskatoon Eastview 
to win a seat in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, we will leave that area for another day, as we 
review your answers. 
 
I have a couple of technical . . . one technical question that 
perhaps your officials can answer for me. I’m wondering, does 
your deputy minister use a CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) 
vehicle? Do any other department heads in your department . . . 
are they entitled to CVA vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Actually there are two CVA 
vehicles in the department  my deputy minister and myself. 
And I haven’t done an appraisal on mine recently, but I would 
expect it would have a value of about between 1,000 and 
$1,200 at the present time. And this is a high-miler, as they say. 
I think it was one that your government used for most of its 
term in government. It needs a paint job and a few little odds 
and ends. 
 
But I say this not facetiously, but only to say that the fleet of 
vehicles that we run as executive vehicles, and I know the 
members opposite know that, are not  as some in the press 
call them  luxury cars by anybody’s standard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that 
the previous administration was very frugal when it came to 
automobiles. And I know that those same automobiles have 
deteriorated significantly since 1991 as they move about the 
province on the province’s deteriorating highways. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, again on the CVA vehicles, your deputy is 
entitled to the CVA vehicle; does he actually drive a CVA 
vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, he does have a CVA vehicle. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I gather the minister wants to leave as 
quickly as possible; therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would move at 
the present time that we rise and report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise  

and report progress. 
 
The Chair:  The member from Cannington has already 
moved a motion that we rise and report progress. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
withdraw that motion. 
 
The Chair:  Is it the minister’s intention to continue in the 
Committee of Finance? Then I would suggest that he not 
suggest that we rise, just that we report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  If I could then, I move that we 
report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — We’ll begin by inviting the minister to introduce 
his officials. Before I have you do that, Minister, I just remind 
committee members you were here on April 15 of this year, one 
other time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
have with me today, deputy minister, Stuart Kramer, on my left; 
associate deputy minister of policy and programs division, Les 
Cooke, behind me; assistant deputy minister, management 
services division, Bob Blackwell, to my right; director of parks 
and facilities, Don MacAulay, behind me; and director of 
financial and administrative services, Donna Kellsey, to my left. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good afternoon. And welcome to the 
minister and his aides. I appreciate this opportunity to ask you a 
few questions. And I guess, in particular, this is an area that’s 
fairly interesting to me in particular, I guess. 
 
One question to start off with, and I’d like some information on 
exactly what the methods that are used to arrive at the numbers 
of hunting licences given out in any areas. Like your surveys, 
how are those done? Or do you make a survey once every 
certain number of years and continue on with those? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In response to 
the question, there are a number of ways in which we determine 
seasons, bag limits, and probably the most obvious method is 
aerial surveys in the winter when there’s still snow cover to 
determine deer populations, elk and moose and antelope. We 
also rely on landowners, observers, hunters. We have surveys 
which people report in year after year in a particular area on the 
number of deer, for an example, which are sighted in a 
particular area. 
 
So we do rely on the public as well as the local conservation 
officer, again getting feedback from the public. So we do 
determine this through a number of means. 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2877 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. A question a little more specific. 
We know that a lot of those numbers very often are sensitive to 
climate conditions. And I’m wondering, with this winter having 
been moderately severe in southern Saskatchewan, has that had 
any significant effect on wildlife numbers in southern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly weather does play a big impact. 
The winter which we just came through, in some areas where 
there was a shortage of food, up to 33 per cent of the 
white-tailed deer population did perish. In other pockets where 
food is available, they survived the winter quite well. 
 
Upland game birds also did not fare very well with this past 
winter and the heavy snows. And as you can tell, the weather 
can have positive impacts too. With the increased wetlands and 
water availability, waterfowl numbers are higher than they’ve 
been for probably 20 years. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  One question on upland birds. Is there any 
restocking program in place for the ring-necked pheasant? 
Restocking programs for the pheasant? Because the numbers 
are fairly low. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  After a number of years of restocking 
programs for pheasants, we decided that the money and effort 
put into the restocking was not worth it. However, a number of 
wildlife federation branches and individuals still do some 
restocking. We do have a resident population of pheasants 
around Wood River and Souris Valley area, and we’ve found 
out that the resident birds have acclimatized and their young are 
more apt to survive than released birds. So it’s not part of our 
ongoing program to restock pheasants any more. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  With the changes that are in the works for 
some of the federal legislation, question: does your department 
have any involvement with what used to be considered the 
hunter safety courses and those sorts of things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The hunter safety education programs are 
provincially driven, although the federal government has made 
some requirements to be implemented into the provincial 
programs. We have met those requirements with respect to 
handguns and such like, so we still administer our own hunter 
safety program. And we’re very proud of the successes, with 
well over 100,000 graduates since the program was brought in 
30 years ago. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And I probably was involved in 
teaching one of the first thousand of those hundred thousands 
some 30 years ago. There’s been a bit of a kerfuffle in the group 
that’s the group of instructors for that program right now. And 
I’m wondering, is your department at all involved in trying to 
get all the instructors in the province back onside in an 
instructoring mode? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, during the change-over period, there 
was different . . . we had to incorporate new ideas and systems 
and such like. But I’m happy to report that the operation is 
running well. We’ve got some new instructors; some others 
decided not to continue on. And so we have a very good  

volunteer system and Rick Wyatt is doing a good job in pulling 
this together, and the number of students lined up for the 
program is still encouraging. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. It is rather unfortunate that there 
was that little glitch in the system, because I think the 
Saskatchewan . . . as people in Saskatchewan, we’ve had 
probably what I consider to be the best firearm safety or hunter 
safety program in Canada. And I hope as the negotiations and 
the modifications continue, as you have to work through with 
the federal program, that we’ll be able to dig in our heels 
enough and not lose what’s been just an excellent program 
throughout the past and has been highly successful. And I think 
it’s a program that people in Saskatchewan can be justly proud 
of and what it’s done over the past decades in fact. 
 
Sort of an event that’s happened fairly recently: I believe there 
was a sale of Crown land to the Okanese Band that took place 
very recently. And I’m just . . .The question I have is, when 
these particular sales take place, there’s usually a fair bit of 
reaction in the country in the area right around there, and I’m 
wondering what kind of opposition there was to that particular 
sale that took place recently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, the Okanese Band applied for two 
parcels of land in the Porcupine forest area. One was around 
Round Lake. I think it consists of nine sections  I’m not sure 
of the exact size. But there was considerable opposition to the 
province selling that parcel of land because of the number of 
people involved in the area. 
 
So we as a province have 90 days to get feedback, and after the 
feedback, we recently decided we would not sell that parcel of 
land. 
 
Now the other parcel of land near Mann Lake, we did not get as 
many complaints or feedback on. And we have said yes, the 
band can go and negotiate with the current third-party interest 
people in the area, which basically consists of two trappers and 
an outfitter. And the if the band can successfully negotiate 
settlement with the two trappers and the outfitter, portions of 
that parcel of land may be sold to the band. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
just have a short question . . . welcome to your aides as well. So 
there was some opposition to the sale of the Crown lands in that 
area was there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, the parcel of land around Round Lake, 
there was considerable opposition to that, so that parcel of land 
will not be available for sale. And I should have mentioned, the 
parcel of land surrounding Mann Lake, we will still maintain 
the roads and trail rights of way and the water bodies. If it is 
sold, we’ll still control those. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I understand that they’ll have to negotiate with 
the third-party interests. If they can’t come to some kind of an 
equitable agreement, then it won’t go through; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, that is correct. Third-party interests 
have to be extinguished one way or the other. And if no  



2878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

agreements can be made, then the land will not be sold until 
third-party interests have been dealt with satisfactorily. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Back to a question or two on 
game licences. Two questions: what decides the cost or the 
price on a particular licence and where do the monies go? So, 
for example, I believe if $33 is a common figure that shows up 
in the synopsis, what dictates what the price is and where do the 
monies go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The licence fees are determined by a 
number of factors. For an example, we compare with other 
jurisdictions, we consult with groups like the wildlife federation 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities). And an example of these discussions has 
resulted in . . . (inaudible) . . . deer tags in some zones being 
half of what the buck licence is. So we do look for input from a 
number of areas. The fund is . . . funds themselves, from the 
licences; 30 per cent goes to the fish and wildlife development 
fund, which was started in the early 1970s at the request of the 
wildlife federation, and the remaining 70 per cent goes into 
general revenue. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Moving into the area of 
environment for a while, and specifically The Environmental 
Assessment Act review, a couple of years ago you announced 
with a certain amount of enthusiasm the imminent amendment 
of The Environmental Assessment Act and then these changes 
seem to have been shelved when there was some opposition. 
And usually, whatever direction you take, you will have some 
opposition on that issue, as you’re probably aware of. 
 
But the question I have is, can you outline the reasons why your 
initial amendments were shelved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  You’re certainly correct in saying that we 
were looking at amending the environmental assessment 
legislation a couple of years ago. And what we did when we 
had sort of a proposed package together, we went to the public, 
we met with interest groups as well as the public at large, and 
there just wasn’t the public support to proceed with the 
amendments and the changes, so we simply backed off and we 
are continuing on with what we had. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Coming from a rural, small town area as I do, 
there is a continual concern about property sale that has had old 
fuel tanks on it, like I’m talking within the town boundaries. 
Because in days gone by almost every store in town had some 
sort of underground tank for something or other. And this 
creates a lot of difficulty, when that property is supposed to be 
sold and when the banks get involved, getting their certificate. 
 
I’m wondering where we’re at with that, and if we have a view 
for the future on that situation. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That certainly is a very real problem in 
many communities, is the orphan sites, or contaminated sites 
also, whether it’s underground fuel tanks or waste disposal 
sites. And because many people have perhaps benefited or been  

involved with these sites, we have initiated a study group to 
look at the whole issue of liability. 
 
And we’ve tried to bring in as many stakeholders as we 
possibly could  SARM and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), Dale Botting’s group, the lending 
institutions, the environmental fairness group, service station 
owners  and they are looking and going to be reporting to us 
later this summer, or in the fall, as to how we should proceed. 
 
It certainly isn’t fair for the current resident or occupant of an 
area to pick up the whole bag of expenses in fixing this site. At 
the same time, the rural community doesn’t want the whole bag 
and pay for it all, nor does the province. So we will be getting a 
report back. And that’s a very real problem and I’m pleased you 
raised the issue. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  I think you mentioned the partners you’re 
going to have involved in making some of those decisions and I 
think that’s a good selection there. 
 
The question that I do have is, do you have a time line of sorts 
in place, or at least that you’re aiming at to have this revamped 
process in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We expect this group to report back to us 
this fall sometime. Following that we will be taking their 
recommendations out to the public through a series of public 
meetings, getting feedback. And if there’s a general consensus 
certainly in one direction, we’ll be working towards that. 
 
But our goal is to resolve the environmental problem and also 
do what we can to minimize the impact on the various people 
that have been left holding the bag, so to speak, with these 
properties. So we will be using the public consultation process 
extensively on this. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
this is an area that I had down to discuss. It’s an area that . . . 
even just the other day when I was coming back from my 
constituency and I stopped to fuel up at a small service station 
in the community of Windthorst, and I was talking to the 
proprietor. He’s got a tire shop as well as a fuel bowser, the 
only one in town, I might add. 
 
And his comment was, see that sticker on the wall? That costs 
me $9,000 for nothing. He spent $9,000 to do a bunch of tests 
and whatever, put down. . . And he went to the bank to borrow 
a few thousand dollars just to kind of get on his feet and keep 
things going. The bank wouldn’t even look at him. I think now 
he’s doing actually quite well, but he found that the amount of 
tires that he’s handling and working with tires and trying to 
keep up doesn’t do enough to keep someone at the shop. It’s 
just become a real hassle for him. He’d like to sell; he paid a 
good dollar for it. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, he’s still sitting there, because of 
the regulations that are in place, unable to do anything. And 
many other small retailers around the province are in that 
position. And so I was talking to Bill Ireland. We talked to him 
just the other day. I understand there’s meetings yesterday and  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2879 

today as to coming to some kind of an understanding and 
agreement on this, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I might add that the people I talked to felt a lot more 
comfortable with how the talks have been progressing, and 
maybe that’s an indication that we finally have people in the 
department who have a bit more of an understanding of the 
problems out there and they’re willing to at least listen to the 
stakeholders. And I think you just made a comment about the 
fact. And possibly you, Mr. Minister, come from some of the 
same area I represent, where we have communities that are 
struggling even just to keep a service available in the 
community, and most of it is totally tied to the regulations 
regarding underground storage tanks. 
 
So if I understand you correctly, Mr. Minister, at the present 
time we’ve got a discussion taking place between the 
stakeholders and the department. And once you’re done that 
discussion, you are then going to give people throughout the 
province the opportunity to go through some of the 
recommendations that have come out of the discussion paper, 
and then you will come up with a policy that everyone, I hope, 
can live with. 
 
And I trust in that discussion, Mr. Minister, that you’re not 
immune . . . (inaudible) . . . the fact that if we look at the 
compensation, whether it’s compensation or whether it’s even 
the cost in areas where maybe tanks have to be removed, that 
there is some association to the amount of revenue that is 
derived out of the sale of those products. And I bring up the fact 
that taxation takes a good chunk out of a litre of fuel. And the 
oil companies take a good chunk. And that small retailer is left 
with a very small amount, and yet he’s expected to absorb all 
the costs. 
 
So what I’m asking of you, Mr. Minister, is the discussion 
that’s taking place right now all inclusive? And what I mean by 
that, including all of the concerns that are being raised, even to 
the point that there should be some involvement by the 
stakeholders based on the revenue that is generated by a sale of 
a litre of fuel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes. Again you have certainly hit on an 
issue which is very important to small communities, and it was 
an issue that your government in 1988 cited and first brought in 
the underground fuel tank regulations to deal with this problem. 
And again to . . . working with the people and listening to them, 
including service station owners, we’ve modified these 
regulations a number of times. And in fact many tanks can 
continue to operate as long as they have a test system in place, 
which costs about 250 to $275 per tank to install. 
 
So we’re working with these groups, but you’re certainly 
correct. Bill Albert is one of the members on this committee 
and we will be looking forward to the report. And I think as you 
also identified, every case will be a little different and we need 
to be able to be flexible, to consider things like volume of sales 
and such like. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the hon. member for Swift Current on 
his feet? 

Mr. Wall:  With leave, to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall:  Mr. Chairman, thank you, and thank you to the 
members of the House. I’d like to introduce a constituent of 
mine who is very involved in the home care program in Swift 
Current for a number of years. He also served on the district 
health board and now is with the support branch of the 
Department of Health. I’d like all members to . . . I hope that 
you enjoy the session that you’re watching, Jim. And I’d like all 
of you to make Jim Wallace feel welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister. 
In the discussions that are taking place right now, are they 
discussions simply centred around underground storage tanks or 
are we discussing other areas of concerns regarding 
environmental regulations. I’m talking of storage facilities and 
also waste dumps in communities and the problems that have 
been associated with the changes that have come in place; is 
this an all-inclusive discussion trying to hopefully at the end of 
the day reach . . . come to a consensus as to how we address the 
concerns of the environment and how we handle waste 
management and what have you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, you are correct. It does go beyond 
underground fuel tanks. For example, the Southeast Surface 
Rights Association is on this committee because there’s a 
number of sites around oil and gas wells which perhaps have 
been contaminated, so we want to deal with those. And industry 
sites, industrial sites, spills, so we’re looking at the broader 
range of contaminated sites in general. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. Does that 
include farm yards as well? 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to managing our resources and our 
environment, another concern that was just raised at a 
graduation last week. The community of Windthorst went 
through an extensive program of setting a blue box program up 
in their community and educating the public within the 
community as to bringing disposable and recyclable products 
and making sure that in many cases it was sorted so that 
magazines or clothes or whatever were in different boxes. 
 
And then they would collect those .and I’m not sure if they 
did it on a weekly basis or a monthly basis  and kind of 
stored it. And then they’d get a large truck load and they’d 
bring it in to the city of Regina and there was a . . . I don’t know 
the exact place, but they used to bring this material in and  



2880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

they would be paid for the material, the recyclable material, in 
there. And they were getting about $300 a load when they 
brought it in, which made it more than feasible for them to 
continue to operate this program. Recently, Mr. Minister, they 
brought a load in and they received $30  it didn’t even cover 
the gas. 
 
What I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what has happened to 
change the value of this product and the recycling program 
that’s in place to the point, Mr. Minister, that basically the 
community is saying, what’s the use? Why should we have 
spent all this time, all this effort, this money, spent this money 
to get this program up and running, get the blue boxes, and now 
there's no value in it? We may as well just let the people take it 
out and burn it wherever. It ends up in the ditch or whatever, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Can you tell me what has happened to change this? Has there 
been a move by the department to maybe give all the services to 
SARCAN? 
 
And the reason I raise that is because what’s happened in the 
community of Kipling, they’ve got a recycling bin available 
plus they’ve got a crusher to compact paper materials. And it’s 
. . . like the people of Windthorst are basically saying, is this a 
method whereby the department is saying, well to our 
community, you drive, make the 10-mile trip down to Kipling 
and let SARCAN handle it rather than using a program that’s 
already been set up in your community. 
 
Specifically, what is the response to that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Recycling products is something that the 
public certainly wants to be involved in, from school children to 
homemakers, whatever, and it’s certainly something that we all 
want to do and encourage. And unfortunately with our sparse 
population . . . We take paper recycling for an example. We 
may have a dealer in Regina that has an outlet for paper for 
recycling and if he goes belly-up or moves, then that source or 
that outlet or that vehicle for recycling paper is gone. And that’s 
one disadvantage of having a small population which is 
scattered over a large area. 
 
On the other hand, we have a number of positive recycling 
programs. SARCAN for an example is very successful with 90 
to 95 per cent of the cans returned. And the government  we 
have nothing to do with SARCAN. They’re up and running and 
creating jobs, doing a good job. 
 
And realizing that people do want to be involved in recycling, 
we are very happy to initiate tire recycling as well as used oil 
recycling this year. And again we expect good public 
participation. Another example of recycling is the pesticide 
chemical containers. 
 
So we are doing what we can, and I think we’re doing well, 
although certain areas and products  paper and what not  
the price does fluctuate widely depending upon the availability 
of a market. 
 
(1645) 

Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, in this 
case it’s not specifically something that the department has 
done through regulations, just the fact that they’re dealing with 
a buyer who all of a sudden has found he may not have a 
supplier ready to take the products, so therefore he has adjusted 
his prices accordingly. And if that’s what you’re saying that . . . 
certainly I can pass it on. And the community, maybe they can 
look at other alternatives. If I’m not mistaken, I think Saskatoon 
also has an outlet but I’m not positive on that. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to recycling there are certain 
products that for some reason or other aren’t accepted by 
SARCAN, and I’m not sure whether that’s just a policy they 
have because of the handling of the product. One of them, in 
particular, is a product that we see more and more of, and that’s 
4-litre plastic milk jugs. And it doesn’t take long for a garage to 
fill up with milk jugs. You can get away with some small  
what are they?  10-ounce pop bottles or 16-ounce pop bottles 
or the 2-litre jugs of pop, but these 4-litre milk containers are 
becoming a real nuisance. 
 
And I’m wondering why they are not being recycled. What 
would be the reasons why they would not be accepted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That’s a very good question and it’s been 
raised before. And just last week or the week before, we met 
with the grocery industry, which utilizes these plastic jugs, and 
we are working as quickly as we can to get a recycling process 
going for those, as well as cardboard milk cartons and the 
Tetra-Paks. 
 
So we are working in this direction, and hopefully, within the 
next few months we’ll have some positive announcements on 
those. 
 
Mr. Toth:  What is the reason that they aren’t being recycled 
right now? Is it because we don’t have a deposit on them and 
you’re just trying to work at it . . . work at some kind of an 
understanding regarding a deposit fee to cover the costs of 
recycling it? Or is it, it’s a product that isn’t all that easy to be 
recycled and turned back into some form of reusable product? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly the plastic milk jugs are fairly 
new on the market  a few months or whatever  and we are 
in the process of working out a deposit on them and an avenue 
to recycle them, whether it’s through SARCAN or the supplier 
or whatever. But we are working towards that. 
 
Similarly with Tetra-Pak, we have been charging a fee on 
Tetra-Pak simply to not give them the advantage over the 
market-place, but it looks like somebody has found a way to 
recycle Tetra-Paks and we’re hoping to have some positive 
announcements on those very shortly as well. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Would the concern regarding the milk cartons be 
something about reusing them or just breaking them down? I’m 
not sure. The unfortunate part with milk cartons, unless a 
customer takes and rinses them out well before they haul them 
in, is that you’re not really sure whether you want to have 
somebody swish some water around after about a month later 
and then reuse them. And is that one of the concerns as to  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2881 

whether you reuse them or just compress them and use them in 
another form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, again it’s just a matter of having an 
avenue or a program to recycle them. They would not be reused 
as milk cartons per se unless they were totally recycled. As you 
point out, there’s the health concerns and . . . But it does look 
like we will have a system in place to collect and to reprocess 
these, both the cardboard milk cartons and the plastic jugs. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Coming back to another 
issue that certainly came to the forefront this past winter, and 
that’s regarding wildlife compensation. Mr. Minister, what is 
your department doing presently to address the concerns that 
were raised by producers at a number of meetings around the 
province? 
 
While you stood in the Assembly about a month ago and said 
 or two months ago and said  well just wait, people will get 
out and they’ll harvest this crop and it won’t be as bad as was 
expected. I’ve talked to some of the producers, and I can assure 
you, Mr. Minister, it was worse than some of them expected. It 
wasn’t quite as bad as they thought it might be. 
 
But the facts are with the current prices in some cases versus 
what they would have harvested last fall and what they were 
able to recover this spring, it was about a 50 per cent reduction. 
In the terms of flax, where you took a 15 bushel crop off last 
fall, you’re taking seven bushels off this spring. Not only was it 
a reduction by half, but a downgrade in the quality of the crop 
at almost 8.50 a bushel. That’s a substantial economic loss, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And so I know many producers are actually quite annoyed that 
your deer, the Crown’s livestock, outright damaged their 
resource and something that they were trying to make bill 
payments with this year. And yet we don’t have anything in 
place. 
 
And quite frankly, the current system under crop insurance 
doesn’t address the problem out there. And, Mr. Minister, you 
had mentioned that you’d be working on something. Well it 
doesn’t meet the problem that was associated with last fall. And 
this winter may not be quite as bad as this last fall, although I 
can assure you from what I see even this year from waterfowl, 
there is going to be some producers complaining. 
 
We were just driving over the community of Moosomin the 
other day and there were 100 geese sitting out on a piece of 
land where we haven’t seen geese before, and even right close 
to home. And you know what 100 geese can do in a hurry. 
That’s just a small flock. So some of these other issues are 
going to be coming up. 
 
So where are we today, Mr. Minister? What is the department 
doing? And I’m sure maybe it’s some . . . Through 
consultations with the Department of Agriculture trying to 
design a policy, where are we based on what the wildlife 
federation has recommended in regards to taking some of the 
funds from fees, licence fees, and putting them towards a 
long-term compensation program? And as well as designing  

something that producers can be involved in that would be 
voluntary, that would be an add-on program, that would be . . . 
it wouldn’t be something just amalgamated into Crop Insurance 
that really means nothing. Mr. Minister, can you let us know 
where we are today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, there’s certainly no secret that we had 
deer damage last winter, and we have not forgotten that. And 
we continue to work in programs. Some of our hunting 
regulations will enhance an increased harvest. I might add that 
last hunting season there was a record number of white-tail deer 
harvested in Saskatchewan, well over 50,000 animals. 
 
And one of the things, for an example, that in working with 
SARM and landowners, if written permission is obtained from 
a landowner in the south-east, where traditionally vehicles were 
not allowed off roads, vehicles will be allowed to drive in 
farmers’ fields providing written permission is obtained from 
the landowner. 
 
This will probably contribute towards an increased harvest and 
we will certainly be . . . We’re looking at experimenting with 
lure crops and wildlife development fund lands, again 
incorporating or working with the local wildlife federations to 
help us produce these lure crops. 
 
We are still working on the compensation end. We hope to, by 
the end of July, have an announcement where there will be a 
fund established, again with cooperation with hunters and the 
wildlife federation. So we are certainly working towards this. 
 
Our ongoing programs are providing permanent fencing for 
feed stacks will be in place. What we want to do with haystack 
damage is fix the problem instead of just throwing money at it. 
So we will continue on in that direction as well. 
 
And hopefully all of the crops will be harvested and be in the 
bins. As you say, the prices are very attractive right now. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, my 
colleague has just raised the point. It’s interesting, while we 
were driving down the road, and certainly our area was . . . you 
had to be very careful as you were driving, especially last fall, 
and it’s beginning to show up again in the spring, with regards 
to the number of deer that happen to walk out or run in front of 
you. If you’re fortunate enough to spot them quick enough, 
you’ll miss them. But the fact is when you hit a deer, Mr. 
Minister, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) comes 
along and looks at it. Well it wasn’t your fault  you tried, but 
they cover the damage. 
 
The unfortunate part is while we carry crop insurance or other 
insurance for crops, if the deer happen to come in, it’s . . . 
through no-fault insurance  it wasn’t any fault of your own 
 but sorry we’re not covering, we’re not helping you out. 
 
Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that maybe we need to 
include SGI in compensation for deer damage. It’s offered 
certainly for cars or vehicles travelling the road. Whether or not 
that’s a possibility, it might be something that would be looked 
into. The minister responsible might not appreciate that but I’m  



2882 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

just tossing it out as a suggestion. 
 
The other thing . . . and when we’re talking about 
compensation, while we talk about compensation, Mr. Minister, 
I guess a feeling that I have had is, in addressing the problems 
we have with deer on the roads or deer in farmers’ fields, in the 
crops, or even in stored feed supplies, we have a number of 
acres of land throughout this province that is wildlife 
development land, a land that’s been set aside for wildlife. 
 
We’ve got a program that’s been set up, and to be quite honest, 
it’s totally ludicrous. And I know wildlife members aren’t going 
to agree with me and they’ll say that member from Moosomin is 
way out to lunch  I know this. 
 
Quite frankly, there are some of the wildlife members in my 
area are beginning to see that there might be a point. And when 
I say it’s so ludicrous, it’s a fact that when wildlife comes in, 
picks up some land, the wildlife development fund, the first 
thing they do is take off a quarter section of fence so that 
nobody can put livestock in there. And I find it interesting. I 
drive by pieces . . . patches, or pieces of property where later in 
the summer you’ve got three and four feet high grass sitting in 
there and the deer are out in somebody’s pasture just grazing 
with the livestock. This other grass is grown. They haven’t been 
able to keep up. It’s got old. They don’t like it. They like the 
new stocks. 
 
And so what I would like to know, and I’ve suggested to the 
wildlife members in my area, it’s time we looked at maybe even 
a controlled grazing program. And if wildlife members are so 
set on you can’t have grazing in it, maybe they need to develop 
a program that has controlled grazing. And what I mean by that, 
a limited number of cattle. Deer get along well with cattle, and 
it’s a way of helping the local farmer out as well as maintaining 
an area for wildlife. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Minister, is maybe cultivating a small plot 
on that property of about 30 or 40 acres, putting alfalfa in it, 
and having if you will the local wildlife federation go in and 
harvest that, roll it up, and then set those bales out in there and 
maybe hold some for later on in the year. Rather than the 
department having to go out and take money to buy feed to keep 
deer out of somebody else’s property, you’ve already got your 
own sitting there. We’ve got all this land all over, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if the department’s given any 
thought to something along this line as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  You raise a good point and I guess people 
often focus very narrowly on specific issues. This is an 
example. People figure wildlife are ducks and deer because they 
may perhaps cause a problem. These lands are a place where 
many of our rare and endangered plant species such as yellow 
lady’s slipper survive. These species of plants cannot tolerate 
being trampled by livestock. 
 
Our duck population in many areas, over 90 per cent of the 
duck nests are unsuccessful simply because there’s a lack of 
cover. So these lands provide nesting cover for upland birds,  

songbirds, and waterfowl as well. 
 
Certainly grazing is not totally out of the question; it’s been 
discussed. There’s been lots of debate around the issue, but I 
guess so far, the hunters believe that they’re paying to buy these 
lands and they should have the say in managing it, and probably 
controlled grazing in certain situations would not be a problem. 
 
You have many other people problems though. You have to 
decide who gets the lease. And if it’s a dry year, do you tell the 
landowner he can only put half as many cattle into the lease? 
Who pays for the fencing, and so on and so forth. But our goal 
is to work with landowners, because without the cooperation of 
private landowners in Saskatchewan, we simply will not have a 
valuable and varied wildlife resource. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

 
PRIVILEGE 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2829 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................2829 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................2829 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2851 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2852 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................2852 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................2852, 2873 
  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................2852 
  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................2852 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2852 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2860 
  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................2872 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2873 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2879 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sutherland Celebrates 40th Anniversary of Amalgamation with Saskatoon 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................2852 
 Activities in Humboldt and Muenster 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
 Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
 Lumsden Students Win Awards at National Science Fair 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
 50th Anniversary of Nipawin Rotary Club 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
 Saskatoon Kiwanis Clubs Strengthen Communities 
  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
 Improvements in Regina Coronation Park 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Funding  
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
 Eaglestone Lodge Closure 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2858 
  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................2859 
 Hospital Closures 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................2859 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Social Services  Vote 36 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2830 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................2830, 2832 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2831 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2832 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2837 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Budgetary Expense 
 Social Services  Vote 36 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2841 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2841 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Economic Development  Vote 45 
  Lingenfelter ...................................................................................................................................................................2841, 2860 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2841 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2845 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................2859, 2861 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Environment and Resource Management  Vote 26 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................2876 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................2876, 2878 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2877 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2878 
 


