


















































May 16, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1651 
 May 16, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Southey, 
Cupar, Earl Grey, and Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities the people have signed from are Regina, 
Indian Head, Balgonie, Milestone, and Viscount. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
Prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from the cities of 
Weyburn and Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 
 
The people that have signed this petition are mostly from 
Regina, but also from Lumsden. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition regarding the Plains Health Centre from the 
people of southern Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close to the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition once again is a number of concerned 
citizens from the city of Regina. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 58 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

Minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation regarding the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement, known as CCTA in this document: 
 
1. What dollar value of total Crown projects works has 

come under the CCTA since it was announced on 
March 3, 1995? 

 
2. How many CCTA projects and with what total volume 

have been tendered in urban areas, i.e., population 
centres over 5,000, where the eligible projects are 
greater than $50,000 in size; how many non-union 
contractors have been awarded work on such projects, 
and how many non-union employees have been actually 
working on these CCTA projects in urban areas? 

 
3. How many CCTA projects and with what total volume 

have been tendered in rural areas where the eligible 
projects are greater than $150,000 in size; how many 
non-union contractors have been awarded work on such 
projects, and how many non-union employees have 
been actually working on the CCTA projects in rural 
areas? 

 
4. In total, what percentage of all person-years of 

construction jobs on CCTA-covered projects since 
March 3, 1995 have been non-union? 

 



1652  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

5. As a result of the CCTA’s required pro-union hiring 
sequence, and in light of the limited number of 
unionized contractors and employees in the province, 
i.e., less than 20 per cent of the entire construction 
sector, how many contractors and workers on CCTA 
projects over the last year came from out-of-province? 

 
6. On average, compared to similar-sized projects prior to 

the CCTA, what has been the estimated percentage 
increase in project costs covered by this agreement? 

 
7. Many unionized contractors who work on Crown 

projects covered by the CCTA can undertake name 
hiring whereas non-union contractors under this 
agreement cannot and must accept whatever is sent by 
the union from their out-of-work list. How many 
name-hired unionized employees have been working on 
CCTA projects since this agreement was announced? 

 
8. How many unionized employees who have worked on 

CCTA projects over the past year have been hired from 
outside of the major cities of Regina and Saskatoon; 
what percentage of total unionized labour on CCTA 
projects would this represent? 

 
9. The CCTA established a new group called the 

Construction Opportunities Development Council, 
CODC, to create, support, and promote programs to 
continually enhance the unionized construction 
product. Who is on this council and especially, what 
have been their activities over the last year, or will they 
be required to soon publicly release an annual report on 
these activities? 

 
10. The agreement requires every contractor on a CCTA 

project to pay 21 cents per hour worked in extra fees, 
an extra 5 cents per hour has gone to the building trades 
union, 10 cents per hour has gone to the unionized 
employers’ group, CLR (Construction Labour Relations 
Association), and an extra 6 cents an hour has gone to a 
special fund to finance the work of this new CODC 
mentioned in the previous question. All of these extra 
fees are ultimately borne by the Crown corporations 
through contract payments. On behalf of the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan, how much revenue through these 
extra fees has been collected under the CCTA since 
March 3, 1995 for (a) the CLR, (b) the SPBCTA, and 
(c) the CODC fund? In each of these accounts, how has 
the money been spent? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to introduce two very special people in my life, my 
daughter Tammy and my granddaughter Marissa Danielle. 
Tammy has been nursing in Texas the past two and a half years 
and now is employed at the Provost Hospital. Please help me 
welcome them not only to this Assembly, but back to the  

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
and welcome two members and representatives of the Metis 
Nation of Saskatchewan in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, we have 
Robert Doucette, you know from around Saskatoon, but also 
Dale MacAuley from Cumberland House. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like all people to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I see seated in the west 
gallery is a person whose name is synonymous with libraries 
and development of libraries in Saskatchewan. I refer to Mr. 
George Bothwell, and I would ask the members to wish him a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Marriage of Member for Meadow Lake 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, I 
would like to extend best wishes to the member from Meadow 
Lake on his wedding this afternoon. It is quite obvious that he’s 
volunteered to spend a lot of time working rather closely with 
one particular government official, and it seems to have paid off 
because she has now agreed to be his bride. 
 
When I found out that the nuptials were going to be held in this 
building, Mr. Speaker, I thought that the plans fit rather nicely 
into the member’s goal not to miss a paid day at work. When 
the ceremony reaches a point where it’s asked if anyone objects 
to this marriage, I have the solemn promise of our caucus that 
there will be no heckling. 
 
I, however, will not be responsible for the members of the 
government who know the member from Meadow Lake much 
better than I. 
 
While I would have difficulty wishing long life and prosperity 
to this government, I have no hesitancy, on behalf of my 
colleagues, to extend best wishes to this couple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of Michael Osika 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It is a day of both joy and sorrow. I believe this is the first 
member’s statement I’ve made in this Assembly. I regret the 
occasion upon which I give it. 
 
Just shortly before entering the Assembly, I learned of the 
untimely death of the brother of the Leader of the Opposition, 
and I want to express on behalf of all members of the Assembly 
our sincere condolences. 
 



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

I did not know Michael Osika but I understand that the Leader 
of the Opposition and his brother were close and were an aid 
and a comfort to each other, and hopefully those memories will 
be a comfort to you in the days ahead. Please accept our 
condolences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Record for House Demolition 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mind over matter is a 
phrase we often hear. On Saturday, May 11, 15 male and female 
members of the Aurora Karate Club from Watson, Englefeld, 
St. Brieux, and Prince Albert combined mind and body in their 
successful attempt to break the Guinness Book of World 
Records for demolishing a house. They accomplished the feat 
by using their hands and feet to demolish a seven-room house 
in Watson in just three hours, six minutes, and 50 seconds. 
 
The karate club instructor, Wolfgang Manicke, was the 
organizer of the latest assault on the world’s record. The 
Watson Karate Club members vigorously attacked the house 
and it became quite evident they were well on their way to 
smashing the old record. However, less than two hours into the 
demolition, a gas leak was triggered by a falling wall and time 
out had to be taken while SaskEnergy plugged the leak. The 
delay dashed some of the club’s momentum, but they still 
managed to set a new record. 
 
The club was then joined by three more members who tried 
setting a record for demolishing six buildings in one day. They 
have now set the benchmark by which other records will be 
measured. 
 
Mr. Assembly, I would ask the members of this Assembly to 
join me in congratulating the Watson Karate Club on setting a 
new world record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Head Start Program 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In keeping with 
Child Care Week I believe my statement is timely. 
 
In many ways the most important years in the education of a 
child are the preschool years, the years when kids are prepared 
to learn. If they are comfortable in the school setting they will 
learn. If they are somehow made to feel like outsiders they 
won’t learn. The teachers among us in this Assembly know this 
for a fact. 
 
So I am pleased to recognize a new program in my 
constituency, in the city of Lloydminster. The program is called 
the Aboriginal Head Start Program and it is sponsored and 
operated by the Border City Metis Society. The ideas behind 
this program is quite simple and vital. It will give children ages 
three to four, who are about to enter kindergarten, a head start 
into school. The students will be taught basic skills which will 
help them feel good about themselves, and more importantly, it  

will encourage the attitude that the school experience is a 
positive one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the program also recognizes that parents 
often need to be educated so they can assist their children to be 
educated. The focus is on children and parents preparing for 
kindergarten. Classes will be offered on parenting, budgeting, 
and nutrition. As well there will be cultural and other 
educational workshops. 
 
This is a good idea and I congratulate Myrtle Racette, president 
of the Border City Metis Society, for creating Head Start in 
Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
constituency of Regina Centre is distinctive for many reasons, 
but one that I’m most proud of is the intense feeling of 
community that we cling to within the larger city. Regina 
Centre is truly, in the best sense of the word, a village and our 
village is happy to announce its annual Cathedral Village Arts 
Festival. The festival begins on Queen Victoria’s observed 
birthday, it ends the day after her actual birthday, and it has 
nothing to do with the Queen. However, the dates for this year’s 
festival are May 20 to 25. 
 
And as the festival’s advertising flyer says, “art and community, 
hand in hand; that’s what makes the Cathedral area of Regina 
special,” and the village arts festival is our annual public 
demonstration of this. 
 
As Co-Chair of the art committee, I’ve worked with a group of 
artists to bring two new, exciting events to the festival. One is 
called YART, where various people, some of whom are artists, 
will be creating small theme parks in their yards. And the tour 
of YART will also include 12 pieces of public art in the area. 
The art show, called “Hung Out to Dry,” includes any work of 
art which can be hung from a clothesline. 
 
Music, art, dance, food, and a street bazaar will fill out the 
week. Tour maps and festival schedules are available at the 
Cathedral Community Centre and throughout the 
neighbourhood. 
 
So please join us  it’s a short drive from Moose Jaw  in 
this annual celebration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Kinsmen International Band 
and Chorale Festival 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to share with members three very good reasons for 
visitors, or honeymooners, to come to Moose Jaw this weekend. 
Mr. Speaker, of course it wouldn’t be spring if the Moose Jaw 
Kinsmen International Band and Chorale Festival did not occur. 
 



1654  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

This weekend the 46th annual festival will proudly take place in 
our community: 23 concert bands, 15 choirs, 8 jazz combos, 
and 5 jazz bands will entertain us both Thursday and Friday 
evenings at Peacock auditorium and at open-air concerts on 
Main Street on Saturday afternoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this weekend, folks can head up to the 
Hillcrest Sports Centre on Main Street for our ParkArt 95 
annual arts and crafts festival, featuring a wide variety of high 
quality, original crafts, works of art, along with more music and 
entertainment. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, for those visitors and honeymooners 
who would want to enjoy a pleasant stroll around our historic 
downtown, there’s always the chance to check out our giant 26 
outdoor murals. Only in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, can visitors 
combine these three first-rate attractions in one weekend. 
 
Soon, Mr. Speaker, as you know, our visitors will able to 
explore the historic tunnels of Moose Jaw and to experience the 
geothermal waters of the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa. Mr. 
Speaker, our city is on the move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Green School 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Spring is finally here, and the best way I 
could think of celebrating its long-anticipated arrival was to be 
present yesterday at the W.F. Ready School in my constituency 
as it received a special honour. 
 
W.F. Ready School is now a green school, one of 21 schools in 
Regina that have reached this milestone. For the past three 
months, the entire school worked together to complete over 100 
projects, from planting trees, caring for lawns, to art displays 
and designing T-shirts. 
 
The importance of these projects was to spread the word about 
protecting the environment to others in their community. 
Parents and siblings gathered with the whole school at a 
morning assembly that was organized by Cheryl Ganong. To 
cheer them on, there were green cheerleaders, the Clean Cat 
Rapper, Sonia Erb, and the junior choir, which sang three 
songs, one of which was an adaptation of “I Love Trash.” 
 
To conclude the wonderful assembly, we all joined in to sing an 
adaptation of “This Land is Your Land.” We then all 
reconvened outdoors to plant a tree to commemorate the 
occasion. I would like to extend a word of thanks to principal, 
John Matity, vice-principal, Rick Orban, the students, teachers, 
staff, and parents, who are all doing their part to promote the 
three R’s: reduce, recycle, and reuse. 
 
Thanks also go to Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. Mr. Speaker, to see those smiling faces we all 
know that the future of our environment is indeed in good 
hands. Congratulations to Hawrylak School. Keep green. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
leaked memo confirmed this week what the Liberal opposition 
has been saying for months. Saskatchewan residents heard the 
smoke and mirrors story behind this NDP (New Democrat 
Party) government’s Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement. 
 
They learned of a leaked memo from the Economic 
Development department that warned that the NDP should 
scrap this policy before it started. They heard how this 
government, in spite of these warnings, proceeded with a plan 
that discriminates against non-union firms and has robbed the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan of millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, newspaper articles now appeared in The Calgary 
Herald and the Winnipeg Free Press this week telling people in 
other provinces of this government’s actions. Will the Minister 
of Labour explain what message he believes this sends to bona 
fide construction firms who may now be scared away from 
bidding on projects in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 
knows, the labour environment in Saskatchewan was much 
poisoned by years of disrespect by the members opposite before 
we came to office in 1991. We worked with the construction 
industry and with the labour unions and with people in 
government to try to establish a fair basis from which contracts 
could be tendered in this province. And I can tell you our intent 
is to continue to operate to establish a fair and open place for 
workers and business in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this government spouts 
rhetoric about doing what is in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. They speak constantly about the fact 
that they are pursuing economic and business investment in this 
province. However, the facts speak louder than their hollow 
words. While this government attempts to lure investment to 
Saskatchewan, they’re sending signals which indicate that they 
are arrogant, irresponsible, and don’t know how to conduct 
business properly, and that’s putting it mildly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, word spreads fast in the business community, and 
the reputation of this government has been poisoned. Does the 
minister not understand that potential economic and business 
investment is threatened as long as the CCTA exists? Will the 
minister make a commitment in this House today to scrap this 
union preference policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are 
acquiring the same flair for inconsistency that the old 
government used to have. A couple of days ago in the House, I  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

believe I remember the members opposite complaining about a 
Manitoba contractor getting the low tender on a SaskTel bid in 
Saskatchewan. Today he is saying Manitoba contractors are 
offended by the policy. I can tell you that the policy is 
established to establish a fair basis for cooperation. 
 
But when it comes to chasing jobs away from Saskatchewan, I 
would think the members opposite ought to feel thoroughly 
ashamed by the response they’ve given to one of 
Saskatchewan’s industries, which is Crown Life here, when the 
members opposite have the audacity to stand in this House and 
criticize government policy; when they have irresponsibly 
spoken about a sound Saskatchewan company because they 
wanted to get cheap political press. I can tell you the public can 
read through your insincerity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Summer Employment 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this government has budgeted 
almost $900,000 for the 1996 Partnerships summer employment 
program. It is my understanding that almost 1,800 applications 
were received before the April 15 deadline. Will the Minister of 
Economic Development tell this House whether the funding 
which has been dedicated for the partnership program will 
enable all the applicants to hire students for this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is the fact 
that we have received more applications than we’re able to 
process with the funds that we have allocated for that purpose. 
It would seem that the program is fully subscribed and that 
we’re simply not able to meet the demand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this House is aware that last year 
the government had originally committed $900,000 to the 
partnership program, but during the election year the 
application deadline was extended by more than one month, to 
May 24, and an additional $1 million was approved for the 
program. 
 
In this non-election year, is the minister prepared to make the 
same commitment in this House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it is foolish of course for 
the member to suggest that the election had anything to do with 
it. The fact of the . . . The member finds that funny. I don’t 
frankly see the humour. 
 
The fact of the matter is that we are coping with a budgetary 
problem in 1996 that simply wasn’t with us in 1995. And the 
reason for it is your cousins in Ottawa. 
 
Now we have squeezed and scrimped and saved to try and 
back-fill the federal cut-backs as they relate to health, as they 
relate to post-secondary education, and as they relate to social  

welfare, and we just simply don’t have the money to 
supplement a successful program, as we have. And the member 
can accept that in spite of her obvious cynicism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After an answer like 
that, it’s going to be hard to get serious. But, Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Minister, the president of one of Saskatchewan’s largest 
employers has now joined in condemning your 
union-preference tendering policy. IPSCO president, Roger 
Phillips, says, and I quote: 
 

Only a biased person could view this machiavellian 
deprivation of individual rights as fair. The CCTA is unfair 
to individual workers and a crass example of government 
pandering to special interests with no benefit to the general 
public. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

The Saskatchewan people deserve answers to a couple of 
questions. What extra money, what extra cost, did the 
typical Crown project cost and face? And was it as high as 
30 per cent, foreseen by its own Economic Development 
department? And how many rural, non-union workers lost 
their jobs? 

 
Mr. Minister, I know that you don’t want to answer these kind 
of questions for the opposition because we’ve asked them 
before, but perhaps you would be kind enough to answer these 
questions for one of the more important presidents and one of 
our province’s leading corporate citizens. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  As the member opposite would know, as 
one of the people that created the environment in which unrest 
prevailed in Saskatchewan between the government and labour 
and between business and labour, the member opposite would 
recognize that one of the representatives of business in that 
debate is the member he is quoting. 
 
There are other points of view about how relationships should 
exist. But I want to say to the member opposite that we have 
worked very hard to create a good relationship between workers 
and management in this province. We have engaged a public 
review, and I hope Mr. Phillips took the time to respond to the 
review of the Crown Tendering Agreement. 
 
As I said to the members opposite just a few days ago, we have 
a meeting arranged with Mr. McLauchlan from the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association. The discussions 
continue about how these policies and relationships can be 
improved, and we continue to engage both workers and 
business in establishing a good business climate here in the 
province. 
 



1656  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Changes to Labour Standards 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, your 
remarks seem to be contradicted this morning by the president 
of SaskPower who, in fact, admitted that people were working 
during the 1980s in the Power Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Economic Development 
minister. Mr. Minister, Roger Phillips also says that your 
government may be dedicating more lip-service than action to 
your Partnership for Growth economic strategy. He says 
departments other than Economic Development won’t buy into 
the plan, and bureaucrats in the Labour department have bowled 
through a myriad of anti-competitive, business-strangling 
regulations and policies. That’s pretty strong language, but it’s 
true and this is what he said. 
 
And of course the unions preference policy is one example of 
this, as we saw from that leaked document. Another example is 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) changes to The Labour 
Standards Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have made a commitment to reduce 
government regulations by 25 per cent, and yet we have not 
seen this happening to date. Will you live up to this 
commitment by supporting the private members’ Bill I will 
introduce later today to repeal some of your more oppressive 
changes to The Labour Standards Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, with respect to the question 
as it was finally stated, I suspect we will determine how we vote 
when we see what is proposed. 
 
With respect to the state of the Saskatchewan economy, I think 
the members opposite themselves would acknowledge, as many 
people who used to support the members opposite would 
acknowledge, that the New Democratic government since 1991 
has done a far superior job of creating a business climate in 
Saskatchewan in which both workers and business want to stay. 
And there’s much more respect for the financial and economic 
management in this government than yours will ever see again 
in this century. So I think that speaks for itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addiction Help-line 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the gambling minister. Mr. Minister, a news 
report last night indicated your gambling hot-line is not . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I will ask the hon. member to 
direct the question to a minister responsible for a portfolio and 
to define the portfolio according to the title that the minister 
holds. So if you would just rephrase to which minister you’re 
directing your question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, my question is for the minister in 
charge of Gaming. The news report says that people are very  

often unable to get through, and when they get through they 
usually get an answering service, and very often no one phones 
back. Now this time we can’t blame it on SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is simply unacceptable. When a person gets 
to the point of actually reaching out for help, they need that 
help, and they need it right now. They don’t need to be playing 
telephone tag for several days. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve already seen that calls to your gambling 
line have increased dramatically since the opening of the 
Regina casino. I think we need a little less effort milking your 
new cash cow and a little more effort helping people that are 
looking for help. What steps are you taking to correct these 
problems with your gambling line and ensure that people who 
need help get help? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, it is true that when people 
phone the gambling hot-line, of course occasionally the 
counsellors are on line with other people. So it does happen that 
the counsellor is not immediately available. I think most 
fair-minded and reasonable people would understand that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If the help-line staff are out of the office or on an emergency 
call or talking to somebody, the callers can leave their name and 
number for a call-back, or in an emergency they can stay on the 
line and have the crisis worker paged by the answering service. 
People understand, Mr. Speaker, that the counsellors are not 
always available on a moment’s notice. 
 
I want to say that the number of calls has increased because 
we’ve been encouraging people to call if they do have problems 
with gambling or if they need information, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re taking a very responsible approach, trying to make sure 
that people who may have a gambling problem get help  
something that, for nine years, the party with which the 
member’s associated never took any steps to deal with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Investments Corporation President’s  
Furniture Expenditures 

 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During those 
nine years, there were also no full-time casinos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shortly after the NDP took office, we learned that 
Jack Messer had spent $27,000 renovating his office, making it 
soundproof and putting in a private bathroom. 
 
Apparently Mr. Messer wasn’t the only friend of the Premier 
with expensive tastes. We’ve now learned that Don Ching also 
thought he needed to do some redecorating as the president of 
CIC. He spent $3,500 of taxpayers’ money on a new credenza; 
$6,000 on a new desk; $16,000 on a new wall unit, and it sure 
doesn’t sound like he was shopping at The Brick. Mr. Speaker, 
including PST (provincial sales tax), Don Ching spent 34,823 
taxpayers’ dollars on new furniture while his tenure at CIC. 
 



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

To the minister responsible for CIC: Mr. Minister, do you think 
it’s appropriate that Don Ching should spend almost $35,000 of 
taxpayers’ money on office furniture during this time of 
restraint? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the 
members opposite that I’m not a great furniture buyer so I don’t 
know what the value of things is, but to an old farm boy it 
sounds like lots of money for furniture. 
 
My understanding is that that furniture was purchased in 
agreement with the owner of the facility in which CIC is 
housed. They wanted to retain CIC as a client but needed to 
renovate the facility as well, as CIC was occupying their space. 
And part of their agreement to continue the lease agreement 
with CIC was to provide compensation for the furniture that 
was needed to update the president’s office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 
minister would then supply a copy of that lease. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, during your 
half-hour infomercial back in February, you said your 
government’s commitment to spending cuts and restraint would 
start at the top. Yet we continue to see example after example 
of people, like people . . . where Don Ching, at the highest level 
of your government, is exempted from this restraint. 
 
Mr. Premier, what do you plan to do to address this problem? 
Do you think it’s appropriate that your friend and your new 
hand-picked SaskTel president should spend $35,000 on office 
furniture while he was the president of CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the member 
opposite needed to get through his list of questions. I’d like to 
repeat the answer which he seems to be calling for again — that 
there was an agreement between the owner of the building and 
CIC that they would be compensated for the cost of upgrading 
the president’s office. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government continues to tinker with SaskPower. This 
government is proposing that SaskPower employees have the 
right to enter private residences without permission in almost 
any circumstances. In other words, any time the cabinet sees fit. 
 
How can you explain this? Even our police don’t have this kind 
of sweeping power. Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible 
for SaskPower tell this House if Jack Messer is working 
overtime to draft this government’s legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will say 
to the member opposite that yes, Jack Messer does do a lot of  

overtime work, as does the rest of the management team. They 
have had a very particularly busy year with respect to 
restructuring. So do we get enough hours out of the executive 
team over there? The answer is yes. 
 
With respect to the legislation that is before this House that you 
refer to, you and I will have the opportunity to discuss this 
clause by clause, and I will be very happy to explain to you 
why, for safety reasons, this legislation is required. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that’s 
not the only problem with SaskPower. The government wants to 
give Jack Messer more power. It wants to give him more 
freedom to spend taxpayers’ money. Instead of Jack Messer 
getting approval for spending over $1 million on a transaction, 
they want to let him make that decision without getting an order 
in council from cabinet. 
 
Mr. Minister, with every decision this government makes, they 
are moving further and further away from public accountability. 
This is a sign of an arrogant government. Mr. Minister, will you 
please explain why Jack Messer no longer has to be accountable 
to the public when they decide to spend taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be more 
than pleased to answer that for the member. The fact of the 
matter is the legislation and the amendment to the legislation 
would put SaskPower in the same position as every other 
Crown corporation, in that an expenditure of that amount would 
not be done unilaterally by anyone within that corporation. But 
it would come to the board of directors who are represented 
from people from throughout this province  people who 
understand the nature of the industry, as you quite clearly don’t. 
 
The reason that this is being introduced is so that the 
corporation will have the flexibility to make timely decisions in 
the new environment that it finds itself in  the new, 
deregulated environment that you and the Tory caucus have 
supported in the 1980s. 
 
I want to say that we will continue to run this corporation in the 
best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, and I want to say 
as well, Mr. Speaker, that we can do it, I think, quite capably 
without the help from critic’s criticism when he knows full well 
that this can be debated and discussed in the legislation that’s 
before the House. I wish the member would take the time to 
understand and learn the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Overhead Power Lines 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
farmers in Saskatchewan prepare for spring seeding, many are 
receiving a letter and stickers from SaskPower president, Jack 
Messer. He reminds producers of the safety risks associated  



1658  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

with spring seeding. In particular, he notes that four deaths 
resulted from contact with power lines between 1991 and ’95. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskPower indicate why his 
government eliminated the RUD (rural underground 
distribution) program, a program that is proven to save lives, if 
in fact they recognize that overhead power lines are such a big 
safety concern? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I 
find it really interesting that the member would bring this 
question to the House during question period when we had two 
hours this morning at which he could have asked the cost of the 
program, what kind of public feedback we had, and whether or 
not it was appropriate to make people aware of the fact that 
overhead lines can in fact cause deaths on the farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of questioning really does interest me, 
given the fact that he knows that there were four deaths from 
overhead lines last year, that we are trying to create awareness 
within the people of rural Saskatchewan. We will continue to 
do that because we think it’s a very worthwhile program. And 
instead of nit-picking, silly questions, I wish the member would 
stand up and recognize the fact that this is a very good 
awareness program and support some of the positive initiatives 
that are done by the corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
asked part of these same questions this morning, and I didn’t 
like the answer this morning, so I thought I’d try it again, but I 
don’t like it any better this afternoon. It didn’t get any better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who populate our rural areas question 
the value of a letter to warn them of a danger of overhead 
power lines. A letter and stickers are not going to save lives, but 
the rural underground power program has proven it can and 
does save lives. Rural people are waiting for the minister and 
this government to demonstrate that they are the defender of 
Saskatchewan families, not only the Saskatchewan family of 
Crown corporations. 
 
Aside from the safety element, the RUD program also resulted 
in full-time, well-paying jobs in rural Saskatchewan, and was a 
more cost-effective way of maintaining our power lines. Will 
the minister send a message to the farming families of this 
province telling them that their lives are more important than 
finances and re-establish the RUD program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, the signal and the 
message that I want to send to the people of Saskatchewan  
that is, on a daily basis the Liberal opposition stand in this 
House and ask the government to spend more and more money 
at the same time their colleagues in Ottawa are cutting back in 
funding to the tune of a hundred million-plus for health, 
education, and social services. 

That’s the message, Mr. Speaker, that I want to send to the 
people of Saskatchewan. As well I’d like to send a message to 
the people that this caucus is doing more to destroy business 
and to destroy opportunities for jobs in this province, and 
Crown Life is a good example. And I ask the members of that 
side of the House to sit down and take stock of themselves and 
be a little realistic and be honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan, which quite clearly they’re not willing to do to 
this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Unity Debate 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to first of all welcome the 
Premier back to our province after his trip to Quebec and 
Ontario. Mr. Speaker, like all Canadians, members of our 
caucus are watching events unfold as they relate to national 
unity with an increasing sense of unease. It seems the forces for 
Quebec separation are once again getting ready to do battle in 
yet another attempt to break up our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d simply like to ask the Premier if he can give 
the House his sense of the state of national unity given events 
that have unfolded in the last few days and after his meetings in 
Quebec. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for the question, and before I answer it I would like 
to express my condolences to him and his family with respect to 
the loss of his brother as we just found out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my assessment of the situation is that Canadian 
unity will prevail, is prevailing, as it has in the past. People in 
Quebec are looking for an agenda of reform which is I think in 
some ways very similar to the agenda of reform that people 
outside of Quebec are also looking for. 
 
We can attend to a lot of our problems with respect to national 
unity by making sure that we make administrative arrangements 
where the jurisdictions of the provinces and the federal 
government are truly understood, that we disentangle, we 
eliminate overlap and duplication. There may be other items for 
consideration. 
 
And at this point, those with whom I met  business people, 
significant numbers of business people and other important, 
influential people in the province of Quebec  are searching 
with ideas and concepts which would help us to achieve this 
goal. 
 
I frankly am not as pessimistic as the Leader of the 
Opposition’s question might imply. I think there is a lot of 
innovative thought going on inside Quebec and outside Quebec 
to frame that kind of a package, which may not be a very big 
constitutional package but none the less pertains to the 
functioning of Canada, to prove what I think is the obvious  
namely, Canada works and it’s the best place in all of the world 
in which to live. 



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
people that have heard the Premier’s dissertation, again I’m 
sure they appreciate those comments. 
 
I would like to ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is if he can see a 
role that the province of Saskatchewan may be able to play to 
ensure that this country does not go beyond its unified situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is correct 
to say  and I hope I speak on behalf of every member in this 
Assembly  that this legislature, this government, the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, regardless of ideology and 
differences, believe in a very strong, unified, and strong 
country, a country which really has produced so many of the 
fine things of not only this nation but a leader in other areas of 
the world. There’s no doubt about our commitment. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition asks, what role can the province 
of Saskatchewan play? For the time being I think our role, as I 
see it, is to advance the various concepts and ideas which may 
further the cause of unity, many of which, I repeat again, are not 
strictly related to constitutional issues as we would think about 
them in a classical and traditional way; many of which are 
related to what it means to be a Canadian. 
 
Social policy, which I think is a defining feature of Canadians 
and Canada  social policy, which is a touchstone. It’s not the 
old railway system, the old national policy. I think working on 
the national debt; I think the question of a fair taxation policy; 
making sure that we don’t level down but level up the 
opportunities of working men and women. And doing it without 
necessarily, as I repeat again before I take my place, a large 
series of constitutional conferences. We can do this with just 
common sense application of disentanglement and 
administrative arrangements. 
 
I’m prepared to entertain any concept or idea on behalf of the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan which would achieve 
that broad, general objective and be open to those ideas. And 
I’d be very pleased to hear from the opposition parties and any 
group in Saskatchewan as to what they think we should be 
doing in this province. 
 
But I want to repeat, this country is strong, united, and will 
remain united. I’m convinced of that as a result of my visit to 
Montreal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
introduce a Bill to amend The Labour Standards Act. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:17 p.m. until 2:26 p.m. 
 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  10 
 
Osika Aldridge McLane 
Draude Bjornerud Krawetz 
Gantefoer D’Autremont Heppner 
Goohsen   
 

Nays  30 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen Mitchell 
MacKinnon Shillington Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Lautermilch 
Upshall Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Trew Bradley Lorje 
Scott Nilson Serby 
Stanger Hamilton Murray 
Langford Kasperski Sonntag 
Flavel Murrell Thomson 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day I wish to table a 
correction to the Chief Electoral Officer’s report tabled on 
Tuesday as sessional paper no. 156. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To raise a point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  What is the member’s point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Today in question period there were 
a series of questions raised about matters which are: (a) before 
the House; and (b) before a committee of the House of Crown 
corporations. The member raised a question about SaskPower, 
admitting it was here because he didn’t particularly like the 
answers he got in Crown Corporations, which is a committee of 
the House. 
 
It’s always been my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that where a 
matter is before a committee of the House, it should not be 
raised in the House itself. I refer, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne’s, 
page 133, paragraph 360, which says: 
 

A question may not: 
 
(2) seek information about proceedings in a committee 
which has not yet made its report to the House. 

 
And I would refer, Mr. Speaker, as well to Erskine May, the 
English authority. Although the question period is a little 
different there, I think this rule is the same. And that reads: 
 

Questions are inadmissible which refer to the consideration 
of matters by a parliamentary committee. 



1660  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

So I’d ask Mr. Speaker to take this under advisement. It’s my 
understanding that where matters are before . . . It includes also 
Committee of the Whole. Where something is before 
Committee of the Whole or it’s before Crown Corporations 
Committee, it is not a proper subject to be raised in the House 
in question period. It’s also, I think, bad form. But I think it’s 
against the rules as well. 
 
(1430) 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. I have listened carefully to the 
point of order raised by the Government House Leader. I will 
want to do two things: I want to take time to reflect on the 
points that he has raised and also to review the record, and will 
bring a ruling to the House in due course. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to question no. 96. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 96 is tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Convert question no. 97. 
 
The Speaker:  Question 97 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, It’s my pleasure to 
stand here today on behalf of the member from Redberry and to 
introduce to you and all members of the House, some 32 
students from Hafford School who have travelled at least four 
. . . I would say four, maybe four and a half hours this morning 
to get to Regina and to visit the legislature. 
 
They are here from a grade 8 and 9 class in Hafford. And with 
them is their teacher, Gary Philipchuk; their chaperons, Robert 
Wall, Janet Baraneski; and guest, Deb Succuii. And I will be 
very pleased to meet with them on behalf of the member from 
Redberry later this afternoon. And I’d ask all members to 
welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through  

you I would like to introduce a former MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) who of course is no stranger to all 
members on all sides of the House. 
 
I am referring of course, to Mr. Larry Birkbeck. I believe he was 
the MLA from Moosomin. I welcome him here today and I 
hope that he enjoys the proceedings now as much as he did 
when he sat in this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83  An Act to amend  
The Limitation of Actions Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Limitation of Actions Amendment 
Act, 1996. 
 
This amendment will extend the limitation period for 
Saskatchewan recipients of silicon breast implants until 
December 31, 1998. The extension will ensure that recipients 
are able to take legal action for damages caused by the implants. 
This amendment directly responds to an injustice suffered by 
Saskatchewan residents with silicon breast implants. 
 
A number of Saskatchewan women with silicon breast implants 
chose to pursue their claims against the manufacturer of the 
implants by participating in what was being touted as a global 
settlement of a class action lawsuit in the state of Alabama. 
Under class actions legislation, claimants who participate in a 
class action are not allowed to concurrently pursue individual 
lawsuits. 
 
After agreeing to the global settlement, the manufacturer, Dow 
Corning, filed for chapter 11 protection under United States 
bankruptcy laws. This had the effect of significantly reducing 
the amount of money in the settlement fund. Because of this 
development, the Alabama court unilaterally excluded all 
United States claimants from participating in the fund. The 
rights of Saskatchewan claimants were severely prejudiced by 
this court decision. 
 
When it became clear they would not receive compensation 
through the Alabama settlement, a number of Saskatchewan 
residents jointed a class action suit initiated in British Columbia 
against silicone breast implant manufacturers. 
 
In British Columbia, however, the rights of Saskatchewan 
claimants are again in jeopardy of being prejudiced. In that 
case, the defendants are indicating that they plan to challenge 
the validity of claims by out-of-province residents. It will be 
some time before the British Columbia courts rule on the 
defendants’ claim that the British Columbia courts have no 
jurisdiction to include non-residents in the class action. 
 
If the defendants are unsuccessful in the jurisdictional  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

argument, they have indicated that they will then raise a 
limitation period defence against the non-British Columbia 
residents. Recent case law indicates that the British Columbia 
court will likely apply to Saskatchewan limitation period in this 
case. 
 
The amendments contained in the Bill I am introducing today 
would allow Saskatchewan claimants an opportunity to 
continue to exercise their legal rights and hopefully correct the 
injustice done in Alabama. The defendants affected by the 
extension of the limitation period will not be prejudiced in their 
ability to defend because they are currently defendants in other 
legal actions pertaining to this subject matter. 
 
The women who stand to obtain a benefit from this amendment 
are innocent victims of the American justice system. They were 
pursuing their legal rights prior to the expiration of their 
original limitation period. They quite properly decided that the 
most economical way to pursue their claims was through the 
class action in Alabama. Making this amendment increases the 
likelihood that they will be able to recover in the British 
Columbia class action the damages they have suffered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Limitation of Actions Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when a 
Bill is introduced in the House that will truly benefit 
Saskatchewan people, we must give it our full support. We see 
no reason to argue issues just for the sake of political games, 
especially when there is so much to be gained by offering our 
support. 
 
From our reading of Bill No. 83, An Act to amend The 
Limitations of Actions Act, we believe this is one of those Bills. 
With the passage of this amendment, women throughout 
Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to launch a class action 
lawsuit against a company that manufactured faulty silicone gel 
breast implants. Mr. Speaker, this issue has received a lot of 
attention over the past few years, nationally and internationally. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we believe we are so concerned because it 
touches on the lives of the women in our province. 
 
As members of the Assembly may be aware, over 100,000 
Canadian women have had silicone breast implant surgeries 
before 1992, when implants were banned in Canada and the 
United States. Women were complaining that the implants were 
leaking silicone gel into the body, causing illness and disease. 
 
Dow Corning Corporation, the company that manufactured the 
defective implants, agreed to a global settlement of $4.25 
billion. The problem was, Mr. Speaker, that, although over 
one-half of the implants were sold outside the United States, 
only 3 per cent will be paid to foreign claimants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most distressing fact about this case is Dow 
Corning’s apparent contempt for women, for refusing to warn 
them about the problem in the early stages. 
 

According to an article from The Globe and Mail published last 
December, Dow Corning knew about the problem as early as 
1979. In fact by 1984 the company had received 78 reports 
from doctors who were calling attention to the unexplained 
ruptures. Still the company let the sales continue. This shows a 
complete lack of professional ethics and a complete contempt 
for people. 
 
As we have continued to say in this House, people must be 
treated with compassion and as individuals. They are not 
statistics or financial numbers, and to treat them as such is 
totally unacceptable. 
 
So how does this issue affect Saskatchewan women? According 
to an article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, between 60 and 
70 Saskatchewan women have registered in the global 
settlement. However there is strong indication that many of 
these women may never receive money from Dow Corning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now only Ontario and Quebec allow class 
action suits. Because of this a Canadian distributor of breast 
implants, Bristol-Meyers, agreed to pay women in those 
provinces $28 million. 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation in this province has put 
Saskatchewan women at such a disadvantage, particularly given 
the astronomical costs it would take to launch such a lawsuit 
against a large U.S. company. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am sure everyone in this House will agree, 
we want to make sure Saskatchewan women are receiving their 
fair share of compensation. It’s an issue of compassion and it’s 
an issue of justice. Women whose lives have been radically 
altered by faulty implants deserve our support and our 
protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill proposes amendments to The Limitation 
of Actions Act. In legalese, this means that a section will be 
added which guarantees a person will be governed by a 
limitation period respecting an action that was brought in on or 
before December 31, 1998. This means the Bill will extend the 
time period an individual affected by an injection or insertion 
has to file a claim against an errant company. In other words, 
Saskatchewan women have a better chance of receiving 
compensation for their pain and suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I have made my point clear. As I said 
earlier, our job as opposition is to ensure the people of this 
province are being treated fairly by this government and that 
legislation is progressive and effective. This Bill seems to fit 
within the guidelines; therefore we see no reason to hold this 
Bill up, and I move that Bill 83 be passed to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of 
Information related to Individuals who Pose a Significant 

Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to  



1662  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

move second reading of The Public Disclosure Act. 
 
This Act responds to a matter of serious public concern — what 
kind of information should the police release to the public when 
they become aware that a dangerous offender is residing in their 
community. This government is responding to requests from the 
police to provide them with assistance and support in making 
these difficult decisions. The Bill before us today establishes an 
independent, professional committee to whom the police can go 
for advice regarding disclosure. 
 
The process established in the Bill ensures that the rights of all 
parties involved are considered in making a decision. The Act 
ensures due process for those individuals impacted by public 
notification. It permits and encourages a full and fair 
consideration of the concerns of the community and the rights 
of the offender in making a recommendation regarding 
notification. The Act also extinguishes legal actions against the 
police, members of the committee, and other persons involved 
in the process where actions have been taken in good faith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again Saskatchewan is demonstrating 
leadership in dealing with an important public issue. We are the 
first Canadian jurisdiction to implement such legislation. I am 
confident that it will provide the police with a useful tool to 
assist them in protecting the public. 
 
Taking the legislative approach to this issue enables us to 
eliminate causes of action where decisions are taken in good 
faith. This legislation clearly indicates this government’s 
support for the concept that carefully considered decisions in 
this area should not be challenged. 
 
(1445) 
 
As I have said before, providing a workable, effective process 
to allow public notification where it is deemed necessary is just 
one way to improve how we deal with dangerous offenders in 
our society. 
 
I will continue to work with the federal government, with other 
partners in the justice system, and with concerned and 
committed community members across our province, in 
determining how to best ensure public safety and appropriate, 
effective treatment for dangerous offenders. 
 
For example, section 810.1 of the Criminal Code allows judges 
to order individuals to abide by conditions which could include 
reporting to the police, not attending at certain places where 
children might be found, or other reasonable conditions, if it is 
believed they will commit a sexual offence against a child 
under the age of 14. 
 
I am encouraging the federal Minister of Justice to proceed with 
amendments to expand this section to apply to anyone who it is 
feared will commit a violent or sexual offence. I’m also 
encouraging the federal Minister of Justice to proceed with 
recommendations he has received to implement a new 
sentencing option for offenders who do not meet the dangerous 
offender criteria but who are believed to be a high risk to re-
offend. 

If these offenders are held in jail for their whole sentence they 
are released into the public with no conditions attached. The 
Criminal Code should allow for a period of probation to be 
imposed on such people to follow their release from prison to 
enable supervision of them while they are attempting to become 
re-established in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Public Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who 
Pose a Significant Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
speak on Bill 93 today. Bill 93, a Bill that will protect the 
public from dangerous offenders through public disclosure, in 
my view is long overdue. 
 
I don’t mean that as a criticism of this government specifically. 
Perhaps what I’m doing is criticizing our society generally. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, somewhere along the line I think we got 
off track when it comes to dealing with dangerous criminals  
any criminals, for that matter. Somewhere along the line, the 
rights of those convicted of crimes began to outweigh the 
innocent victims of those crimes. 
 
Anyone can tell you the frustration that exists in the public 
when they see convicts released from prison after serving very 
little time, if they served any time at all. There’s no greater 
frustration than for the victims of these crimes. There is a sense, 
and quite rightly so in my view, that justice is just not being 
done in too many of these cases. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have to have checks in our judicial 
system. The police have to be under close scrutiny to ensure 
rights are not violated. The Justice department has to continue 
to ensure that fair trials are given to those charged with crimes. 
That is being done, and will continue to be done. We should 
expect no less in a free and democratic country. There has to be 
due process and that process should be followed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in following that process and ensuring that 
those charged with crimes are not treated unfairly, we cannot 
overlook the fundamental rights of those in our province and in 
our country who follow the law, those who have respect for 
their fellow man, those who live solid and decent lives. Those 
are the people that cannot be allowed to slip through the cracks 
of our justice system. Those are the people we should be more 
concerned about. 
 
Our system should do what it is intended to do; namely, to keep 
our streets safe, our homes safe, and our lives safe. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not so sure that’s being done as often as should be 
the case. 
 
I know the members in this House are probably getting tired of 
me recounting my days as a police officer. But I want to relate 
to everyone here today the frustration members of any police 
force feel when they see convicted criminals receive light 
sentences, or otherwise who are treated with kid gloves by the 
Justice department, by our justice system. At times, for police  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

officers trying hard to keep us all safe, it seems that our system 
works against them instead of working with them. 
 
I don’t think there’s any greater frustration for a police officer 
than to see a criminal let off on a technicality. And it’s also 
frustrating when police feel handcuffed by the very system they 
are in place to enforce. Too often in our society, the police 
come under fire for the work that they do. It seems there are 
some who take any opportunity to point the finger of blame at 
our brave policemen and women. 
 
There is a segment in our society  some may call them 
bleeding hearts  that view police as the enemy, out to get the 
public. Any opportunity to call for a public inquiry is seized 
upon when it comes to the actions of the police. Any 
opportunity to paint the police in the same light as the criminal 
is taken. This is truly regrettable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our police officers aren’t in place to be 
commended every time they turn around. They aren’t in place to 
get high praise each and every day. But they are in place to do a 
job, and anything we can do as legislators, can do to help them 
with that job, should be done and it should be done quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the finest men and women I have ever 
worked with  present company excluded, of course  have 
been in the police force; 99.9 per cent of these people are the 
most upstanding, decent, dedicated people you’ll ever meet. 
They will go above and beyond the call of duty to protect our 
citizens from those who have little decency and no conscience. 
 
All they ask from their lawmakers is that they not be the ones 
who are handcuffed. They ask that they are allowed to carry on 
their main objective of protection, as unfettered as possible by 
regulations. Yes, there have to be safeguards in place, but the 
key word here is safe. We cannot do anything that hinders our 
police in keeping our people safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there are people out there who are very 
suspicious of their police. There are people out there who do 
not trust their police. Perhaps they have had something happen 
to them in the past; perhaps they feel they have been mistreated 
in the past or their family members have been mistreated by the 
police. That is truly regrettable. 
 
And yes, there are some in our society who probably have been 
mistreated by individual police officers. Like in any profession, 
whether it be accounting, whether it be law, or even politics, 
there are some bad apples who taint the vast majority who are 
honest and totally above reproach. Unfortunately these are the 
people who get most of the attention. 
 
The police officer who simply goes to work everyday and does 
his or her job, and does it well, doesn’t receive much attention 
for it. But like in politics, those who break the rules receive the 
glare of publicity and the public light shines on them all, harms 
them all in the eyes of the public  that, I feel, is unfair. But I 
suppose there is a reality we have to live with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we as legislators can do our best to make sure  

our police are given the authority, the power they need, to do 
their jobs in the most effective way possible. 
 
That’s why I was so adamant about a public disclosure law. The 
police have to be given the tools they need to tell the public that 
a potentially dangerous person is in their midst. The people 
have been asking for it and they deserve that type of protection 
at the very least. 
 
Again there are some who will probably be adamantly opposed 
to this type of provision. There are some that will say, when a 
convict has served his or her time that should be the end of it. 
Once they are released from prison, they should be allowed to 
continue on with their life as any free citizen should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t totally agree. I don’t agree, Mr. Speaker, 
because for any victim of a violent crime there is a life sentence 
attached. A family who has lost a parent or a child to violent 
crime will never fully recover. A woman who has been raped 
never fully recovers from this ultimate form of violation. For 
these people, the trauma carries on long after the attacker is 
dealt with in the courts. 
 
So is it unreasonable to think the perpetrators of these forms of 
heinous crimes should be let off any easier? Should they, after 
serving a prison sentence, be allowed to carry on with their 
lives free in the knowledge that their neighbours or co-workers 
know nothing about their violations against society? 
 
Do parents not have the right to know that there is a potentially 
dangerous person lurking in their neighbourhood? Do they not 
have the right to keep their kids safe? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 
 no, I know  that they do have that right. And it is up to us 
in this House to ensure that they do have the right. 
 
There are those whose hearts bleed for the criminal but, Mr. 
Speaker, my heart bleeds for the victims. I make no apologies 
for that nor should anyone, because for too long now victims of 
violent crimes have been without rights. They have been 
virtually ignored by our system. The time for this injustice has 
got to come to an end. And in some small way, I believe with 
this Bill, we are finally, at long last moving in that direction. 
 
Like I’ve said, throughout my life in and out of the police force, 
there comes a time when a criminal’s rights has simply got to 
give way to the rights of the victim  to the rights of society. 
How can we call ourselves a caring society if this does not 
happen? Quite simply, we can’t. If this is not done, how can we 
as legislators ever look at the victims of crime or their survivors 
in the eye again. Again, we couldn’t. 
 
We in this House are honoured by the fact our voters sent us 
here, and we should know that in placing that trust in us, they 
are asking us to do what is right in this place. I believe, with the 
movement towards public disclosure of dangerous offenders, 
we are doing what is right. At long last, the victims, the 
law-abiding members of our communities, come out at the top 
of the heap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had a great deal of time to study Bill 93. 
In ideal circumstances, I would like to personally gather  



1664  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

opinions from law enforcement officials and others whose 
opinions I value a great deal. But what I’ve seen so far, I 
believe the Bill strikes a fair balance between the rights of 
criminals and the rights of the rest of us. 
 
There are some concerns, of course, whenever a committee of 
any type is struck, that the entire system along the way will get 
bogged down in red tape. But I will heed the opinion of Chief 
Maguire when he says he is satisfied with the Bill. 
 
The most important aspect of this legislation is that the police 
can feel free to release pertinent information on released 
convicts they see as potential threats to our safety, and they can 
do so without fear of legal action being taken against them. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the handcuffs have come off; at least, they’ve 
been loosened somewhat. And I applaud this of course and so 
too, I believe, do the people of Saskatchewan, the vast majority 
of them at any rate. 
 
But I also urge the Minister of Justice to carefully monitor the 
system he is proposing in this Bill because, Mr. Speaker, once 
this Bill is passed, we can’t think our work is done there. If the 
process that is to be put in place turns out to be ineffective or at 
least not completely effective, we will have to revisit this issue 
at a future date. Because, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
legislation of this type, we have to make sure we are as near to 
perfect as possible. When we are dealing with legislation of this 
type there is very little room for error. And if there is room for 
error it must be on the side of the victims or potential victims. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I believe at this point in time the Bill, as 
proposed by our very able Minister of Justice, is at least worth a 
try. And I believe it should be put into place as soon as 
possible. As I said when I raised this issue in the House earlier 
in the session, we have to move on this as quickly as possible. 
 
For that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to give the minister and the 
government the benefit of the doubt on this Bill. Like I said, I 
would have liked to have had more time to study the details of 
the Bill to a greater extent and to gather opinions on it, but I 
also think time is of the essence when it comes to this type of 
legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition caucus are not going to 
hold up passage of Bill 93 any longer than is absolutely 
necessary. We will ask for some clarifications in Committee of 
the Whole, but at this point we see no reason to hold up this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I just want to say  I want to say all of 
us in this House should be proud to pass this Bill. It is a Bill 
that people have been asking for and it is a Bill that they 
deserve. With this legislation, Mr. Speaker, I believe we are in 
fact doing our job as legislators. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 58  An Act to 
amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential 
amendment be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
we adjourned debate on this Bill we wanted to take time to 
gather some more opinions about the Bill and to kind of 
understand what this Bill will mean to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve already raised some concerns on behalf 
of our constituents and they’re concerns that still stand. 
However, according to most of our legal opinions, some of 
these concerns may prove to be unfounded. When we discuss 
the Bill further in the House, we will make sure of this, and we 
will ask the government to clarify some of the specific clauses 
in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our greatest apprehension still surrounds the issue 
of municipal tax bases  tax bases that help sustain 
communities throughout this province. You see, Mr. Speaker, 
we actually care about the municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
While it appears that the members opposite continue to chip 
away at the very structure of our communities, we will fight for 
their survival. Every time they turn a deaf ear to a community 
that needs to be heard, Mr. Speaker, we will listen. Because 
unlike the government, we believe that municipalities have 
valid concerns that must be addressed. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they have been disappointed time 
and time again as this government chooses not to listen. When 
they see the government introduce a Bill like this one, what are 
they supposed to expect? 
 
They have watched this government systematically dismantle 
health care then turn their backs on anyone who dares to 
protest. They are watching as this NDP government forces 
schools to shut down, fire teaching staff, and make severe cuts 
to programs. And of course, Mr. Speaker, our real concern is 
for the very children that need to be educated in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They are being forced to watch as the highways throughout this 
province crumble under an uncaring, unfeeling government to 
the point of where now we have an open . . . or a 1-800 number, 
Mr. Speaker, that invites calls from motorists and tourists 
pointing out where the potholes are in the province. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Everywhere. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And that is of course, everywhere. 
 
Do the members opposite really believe that people will 
continue to trust anything that they say if they continue to chip 
away at our very system of social well-being? 
 



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

Mr. Speaker, this government is like a child pulling legs off a 
spider. They continue to tear off one limb at a time until our 
province is completely crippled. And when we can’t move 
forward any more, we will die. Stagnant societies can’t exist 
indefinitely, but a stagnant society is exactly what this 
government is creating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, don’t municipalities have a right to be worried? 
Don’t the citizens in towns, villages, and RMs (rural 
municipality), hamlets throughout Saskatchewan have a very 
good reason to fear for their communities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes I think this government forgets that 
there are actually people living in those communities  people 
trying to make a decent living for themselves and for their 
children. Municipalities aren’t just a circle on a map to be 
pinpointed then axed by this government. They are communities 
that were formed by cooperation and compassion  traits that 
have long been forgotten by this government, it would appear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know and as all the members in this 
Assembly know, municipalities are all ready cash-strapped. And 
as this government cuts $20 million, the situation is destined to 
get worse. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we want to be absolutely 
100 per cent sure that this Bill won’t further erode municipal 
tax bases. We want the Justice minister or the Minister of 
Municipal Government to stand up in this House and assure 
municipalities that if this Bill is passed, it will have no 
damaging effect on their tax base. 
 
As you may remember, Mr. Speaker, we raised some concerns 
about the provisions in this Bill that will allow Indian bands to 
purchase non-reserve land in their own name. Currently they 
must go through a corporation, and I want to reiterate that we 
have no problem with Indian bands owning land in their name 
as long as they continue to contribute to the municipality. 
 
We have listened to municipalities, and we must pass on their 
concerns to this Assembly as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should tell the members opposite our legal 
opinions have helped to alleviate some of these fears. They say 
that this land would be subject to municipal property taxes, 
failing some special arrangement with the municipality. 
 
However they have also pointed out that some first nation bands 
are buying property in cities and towns and then seeking to 
convert them to reserve status. Mr. Speaker, we are aware that 
the conversion to reserve status is long and complicated, and I 
know there are ways that municipalities will accept the 
conversion. For example, one of the area bands has purchased 
land in or near Sutherland and they have signed a deal with the 
city of Saskatoon for services. I understand that they have 
agreed to pay the city for services in lieu of taxes. 
 
And the same thing has happened of course in Fort Qu’Appelle; 
a mutual agreement between responsible people was reached 
through a positive process of discussion and consultation, 
which is very important. So you see, Mr. Speaker, I guess it can 
be done. 

This must be a different kind of consultation than the 
government’s where they talk and people are forced to listen. 
This kind of consultation actually produces results that are good 
for both parties involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would hope that the passage of this Bill would 
not affect the whole reserve conversion process. That would be 
completely counterproductive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are well aware, reserve status means 
special taxation treatment as outlined in section 87 of the Indian 
Act. This section states that: 
 

(1) notwithstanding any other Act of parliament or any Act 
of the legislature of a province but subject to section 83, 
the following property is exempt from taxation, (namely): 
 

(a) the interests of an Indian or a band in reserve lands or 
surrendered lands; and 
 
(b) the personal property of an Indian or a band situated 
on a reserve. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would assume that the changes proposed 
in this Bill will not affect this Act in any way whatsoever. This 
is something we will be asking the government to clarify. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite share some 
concerns about the issue of taxation. The Finance minister 
herself has made the NDP position very clear. In an article from 
the Star-Phoenix on May 3, the Finance minister is quoted as 
saying: 
 

“If they take one part of the tax system to court  the 
on-reserve part  then we reserve the right, quite rightly, 
to take the whole tax regime to court including the 
off-reserve exemption. That’s the position we’ve always 
taken.” 
 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the government will want to 
be completely honest and open when we discuss this Bill 
further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we let this Bill pass to the committee stage, 
I must mention my surprise over some of the issues that this 
Bill doesn’t touch on. There are of course other problems with 
The Land Titles Act that this government didn’t seem to want to 
amend or attempt to amend. 
 
For example, the issue of computerization. There hasn’t been 
any meaningful discussion about our system moving into the 
computer world. It’s something that has taken place in Alberta 
and appears to be a positive step. And I guess I know that . . . or 
we all know that the old quill pen is a comforting image for 
legal offices, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not an efficient system in our 
highly technology-based society. If this government is looking 
to improve efficiency and to save taxpayers money in the long 
run, is this not an issue worth considering? 
 
Besides the need for faster, more efficient service, the biggest 
complaint about Land Titles is the high cost of service. Fees in  



1666  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

other provinces are far more reasonable than the fees we charge 
here. I think the government needs to re-evaluate the role of 
Land Titles in this province. Is it a service for the people living 
in this province or is it a cash cow for the government coffers? 
Aren’t people already giving enough to this government 
through the high utility rates and of course the oppressive sales 
tax that we have in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already spoken on this Bill a number of 
times and I think we have made our position clear. As I 
mentioned today, we’ll have a number of questions for the 
government as the Bill moves on and before it passes into law. I 
guess we look forward to hearing their answers to some of our 
questions and collecting the assurances on behalf of the 
municipalities and the people throughout the province. 
 
The Speaker:  I must acknowledge that the Minister of 
Justice would be closing debate, and if any member wishes to 
speak to this Bill before I recognize him, would he please do so 
now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I 
was interested to listen to the remarks of the member for Arm 
River. And he said that the position of the Liberal Party should 
be clear following those that paid attention to his comments. 
 
I’m simply amazed, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand, he says that 
we’ve received legal opinions on this review of the Bill; we 
have no concerns on the basis of these legal opinions. However 
the member goes on to fulminate at length about perceived 
concerns that he says rural municipalities have with the 
government  concerns that people in rural Saskatchewan have 
about the government. He went on at great lengths and related 
this somehow to the Bill. 
 
So if it’s clear to him, it’s not clear to anyone else just what the 
position of the Liberal Party is on this Bill. On the one hand, we 
expect that he would support the Bill and vote for the Bill 
because he says he has no concerns about the Bill. On the other 
hand, he went on at great length to talk about concerns that he 
has. So I don’t know quite what the connection was  on the 
one hand saying that he’s for it and on the other hand saying 
that we have a great number of concerns. Maybe the remarks 
that he was giving had nothing to do with the Bill and had more 
to do with other concerns that the member has. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, I found his remarks . . . and 
especially I was moved to make my comments after listening to 
him say that it should be clear to all concerned just what the 
position of the Liberal Party was. It isn’t very clear. I’m not 
quite sure what the Liberal Party is going to do. Are they going 
to vote for it, or are they going to vote against it? It’s not very 
clear from the remarks of the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  It is my duty to warn the Assembly that the 
Hon. Minister of Justice is about to exercise his right to close 
debate, and afterwards all members will be precluded from 
speaking to this question. 
 
Therefore if any member wishes to speak, let that member do so 
now. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, just before the debate 
is closed on this matter, I would like to clarify a point that was 
made by the hon. member from Arm River. I would like to 
congratulate my predecessor, the very able minister of Justice 
who is now the very able Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education, because he had the foresight in 1994 to shepherd 
through a very important project which will deal with the 
concerns that appear not have to be known by the member from 
Arm River. 
 
In 1994 the project was started  which will be a long-term 
project, and we’re in the midst of it now  called the LAND 
(Land Titles Automated Network Design) project. It’s a land 
titles automated network delivery project. And this project will, 
we hope, provide a Saskatchewan automated solution which 
will put us in the forefront of land title systems in the country. 
And with that note I would like to close the debate. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 88  An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amendments 
outlined within Bill 88 to change The Queen’s Bench Act could 
have a major impact on the justice system in rural 
Saskatchewan. The new legislation would change the laws 
governing where Court of Queen’s Bench judges have to live. 
 
The current legislation specifically states that Queen’s Bench 
judges were required to live in each of 10 Saskatchewan 
communities. The amendment in Bill 88 replaces that section 
with a more vague requirement that states that at least one 
Queen’s Bench judge will be required to reside in the 
neighbourhood of each place designated in the regulations. 
 
By removing the specific locations in which Queen’s Bench 
judges are required to live, the government is making it easier 
to close down small judicial centres in rural Saskatchewan. The 
regulations prescribed in the current Act already give the 
government the authority to disestablish judicial centres. 
 
(1515) 
 
This government is already flexing that authority with the 
announcements of the closures of the Queen’s Bench 
court-houses in Melville and Kerrobert. Those recent 
announcements only confirm my fears that this government is 
on a course to strip rural Saskatchewan of services and jobs that 
are at the heart of many communities. The decisions to close the 
court-houses in Kerrobert and Melville were done without 
much forethought or consultation. If this government believes 
in true democracy, why are these closures being done without 
gathering input from the communities affected? 
 
The residents of Melville and Kerrobert have some suggestions 
and proposals on how the judicial service in their areas can be  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

improved, and this without losing their court-houses. But this 
government simply refuses to listen. 
 
Even though the Justice minister went through the motions of 
appearing at a rally against the court-house closure in Kerrobert, 
he refused to look beyond the statistics of court appearances in 
that area. Four hundred people braved the cold weather at that 
rally to plead their case before the Justice minister. He heard 
testimony after testimony about the hardships this closure will 
inflict upon the citizens of Kerrobert, but he refuses to listen. 
 
The Kerrobert closure is also being condemned by the chamber 
of commerce there, and residents have compiled a petition of 
2,400 names. Yet the government still refuses to listen. The 
Kerrobert Chamber of Commerce has come to the conclusion 
that the decision to shut down the court-house is nothing more 
than part of this government’s political agenda. 
 
Unfortunately that agenda does not include any grand strategy 
for rural Saskatchewan. This is not a secret to the people in 
rural Saskatchewan. It has become clear during the past few 
years. They don’t have to get any further than their local road to 
notice the deplorable conditions that are being ignored by this 
government. They are attending health board meetings which 
are pitting communities against each other. They are being 
forced to compete for the paltry funding this government is 
offering. 
 
Meanwhile the government is trying to renege on any 
responsibility it has for maintaining health services. The people 
in rural Saskatchewan are wondering where they will get the 
money to pay for the increase in their local tax bills because of 
offloading onto municipalities from this provincial government. 
 
The people in rural Saskatchewan are attending meetings to 
decide how far they can cut back on education services because 
of funding cuts again passed down by this government. Farmers 
in rural Saskatchewan know the government does not have their 
best interest at heart when they have to travel farther and farther 
distances to purchase their crop insurance. 
 
Now the people in Melville and Kerrobert know they are only 
part of the government’s grand scheme to strip services. This 
government is effectively discouraging positive economic 
development in rural Saskatchewan. New employees are 
reluctant to move into communities that lack essential services 
like health care and schools. This government continues to 
force unnecessary hardships on the people of Saskatchewan 
and, more specifically, on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The people in these communities are continually watching 
government workers being pulled from their economies. They 
have seen it in Highways, health services, Social Services, 
Education, Crop Insurance, and now in Justice. They want to 
know when the bleeding will end. Mr. Speaker, we would also 
like to know this same thing. 
 
After examining Bill 88, I believe the government does not plan 
to reverse its destructive agenda  not at all. The amendment 
proposed for section 52 will permit this government more  

freedom to close down rural court-houses in a haphazard 
manner. 
 
It’s time for the government to begin to accept responsibility for 
its decisions and job cuts. It’s time that it started listening to the 
concerns of people in this province. This government continues 
to make reckless decisions without gathering input from the 
communities that are being directly affected. The result is that 
these same people are losing faith in the democratic process. 
 
In an article published in the Melville Advance yesterday, 
Melville mayor, Mike Fisher, is quoted as saying: 
 

The government has made up its mind and you aren’t 
going to get anywhere arguing. People will reach a point 
that they’re sick of government. 
 

Mayor Fisher goes on to say: 
 

What I’m concerned about is the honesty of giving 
information and proper detail about the closure . . . I don’t 
think the government is even going to give us the courtesy 
of a response. 
 

The mayor has sent a letter to the Justice minister asking why 
he did not have the courtesy to meet with officials in Melville to 
hear their proposals. That letter was sent seven weeks ago, and 
the mayor is still waiting for a response. A letter outlining the 
concerns of the member from Melville also has not received a 
response from the minister. What do these people have to do to 
get the government to listen to their valid concerns and 
suggestions? 
 
Lawyers who represent clients in smaller centres are also 
expressing concerns about the court-house closures and any 
further closures that may be executed under The Queen’s Bench 
Act. They are telling us that they will have to charge clients for 
more time because they will be forced to travel farther distances 
to make court appearances on behalf of their clients. This extra 
cost could limit the basic right to accessibility of justice 
services in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that is one of our 
gravest concerns. We’re extremely worried that the amendments 
outlined in Bill 88 have the potential to limit the access 
Saskatchewan people have to the justice system. 
 
Because the potential impacts of Bill 88 are so far-reaching, I 
would like to have some more time to consult with stakeholders 
affected by proposed changes, and I would move that the debate 
be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member for Thunder Creek has 
moved that second reading debate on Bill No. 88 be adjourned. 
However, as he has previously moved adjournment of debate, 
his motion is out of order, and debate on second reading of Bill 
No. 88 will continue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In light of the points raised by the member 
from Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, we would like to ask for an 
extension and be able to obtain further information. And I 
would ask that debate be adjourned. 



1668  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government 
Organization Act and to make consequential amendments 

to other Acts 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
official, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 
Susan Amrud from the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
your official, Mr. Minister. 
 
I wonder, Minister . . . and I am sure you can appreciate that the 
gentleman, Leader of the Opposition, that’s normally 
responsible for Justice issues is away for reasons that I know 
you understand. So please allow this country boy a little bit of 
latitude in terms of getting into legal issues. 
 
Would you mind, Minister, to please overview a bit of the 
intention and the thrust of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to give you a brief 
overview. Basically this involves the administration of funds 
within the government. And the practical point is that it will 
allow for funds to be paid out to people in a much more 
efficient and quick fashion. The present system as it relates to 
funds over the amount of $10,000 means that it has to go 
through an order in council process, through the cabinet. And 
this will allow for many of the payments that are made in 
departments to go in a much faster manner. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I also notice that there are areas 
under particularly a new section 17 that have to do with 
allowing cabinet ministers or the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs to enter into agreements with other governments and 
things of that nature. Can you explain the background for 
particularly that section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, another purpose of the Bill is section 
17, which allows for ministers to enter into agreements. But this 
is subject to them giving notice to the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs whose job is to make sure that the 
other ministers don’t sign agreements that haven’t received the 
appropriate approvals within the government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, would you be able to give us some 
general examples of the type of agreements that this might 
apply to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Generally they involve trade. And a good 
example here was an agreement that the Department of 
Agriculture wished to enter into with the country of Ukraine. 
And this allowed for the person, the Minister of Agriculture, to 
go to the Ukraine and sign the document and bind the  

government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And as I understand it then, Minister, using 
your example, the Minister of Agriculture would then be able to 
go and sign this agreement on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. How does this relate then to the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs? Is the Minister of Agriculture 
required to give prior notice to the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, and then the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs gives his blessing, his imprimatur or 
whatever. How is that process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Practically what happens is that the 
Minister of Agriculture, in the example, would give notice to 
the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. And basically that’s 
for good governance so that there is one minister who has 
control and an idea of all of the different agreements. But it’s 
just notice; it’s not prior approval. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Is it a requirement then for the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs to sign off or approve this agreement 
before the Minister of Agriculture  just staying on that 
example  would be able to enter into it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs would not have to sign off. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Then he probably wouldn’t have to travel as 
well to any of these far and remote and exotic locations on 
behalf the . . .Thank you, Minister. 
 
Is there a connection between the $50,000 limit in terms of 
agreements or expenditures tied to this same type of thing, or 
are these agreements then separate and apart from that area? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s a completely separate issue, 
and it just happened that since we were opening up the Act to 
do one amendment, we thought we might as well look at that 
$10,000 limit. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  In the $50,000, are there any limitations, or 
does this allow sort of a ministerial discretion to be moved from 
$10,000 to 50,000 without limitation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, these are only amounts that are 
already approved in the budget that are being expended. And so 
what happens is the budget is passed, and the minister has a 
certain amount of money to spend in an area that is set out in 
the budget. When the request or when the appropriate 
documentation is ready or whatever is required, then the 
minister can sign on his own authority up to $50,000 for the 
payment to be made. Now the limit is $10,000. This would 
increase it to $50,000, and therefore it increases the efficiency 
with which third parties would receive money from the 
government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  So it would have absolutely nothing to do 
with monies that would be spent over and above what was 
allocated in the budget process and would have to be requested  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

by special warrants or things of that nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think if there was a special warrant 
such as we’re operating on now, those kinds of amounts would 
be included in this. But that’s already . . . that’s been to the 
legislature for approval. But no, it doesn’t include giving the 
minister discretion to spend money that’s above and beyond 
what is appropriately approved through the financial 
mechanisms that have been set up. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  This would apply equally to all the 
members of Executive Council, or would the Premier have a 
special consideration by the nature of his office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It applies to all ministers including the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Minister. I think that 
covers the general area of questions that we had. We see this as 
a Bill that is a very common sense Bill and we would have no 
further questions to stand in the way of it moving forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I move that this Bill be reported without 
amendment. 
 
The Chair:  We have to go through clause by clause. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to introduce an official, 
Andrea Seale, who is going to be working with me today. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 
your assistant. Again, Mr. Minister, I’m just going to ask you to 
review this just for a minute to just update us on this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d be pleased to give you a brief 
summary of the amendments that we’re proposing for this 
legislation. 
 
The following amendments are made and they relate to 
applications respecting the dependant adult offspring of 
deceased parents. Our first amendment will provide so that 
when an application is made, a court will be allowed to 
establish a trust for the dependant. This trust will be used to 
help the dependant become more independent or it will be used 
to meet his or her special needs or perhaps to provide 
occasional gifts to the dependant. 
 
In determining the amount of the trust, the court will take into 
consideration that any social assistance maintenance will 
continue to be provided. The capital and income from trusts 
established pursuant to The Dependants’ Relief Act will not be  

considered assets or income of the recipients for purposes of 
determining eligibility for social assistance. 
 
If there isn’t another suitable trustee, the Public Trustee may be 
appointed as the trustee. And there will also be a provision 
which allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 
regulations limiting the amount or the size of the trust. That’s 
the gist of the amendments. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have a number 
of questions here for clarification, starting with clause 3 of the 
Bill, which amends section 9, particularly 9(4) of the Act. The 
Dependants’ Relief Act already gives tremendous discretion 
and power to the court when it makes a maintenance order in 
favour of a dependant. I see from reading section 9(1) of the 
Act that the court, when it makes the maintenance orders, 
appears to be able to impose what it calls, “such conditions and 
restrictions as the court deems fit.” 
 
Mr. Minister, do you interpret those words in the statute as 
broad enough to permit the court to impose either conditions or 
restrictions on the allowance that it orders so to ensure that it’s 
paid into a trust fund for the purpose of benefiting the 
dependant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it would be arguable that the courts 
could have done this before, but we wanted to make sure that it 
was clear that they could set up the trust and also that we put in 
the qualifier that it was for the benefit and use of the dependant. 
So practically, it was to make it very clear that this was an 
option for the court. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, was there a particular court case 
which is found . . . that those words that I have cited from 
section 9(1), which says: 
 

9(1) If upon an application the court is of opinion that the 
testator has by will so disposed of real or personal property 
that reasonable provision has not been made for the 
maintenance of the dependant to whom the application 
relates, then, subject to the following provisions and to 
such conditions and restrictions as the court deems fit, the 
court may, in its discretion, make an order charging the 
whole or any portion of the estate, in such proportion and 
in such manner as it deems proper, with payment of an 
allowance sufficient to provide such maintenance as the 
court thinks reasonable . . . 

 
If this was broad enough to give authority to a court to require 
that an allowance be paid into a trust fund for the benefit . . . 
and the benefit of the dependant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There wasn’t a particular court case that I 
know of, and I know from within my own law practice that you 
would have questions raised about this from many different 
angles and not necessarily just from court cases. Often when 
people were trying to plan for their dependent children as they 
got older, they had questions about how The Dependants’ 
Relief Act provisions would interplay with some of their own 
estate planning. 
 



1670  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

And I think this is part of an overall discussion where we’re 
trying to meet some of the needs that have been raised by 
groups like the Saskatchewan Association for Community 
Living, parents of other dependants. So it’s not one specific 
court case but it’s a start at dealing with some of the difficult 
issues in this area. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the other words from The 
Dependants’ Relief Act that is presented would lead an earnest 
reader such as myself to conclude that the courts already have 
the power to establish trust funds for the benefit of dependants. 
Those words are found in section 9(4) of the Act as it is 
presently written. 
 
This section already says that when an allowance is ordered it, 
“may be by way of an amount payable annually or otherwise” 
and here I move on a bit in a section and I’m being faithful to 
the meaning of the section saying, to the dependant or for the 
use and benefit of the dependant as a court deems fit. 
 
Mr. Minister, as a lawyer, would agree that the term “use and 
benefit” refers to the creation of a trust? Do you agree? 
 
The Chair:  Before the minister answers, I would like to 
advise him it’s been brought to the Chair’s attention that when 
he introduced the official, your light was maybe not on and 
she’s not on record, so would you do that before you answer 
this question again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay. I’m very pleased to have the 
assistance of Andrea Seale today. And she is providing 
assistance. Now I would like to answer the member’s question. 
 
When we entered into consultation in this area, we met with a 
number of groups, and I’ll give you the names because I think 
it’s quite helpful for you to understand. First organization was 
Parents and Caregivers Association for the Mentally 
Challenged, Canadian Mental Health Association, Regina and 
district Association for Community Living, Saskatchewan 
Association for Community Living, the Autism Resource 
Centre, and the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I mention those groups because their concern was exactly 
as you raise, that although it seems as if, on the words, we 
could do what we are already doing, they raised the concern that 
it wasn’t clear enough. And so therefore we heard their concern 
and said, well we’ll make it clear. Because this is the intention, 
that it would be possible to set up trust funds that would be 
specifically available for their dependent children. And that’s 
why we’ve brought his amendment. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, when you spoke about this Bill 
during debate on second reading on May 13, you stated: 
 

However, to ensure that their dependent adult sons or 
daughters benefit from their inheritances, many parents 
now set up discretionary trusts in their wills. Such trusts 
give trustees discretion in making payments to dependent 
adult beneficiaries. By the use of these discretionary trusts, 
parents ensure that inheritances are used to enhance the 
quality of life of dependent adult sons or daughters. 

. . . The Dependants’ Relief Amendment Act, 1996 will 
help to level the playing-field for dependent adults whose 
parents have not provided for them in their wills. It will 
allow a court to order the establishment of a trust for a 
dependent adult. 
 

Mr. Minister, is your Bill envisioning the creation of completely 
discretionary trusts or will there be any obligation on the part of 
the trustees to make payments out of the trust funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is a straight trust. And I think I 
would like to explain about the wording “level playing-field.” 
What happens is when people obtain legal advice and do estate 
planning which they actually would, you know, pay a fair sum 
of money for, they will get a will that includes a trust that 
would deal with some of these issues. 
 
What we’re concerned about is often people will make very 
simple wills and not include specific provisions for their 
dependent children. And what this change will do will allow a 
trustee or some person to make an application under the Act to 
provide for the trust in the same way as they might have done if 
they had full legal advice preparing their will. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, clause 4 of your Bill creates a 
new section of The Dependants’ Relief Act in section 9.1. This 
new section has several subsections and the one that interests 
me is subsection 2. You have listed four purposes for the 
allowance that is to be paid out of the trust fund. They are, 
roughly, helping the dependant achieve independence; meeting 
the special needs of the dependant; providing occasional gifts to 
the dependant; and combination of the above. 
 
Mr. Minister, I gather you do not envision any allowance being 
paid out of this trust fund for the basic needs of the dependant 
such as food, shelter, clothing, lodging, transportation, and 
recreation. Do I understand that correctly? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  These provisions that were put into the 
Act were suggested by the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan, and the basic idea here would be that the 
everyday needs of the individuals would be provided by social 
assistance. And so this deals with those situations where people 
are getting their basic needs met through the social assistance 
system, and then the parents want to provide something a little 
bit extra for them through a trust fund. And that’s the . . . sort of 
the specific situation we’re dealing with here. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  With leave, to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Chair, in the Speaker’s gallery we have 26 grade 8 students  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

from Buena Vista School in the heart of the constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana, the constituency I represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
Teague, as well as chaperons, Mr. and Mrs. Lowe and Mrs. 
Grandey. I would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly 
to join me in welcoming these students to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 89 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
understand then that this section is dealing with dependants that 
are on social services, and I’m wondering if it wouldn’t be a 
good idea to expand the list of permitted expenditures for which 
the allowances could be used from the rather small list to a 
larger, more comprehensive list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the wording here is quite broad. 
And practically you could include some of the things that you 
were concerned about. But if you have any suggestions about 
things that are beyond what’s been contemplated in this 
wording, perhaps you would like to make them. But practically 
we see this wording as quite broad. 
 
I think the other thing that we need to remember is that the 
basic purpose of the overall Act, The Dependants’ Relief Act, is 
to make sure that if an estate is of a sufficient size, that it would 
basically make sure it provides for everybody who is a 
dependant of the person who has died. And that would include, 
if there’s sufficient money, all of the living expenses for that 
dependant. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The subsections (3), 
(4), and (7) of new section 9.1 of the Act sets out some new 
rules governing the extent to which a dependent adult child will 
be able to receive an allowance from this new type of trust fund 
and still be eligible to receive benefits from the government out 
of The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. In subsection (4), the Bill 
states that: 
 

The capital of and income from a trust fund is not to be 
considered as an asset or income of the dependant for the 
purpose of determining the dependant’s eligibility for 
assistance pursuant to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act or 
any other similar assistance program funded by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Could you explain what you mean by any other similar 
assistance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  What we are doing here, to answer your 
question, is that there are possible situations where new 
legislation would provide assistance to some of these people. 
We didn’t want to have to come back and amend the Act if a 
new program was there. The only program in existence right  

now is the Saskatchewan social assistance program, but we 
wanted to cover the possibility that in the next few years there 
might be some other program. 
 
Ms. Draude:  That would be good news. 
 
Mr. Minister, the sub-clause 7 in the new section 9.1 allows the 
provincial government to make regulations limiting the amount 
of the trust fund. I guess I’m questioning why you would want 
to limit it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the simple answer to that is that if 
it was a very large estate, we may want to make sure that the 
judge had the power to use the money out of the estate to pay 
all of the person’s expenses so that they wouldn’t be on social 
assistance. So for example, if there was an estate that had a 
million dollars in it and a good portion of that money was set 
aside for the dependant in a trust fund, we don’t think that it 
would be totally appropriate that that person would then still 
receive social assistance. That’s why it’s worded that way. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do you have an amount in mind of what you 
think this trust fund will be limited to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The amount we have in mind at this time 
is $50,000. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do you agree, Mr. Minister, that the monetary 
limits placed on the size of the trust fund created under this new 
provision will operate as a restriction on the discretion of the 
court to create these new trust funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Perhaps you could explain your question. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I think by limiting the amount, it’s giving the 
courts a lot more leeway. I guess I’m just wondering why the 
number 50,000 was chosen? Is there any specific reason for 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the number 50,000 was 
chosen because, in the discussions with the various groups, 
there was some concern about balancing that responsibility of 
the estate for the care of a dependent adult versus the 
responsibility of the province and their funding. And there was 
some concern that we would set up funds of quite a large 
amount that would not be able to be taken in to pay the 
day-to-day expenses and then supplement or actually replace 
the social assistance payments. So kind of the halfway or 
median point at this stage was $50,000. But we knew that that 
amount may change given inflation and some other things. And 
so that’s why we want the amount set in the regulations. 
 
Ms. Draude:  What about the existing trust funds which are 
already in use for the benefit of disabled adults? Will they enjoy 
the same treatment as those that have been set up after the 
passage of this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If there’s a fund that is presently in 
existence that isn’t being treated in the same way as funds 
might be under this legislation, then I think it would be possible 
to apply to the court to have it designated as a fund like this.  



1672  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

But practically, if they’re set up as discretionary trusts with 
proper legal advice, then this whole legislation really doesn’t 
affect them at all. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I just have one final question. What directives 
are going to be issued to the Department of Social Services 
when it receives requests for benefits from disabled adults who 
already have trust funds established which were set up before 
this? Will they be given any directive from your department as 
to how to deal with this new Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Perhaps you can clarify. Are you talking 
about the discretionary trusts that are already in existence? 
 
Well if you were talking about discretionary trusts, then they’re 
not affected by this legislation at all because whatever amount 
is in the discretionary trust can only be paid out by the trustee at 
that trustee’s discretion. And so therefore it can’t be included in 
the amounts that social assistance uses when they try to 
calculate what amounts are available for the dependent adult. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government 
Organization Act and to make consequential amendments 

to other Acts 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 74 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
The Chair:  Mr. Minister, will you introduce your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d be 
pleased to introduce my officials. Today I have with me Brian 
Kaukinen, to my right, who is the president of Sask Water; to  

my left, Wayne Dybvig, the vice-president of water resource 
management within the corporation; and to my far right, Dave 
Schiman, the manager of financial planning with the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And 
welcome, Minister, and to your officials. We’re glad you can be 
here today. 
 
And I really appreciate the opportunity to speak to you about 
Sask Water. In my previous life I had the opportunity to be 
secretary-treasurer for C&D (conservation and development) 
areas for over 20 years, so this is interesting to look at life on 
the other side. 
 
Could you maybe give me the overview of the department for 
1995? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess the 
mandate of the Water Corporation is really quite clear. We 
assist in managing our water resource in the province. We are 
attempting to move the corporation to a position of 
self-sufficiency, and this has been a bit of progress that we have 
been working on over the past years. 
 
We believe that it is our responsibility to manage this resource 
in a meaningful and an environmentally and an economically 
friendly way, and that we can and we should be doing this 
without a great degree of public subsidization. Certainly we will 
be investing, over the course of time, in major water 
management projects that would have to be amortized over a 
longer period of time. 
 
We attempt to work with the agricultural community to develop 
value added processing. We’re looking at some projects in the 
irrigation area east of Moose Jaw to attempt to see if we can 
attract investors to deal with potato . . . in growing of potatoes 
on irrigated land. 
 
I have been the minister responsible for Sask Water now on two 
occasions. I was, early in . . . after we were elected in ’91, and I 
left for other responsibilities and came back about a year, year 
and a half ago I guess now. 
 
And what I have found, even in the course of the time that I had 
left, is that the corporate attitude within the corporation has 
been and has developed a very healthy approach to try and 
make the irrigation projects in this province self-sufficient, but 
also to work with the irrigators and the people involved in that 
segment of agriculture to help to develop some value added 
produce, some value added crops. 
 
I think, if I look at the history of irrigation in Saskatchewan, we 
have spent an awful lot of public funds to develop irrigation 
projects that really haven’t focused on value added, new 
cropping, new produce that would create job opportunities for 
more Saskatchewan people. I think one of the disappointments 
that I found when I initially came was we were investing a lot 
of public funds to grow larger crops of wheat. And I just don’t  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

think that that was an appropriate approach, and we’re working 
and moving to changing that in as much as we can. 
 
It’s a transitional period. We work closely with conservation 
and development authorities. As you’ve indicated, you’ve been 
part of that, so you’ll probably have a better understanding of 
that than I will, in my short year and a half here. But we try and 
work with the people who are interested in water management. 
 
Sometimes we have, as you will know, some problems between 
neighbours, and we will have problems between communities, 
and problems with communities upstream from those 
downstream. But we try and work as best we can in a 
cooperative approach to responsible water management in the 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noticed that there 
was a sizeable reduction in Sask Water’s budget for 1996, and 
I’m wondering if you can tell me how the change, the reduction 
in the budget . . . what type of influence it will have on your 
mandate. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. In the Speaker’s 
gallery this afternoon are two individuals that I would like to 
introduce to you, Mr. Chair, and through you to my colleagues 
in the House: Glen Gatin and Wendy Johnston who have been 
meeting with my office on training issues this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Gatin was a candidate for the government party in the 
constituency of Moosomin. And Ms. Johnston is a national 
consultant on workplace education with the Canadian 
Federation of Labour. They are working in Saskatchewan on 
first nation employment and workplace education initiatives 
with a couple of the first nations. And I would like to have my 
colleagues in the House welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to the gallery as well. We hope you’re enjoying the 
proceedings this afternoon, although sometimes I wonder how 
anyone can enjoy these proceedings. They seem to drag on 
sometimes. 
 

Anyway, with respect to the budget reductions, the main 
element to the budget reduction is the impact of the 
Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline that was budgeted for last year 
which won’t show up in this year’s budget. 
 
As well, the Water Corporation has experienced a reduction in 
operating dollars from Treasury Board, as all other government 
departments have. We’ve been working very hard to back-fill 
some of the federal transfer payment reduction, at the same time 
maintaining services, and at the same time balancing our 
budgets. Sometimes it becomes a little bit tricky. So I guess all 
elements and all arms of government have been asked to share 
in this reduction of expenditures. 
 
I am told by the officials within the Water Corporation that they 
can manage the change. It, in some cases, will mean that some 
employees will take on a little bit more responsibility, perhaps 
work longer hours, to add for areas where there might be some 
shortfalls. But in terms of the overall mandate of the 
corporation, the operations of the corporation, we believe that it 
is sufficiently funded to be able to carry on the duties that I 
know that you and I would both want to see happen. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I guess it’s up to you and I to 
make the afternoon a little more interesting so people don’t 
think . . . don’t find our debate boring. So I guess I’d like to 
offer a suggestion that I feel that Sask Water is a bit of a hybrid 
Crown. Its role as a water manager is a line department item in 
the Estimates book, while its commercial ventures resemble a 
Crown activity. When we look at these dual roles, we have to 
ask, who is Sask Water accountable to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well the member is right, Mr. 
Chairman. It is in a way a hybrid Crown. The funding is . . . I 
guess it’s partly a Treasury Board Crown and it’s partly a 
Crown Investments Corporation Crown. The Water Corporation 
will make presentations to the CIC board. And as I understand 
it, the funding does come from Treasury Board. The minister in 
charge of the Treasury Board also sits on the Crown 
Investments Corporation board, as I do. So funding basically 
comes from, I guess, the executive arm of government. The 
process whereby scrutiny on decisions is made is through CIC. I 
can say to the member that we haven’t found it to be an unduly 
cumbersome operation. It functions well in that the time that it 
deals with Treasury Board is through developing the budget and 
putting the budget together, the same as other arms of 
government do. The day-to-day operations are managed by the 
executives in the corporation who report to the board, and then 
the board will take pertinent items to CIC. 
 
So you’re right; it’s a hybrid Crown. It seems to function fairly 
well, and we believe it does a good job for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, basically then there’s sort of two 
types of bosses or two people you have to answer to, and I 
guess that probably makes life interesting at times. When I look 
at this sort of dual set-up, then it makes me think that it’s 
possible to use the structure to shield financial activities from  



1674  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

one aspect, from one arm of it, to another. Can you give me 
your opinion on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, really the annual budget is set 
through our budget process that every arm of government goes 
through, with the exception of the Crowns of course. And I’m 
going to try and describe them as I know them and how that 
process works. 
 
We will begin in the fall preparing for next year’s budget. The 
Department of Finance will look through their revenue 
projections, through their expenditure projections, to try and 
determine what kind of pressures are on government for that 
fiscal year. We will ask the Water Corporation, as an example, 
the officials, to come before Treasury Board to describe ways in 
which they might be able to reduce the costs of operations 
without decreasing the effectiveness of the corporation, to look 
at where we can change programs to deliver a positive program 
at the least possible cost. And based on those kinds of 
discussions, the annual budget will be put together. 
 
In terms of the Crown Investments Corporation, what will 
happen in that respect will be, the executive will bring to the 
board of the Water Corporation certain initiatives. They may or 
may not have financial impact on the corporation. The 
corporation does try and live within its budget that is set by 
Treasury Board. If there are major decisions that it’s felt by the 
cabinet ministers on and by the board sitting on the Water 
Corporation Board that need, and we would want and desire, 
further scrutiny, those issues would then go to the Crown 
Investments Corporation on which, I believe, eight cabinet 
ministers sit. We have the officials from CIC with the ability to 
have, sort of, a sober second look at what we’re doing, and then 
that recommendation would be made based on the information 
that would come from the Water Corporation. 
 
But in terms of accountability, we still account to the legislature 
in this forum where we account for the expenditures and 
revenue flow, and this is the forum that I think can offer a good 
degree of public accountability. It serves us well in the other 
arms of the government and the executive arms of government. 
 
So just the fact that some of the decision mechanism is reported 
to CIC doesn’t preclude the fact that we want open and 
accountable scrutiny of the corporation by the Provincial 
Auditor and by members of the opposition and by members of 
the government caucus, because we’re all here responsible and 
accountable for public funds, of which the allocation for the 
Water Corporation is part. 
 
But the reporting mechanism doesn’t in any way deter from 
public scrutiny and from public accountability in terms of the 
operations of the corporation. Those viewings are all very much 
open to public scrutiny. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, if Sask Water’s a Crown 
corporation, is it going to be subject to the Crown review policy 
this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, it’s part of the Crown review. 
 

Ms. Draude:  Sask Water has responsibilities as a project 
regulator but it also assumes the role as a project developer and 
owner. Who issues the construction and operating permits on 
Sask Water developed projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, I don’t necessarily agree that 
Sask Water is a developer. What we view ourselves as being is 
a facilitator. If communities or municipalities come to us asking 
for assistance with respect to development of a water delivery 
system, we will offer and do offer engineering expertise, 
technical advice. We will look for funding opportunities and 
financing arrangements. We work with the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration), the federal arm that deals with 
these types of things. 
 
But we don’t view ourselves as being developers, only to help 
facilitate communities upon request to put together the kinds of 
help and put together the kinds of projects that they would 
desire for their areas. 
 
Ms. Draude:  But there are circumstances and cases where 
you actually do design a project, and as such then somebody 
has to issue the permit. Do you issue that permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, we issue the permits for the 
developments. And I would want to say to the member, we also 
work with outside consultants in terms of the work that they do. 
 
I want to say, in my limited experience putting together . . . and 
let me use the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline as an example that 
you might be aware of. It’s a fairly major project. It involves a 
number of communities, a number of municipalities. There 
have been private consultants that have looked at some of those 
initiatives. But I guess it takes someone overall, some body 
overall, to put together a project of that size. And we as a 
corporation are able to do that. 
 
I know there are some who will criticize the corporation for 
taking private sector work away, simply because we have 
engineers and design people and technical people on staff. But I 
think it’s fair to say that we need to maintain a core of expertise 
to facilitate and coordinate some of these larger projects. As 
I’ve said, we work with private consultants on many of these 
projects and we think that we have a reasonably good working 
relationship. 
 
And I think it would be fair to say that as our economy in 
Saskatchewan was tight, things weren’t happening, we didn’t 
see a pile of capital projects, that professionals who are finding 
work fairly scarce will make the criticism that the public sector 
takes jobs away from the private sector. It’s not our desire to 
want to do that. We need to have, and we feel we need to have, 
a core staff to be able to understand and develop and help to put 
these projects together. And that’s really what we see our role 
as being. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Yes but, Mr. Minister, if you actually do 
design the project and then you issue your own approval, that 
basically could be looked at as a conflict of interest because 
you’re your own watchdog. Don’t you agree? 
 



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I don’t agree because with 
respect to the environmental approvals, that is all done by 
SERM, by Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. They do an independent analysis separate and 
apart from the Water Corporation. So I think that there is 
adequate due diligence done on these projects. We, you know, 
we of course, as I said, deliver technical and engineering 
expertise and we have I think something to offer there. But we 
also know, as we’re moving on some of these projects, that the 
environmental concerns need to be addressed, and so they are 
addressed in an arm’s length from the Water Corporation body, 
and that’s SERM. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Have you had some of the projects that have 
been developed by Sask Water refused by Sask Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can say that the officials  using 
their memory, as their corporate memory might be a little 
stronger, a little longer than mine  can’t recall a project that 
was refused by SERM. But there certainly have been projects 
that have been held up pending more information or pending 
changes to design that were felt not to be desirable. So we 
haven’t had an outright refusal of a project, but the time frame 
in terms of development certainly has been held up until all of 
their concerns have been addressed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has there been refusal by SERM to a proposal 
put forward by private companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  One of the parts of the work of the 
folks within the Water Corporation is to do assessment then, 
analysis of availability of water, availability of the resource. If 
someone is looking for licensing of a project and it is deemed 
that the consumption with respect to that resource, the water 
resource, is insufficient, if there is an application for wells to 
draw from an aquifer and it’s decided by the technical people 
within the corporation that the aquifer as an example can’t 
sustain the pressure that would be put on it by the expanded 
development, then clearly those would be areas where permits 
would be refused. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I am sort of wandering in the dark here a little 
bit because . . . between you and your officials, I’m sure you 
have a lot more experience than I do. But I’m wondering if 
there’s been a time when a proposal or two proposals has come 
in for similar projects or the same project, where SERM would 
have to decide between a Sask Water project and a private 
company’s one, if that’s ever happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I can say that that to our 
knowledge has never been a problem. I would think if there 
were a circumstance where there were competing interests it 
would be my suggestion that the Water Corporation and the 
board and I think the management, would certainly recommend 
that we not put together a development that would be in 
competition with private industry. I can’t think of one that 
would be. 
 
Our role is more one of facilitating development and projects 
and helping communities, helping business in areas where we 
can. We’re not . . . the Water Corporation isn’t in business.  

We’re there as a regulator. We’re there as technical and 
engineering expertise and to help facilitate putting together 
projects, but we don’t own projects. We don’t intend to own 
projects. That’s not part of where we want to head the 
corporation. There are other people out there who might be 
more appropriate people to do developmental work. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do you own the water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The water resource in 
Saskatchewan is owned by the people of Saskatchewan through 
the province of Saskatchewan, and it’s our role to manage that 
water on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Sask Water sits on the committee which 
distributes the federal money through PAWBED (Partnership 
Agreement on Water Based Economic Development), and I’m 
just wondering if it’s conceivable that Sask Water can influence 
the allocation of these funds on the projects. Is this what you 
consider your mandate to be? Could this be seen as a conflict? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I don’t think so. We use our 
technical people to give recommendations to management and I 
don’t think it could be viewed as a conflict. There are many 
cases in which we will retain outside consultants, independent 
consultants. 
 
I can name one example just around Prince Albert last year 
where there was a perceived conflict after studies were done by 
the city of Regina, by the Water Corporation. The Water 
Corporation retained a consultant from Calgary to do an 
analysis of this particular circumstance and that’s how we 
would tend to operate. But in terms of the conflict it wouldn’t 
be a situation that we would put ourselves in. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Some of the recent activities of Sask Water 
sort of reminds me of the beginnings of SaskPower and SaskTel 
when they acquired the small generating stations and telephone 
exchanges, until they actually became utility monopolies. 
 
Sask Water is offering utility systems to small communities 
throughout this province, and I’m wondering if it’s Sask 
Water’s intention to gain control of the municipal water and 
sewer system and become exclusive water and sewer utility. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I don’t think that’s where we 
headed. The corporation will act when we are invited by 
communities and/or municipalities to help to put together 
projects. 
 
If you’re asking, is this the building of an empire, the answer I 
can say is no. We tend to view water management as a very 
critical part of what the Water Corporation does on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to development and assisting in development of 
projects, we go where we’re asked. We don’t own these 
facilities. You know, some we do quite clearly, some dam 
projects, larger projects. Some of them are owned by the federal  



1676  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

government. 
 
But in terms of the distribution of water, we go where we’re 
asked to go. And it’s not that we’re trying to build an 
infrastructure here, a monopolistic infrastructure; that’s not 
where the corporation is headed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Many of the provincial Crowns have been 
going through a period of reorganization and restructuring and 
downsizing, and Sask Water has actually been hiring . . . has 
been expanding. I’m just wondering if the minister doesn’t 
view the expansion of Sask Water to be inconsistent with the 
government’s policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I can’t . . . I can say to the 
member that we haven’t been expanding. Two years ago we 
downsized by 10 per cent, which is a fairly substantial 
reduction. 
 
But in terms of growing the corporation, I don’t think that 
Water Corporation is inconsistent with what’s happening in any 
of the other Crowns. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m going to ask you a few questions more 
directly with conservation and development areas for a few 
minutes, and I’m wondering if . . . at the time I was working 
with them, conservation area authorities were very aggressive in 
their pursuit of drainage activities. 
 
I’m wondering if there’s still as many active C&Ds 
(conservation and development authorities) in the province as 
there was, say, five years ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I am told by my officials that 
there is a much different approach by CAAs (conservation area 
authorities) today than there would have been, say, five years 
ago  not nearly as aggressive in terms of those kinds of 
initiatives. 
 
And I’m told that Nipawin is one area where that is really quite 
a dramatic change in how the CAAs are operating. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have just one question for you. Can you tell me if there’s an 
environmental study holding up the C&D in the Langenburg 
area right now? There’s been a lot of controversy over that 
thing and there seems to be a lot of misconceptions out there as 
to why this project is being held up. Can you give us some 
information on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  This is, I guess, one example where 
projects are held up. The terms of reference are still being 
studied with respect to Langenburg east, so its really in 
abeyance now until that has been completed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One 
supplementary question possibly then. Is this the Environment 
departments from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and the federal 
government? And do we have any idea of a time line on how 
long this could be before this project is either let proceed or 
stopped? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you. The initiative and the 
study is a joint venture basically with the Government of 
Manitoba and the Government of Saskatchewan. The federal 
government is acting in an advisory capacity. And I am told that 
it will take three years to complete the study, and that’s the time 
frame that they’re looking at. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, can 
you tell me how many active conservation areas and watershed 
boards there are in the province right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To 
answer the question, there are 130 C&Ds on the books. There 
are 90 that are active, and I am told that that number is reducing 
by about 10 a year in the past history. There are six watershed 
associations in the province as well. 
 
Ms. Draude:  In your opinion, would you explain to me why 
you think they are becoming inactive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess the main reason would be a 
lack of projects that they wish to embark upon. If there is no 
activity required by people in certain areas, within a C&D 
association over a period of time, I would assume the 
association would make a determination that the need for them 
wasn’t there. But I can say that if in fact the C&Ds can play a 
role, I am assuming that they would be established and they 
would be more active. 
 
But I think the fact that about 10 a year are making the decision 
to discontinue their operations would suggest to me that they 
can’t find or haven’t identified meaningful programs or projects 
in their area that they would want to deal with. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’ve had a number of calls, and 
I’m sure you have as well, about Fishing Lake and what’s 
happening around there at this time with the rise in the water 
level and problems with the ice. I’m wondering if you can tell 
me what’s happening there  why the water is rising to such an 
extent, and if there’s any hope that we can give the residents 
around the lake some help. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, the situation at 
Fishing Lake is one that has been monitored by the Water 
Corporation and by the officials since 1960, so it’s something 
that certainly has been monitored. We’ve been aware of that 
particular area. 
 
The difficulty there is that there is no natural outlet; there is no 
outlet for that lake. In this particular year, we had an awful 
amount of run-off caused by a pile of snow. Cabin owners built 
their cabins, I think many of them, on the assumption that they 
would never see this level within the lake. But mother nature or 
father nature . . . nature has a way of sometimes playing tricks 
on us, and it manifests itself in some difficulties for cabin 
owners. 
 
This has been I guess a particularly cruel year for us in 
Saskatchewan. I had the opportunity to view the southern and 
the eastern part of Saskatchewan last Friday, based on the water 
conditions and some of the concerns that people had offered to  



May 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

my office and to the corporation. And there’s just a tremendous 
amount of water, some of which we can’t deal with. South of 
Regina is an example, sheet flooding. The water is there. In all 
likelihood, there will be a fairly substantial portion of farm land 
that won’t be accessible because of the high moisture 
conditions. Those are things that we can’t control. We can 
monitor, work at long-term planning in terms of how we might 
be able to alleviate some of these conditions. 
 
And I think the same could be said for Fishing Lake. As I said, 
there’s no natural outflow. There is no controlling mechanism 
in terms of inflow and outflow. And unfortunately there are a 
number of cabin owners that have been affected by that. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Am I correct in hearing you say that there isn’t 
a control structure that limits the amount of water going into 
Fishing Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well the conditions there are just 
caused by natural run-off. The spring conditions caused snow to 
melt, and it runs into the lake, and it has no where to go. So it’s 
not a matter of a control mechanism that could have controlled 
the amount of inflow; it’s just natural drainage based on the 
moisture conditions for this year. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I understand as of this morning there was 
about 35 cabins that were basically under water, and they aren’t 
able to get to them to even do sandbagging because the road is 
under water as well. Is there any plans to look at a possible 
outlet for this system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I am to report to the member, Mr. 
Chair. I am told that in order to alleviate the condition on a 
permanent basis, there would have to be a ditching in the 
neighbourhood of some 30 kilometres. So in terms of the cost 
of this kind of an initiative to alleviate this condition from ever 
happening again, there would be millions of dollars that would 
have to be spent. 
 
It’s an unfortunate circumstance, and I guess it’s good fortune 
for us that we don’t have this kind of a spring every year 
because it would certainly make things much more 
uncomfortable every season. I can certainly sympathize with the 
cabin owners and the people who have that investment in the 
area, but the difficulty becomes finding a solution where you 
have some kind of economies that make some sense. And I am 
told this particular solution is something like 30 kilometres of 
ditching, and that’s an awful lot of money. 
 
Ms. Draude:  It sounds like the one-in-hundred flood I used 
to hear about when I was working with them, with the branch. 
Can you tell me how much money was spent on construction 
projects in 1996? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m assuming you’ll be asking how 
much we spent in 1994 and in 1995, so what I’ll do is share 
those figures with you. 
 
In 1995, capital expenditures were $6.368 million. In 1994, 
capital expenditures were $5.723 million. So that was for the 
year ’95 and ’94. 

Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me how many of these projects 
were involved in the Crown tendering project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The total related to CCTA is $1.274 
million. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, do you have the figures available 
for the money spent on maintenance in 1995 on the 
conservation ditches and also the money spent on surveys? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, for 1995, the 
corporation spent $338,211 in channel clearing. In terms of 
rural flood control which includes surveys, an amount of 
1,354,476 was spent in that area. So 1,354,476 for rural flood 
control which includes the surveys. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I would suppose if there was a 
number of surveys that have been requested that there was 
insufficient funding to allow them to be undertaken. Do you 
have quite a number of those on the books? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  This is such a simple answer, so it 
shouldn’t maybe have taken me too long, but the officials tell 
me that they work on about half a dozen each year. 
 
And in terms of outstanding, it’s difficult to determine that 
because they come and they go. Groups will come in and ask 
for a preliminary survey. We do some of that work. It will be 
left on the table. You won’t hear anything for a period of time, 
and sometimes they’ll come back, and sometimes they won’t. 
But I think it’s fair to say that the answer would be we do about 
six a year. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me what the status of the request 
for surveys from St. Gregor south conservation and 
development is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Could I ask the member to repeat 
that again. I think I’m getting a little old and hard of hearing 
here. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me what the status of the St. 
Gregor south request for surveys is  St. Gregor south 
conservation development area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That particular project came to the 
office, as I understand it, last fall. And it wasn’t priorized as 
being on the top of the list, but I am told that it now is, given 
the projects that we have on go, and that it will be dealt with 
this spring. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. They’ll be really 
pleased to hear that. 
 
I’m wondering if your department keeps copies of the audited 
financial statements of the conservation area authorities and the 
watershed boards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’ll commit to the member that we  



1678  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1996 

will pass on what we have with respect to the audit and 
financial statements. I believe that we can request them, but we 
don’t necessarily get them all but that we will pass on to the 
member what we have, the current update of what we have. 
And if there’s more information that you would require, based 
on what we send, then we can undertake to get that for you. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A number of the 
conservation boards are speculating that perhaps one of the next 
moves may be the amalgamation of the conservation boards 
with the RM boards. Is that something that your department is 
considering at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The officials are in the process of 
meeting with all of the CAAs to determine the effectiveness of 
these bodies. And I think until that study is complete, it would 
be difficult to describe to you what the future may hold for 
C&Ds, but I think it would be fair to say we are meeting with 
the stakeholders. We want to ensure that they’re comfortable 
with the operations of the C&D, that they’re doing an 
appropriate job meeting with the C&Ds. And this is ongoing. 
 
I can say to you that there has been no decision by government 
or by the board  either of Municipal Government, by that 
department, or by the Water Corporation  with respect to an 
amalgamation of C&Ds with RMs. That’s not a decision that 
has been made. But as I’ve indicated earlier, we’re looking at 
the operations of them, how they fit into the scheme of things, 
and what the shareholders’ reaction has been to them. But 
there’s no preconceived plan here in terms of amalgamation 
with RMs. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that most of 
the conservation boards will be delighted to hear that because in 
my discussions with them, it’s not something that they feel will 
be beneficial to the landowners in the conservation areas. 
 
I’d like to address a couple of questions on the money that Sask 
Water has given to Temple Gardens Mineral Spa. Can you tell 
me how much money was given to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  There are two areas of support for 
the spa project in Moose Jaw. As you will know, PAWBED is a 
joint organization between the provincial and federal 
government, and there was a grant through PAWBED of 
$138,000. There’s a developmental loan of $125,000 that 
comes directly through the Water Corporation that is to be 
prepaid . . . or repaid, I’m sorry, with interest over a period of 
14 years. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Does the design work for Temple Gardens . . . 
I understand that your department did some of the design work 
for it. Did this project pay for Sask Water’s staff and time for 
this design work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 
the entire project is amortized over a period of 14 years. All of 
the expenses incurred by the corporation are built into that 
amortized price, and it hopefully will be a good investment for 
the city of Moose Jaw, for that community. I know that the city 
is very excited about it. It’s a project that they worked long and  

hard to put together. There’s certainly some community 
involvement in terms of financing. And I want to say that from 
my perspective, certainly as chairman of the board of the Water 
Corporation, we wish them well. I think it’s an exciting venture 
for that community. 
 
And I’ve known Moose Jaw . . . I guess I’ll just say a couple of 
words about that. I’ve known that city for a long, long period of 
time. I grew up some 90 miles south-west of there, so Moose 
Jaw was our shopping community. And I’ve seen the changes in 
Moose Jaw over the years. Some have been positive, and some 
have been not so positive. Certainly they’ve gone through some 
difficult times. There’s always the competition factor between 
Regina and Moose Jaw, as there is between my home town and 
Saskatoon, between P.A. (Prince Albert) and Saskatoon. So it’s 
always a struggle for those communities to maintain their base, 
their population base, and all the economic activity. 
 
So I can say that I’m really quite pleased for the city of Moose 
Jaw. The fact that they’ve been able to . . . Well they pressured 
a lot of people, and they’ve worked long and hard to put this 
project together. And I think the fact that the cost benefit 
analysis has been able to put together a project that will pay for 
itself over a period of time I think really is a feather in the hat to 
the people in that community. They’ve done a very good job. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And of course we as 
the Liberal caucus definitely wish Moose Jaw well, as well as 
you do. And I know you have a special interest in it, and I have 
a special interest in Watrous which is near my home town. And 
I’m just wondering if they had requested something in the same 
way as Moose Jaw had, if there was . . . because they are 
basically in direct competition. I’m wondering if the same type 
of status has been given to Watrous. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member, I don’t believe that 
there was a request from Watrous, but PAWBED funding, 
which is federal and provincial, through an application is 
certainly accessible. And we welcome applications. And as 
funding will allow, we’re certainly more than willing to work 
with communities in terms of projects as it pertains to the 
development of water initiatives. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1651 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1651 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1651 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................1652 
Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1673 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Marriage of Member for Meadow Lake  

Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
Passing of Michael Osika  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
World Record for House Demolition  

Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
Aboriginal Head Start Program  

Stanger ......................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
Cathedral Village Arts Festival  

Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
Moose Jaw Kinsmen International Band and Chorale Festival  

Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
Green School  

Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1654 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1654 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1654 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1655 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1655 

Student Summer Employment  
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1655 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1655 

Changes to Labour Standards  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1656 

Gaming Addiction Help-line  
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1656 

Crown Investments Corporation President’s Furniture Expenditures  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1656 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1657 

SaskPower Legislation  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1657 

Overhead Power Lines  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1658 

 
National Unity Debate  



 

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1658 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act  

Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
Recorded division ........................................................................................................................................................................1659 

TABLING OF REPORTS  
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1659 

POINT OF ORDER  
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1660 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1660 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 83  An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act  
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1661 

Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who Pose a Significant Risk of 
Serious Harm to Other Persons  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1662 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................1666 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1666 

Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government Organization Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1668 

Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act  
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1669 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government Organization Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 50  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1672 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1676 

 
 
 


