













































March 26, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 511 

 March 26, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 

behalf of seriously concerned citizens concerning the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 

Regina and the small surrounding areas. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

throughout numerous southern Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Wynyard, Pilot Butte, Bethune. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well in 

regard to the issue of the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on this petition are almost exclusively from the 

Regina area. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present names of 

people who are very upset about the closure of the Plains 

Health Centre in Regina. 

 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people who have signed the petition are from Regina, from 

Balgonie, from Canora, from Nipawin and all over 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I rise once again today to 

present a petition of names from people basically from Regina 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition has been signed by many, many 

people from Regina that are concerned about the closure of the 

Plains and recognize the value of that institution. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from all over Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people who have signed the petition are from Moose Jaw, 

Rockglen, Chaplin. I also see Nipawin and Caronport on here. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I rise again to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

from Regina, they’re from Weyburn, and they’re from Langham 

and pretty well all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I 

so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions from people throughout Saskatchewan and actually a 

few from throughout western Canada in regards to saving the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, many from the Regina area, 

quite a few from Melville, Windthorst, and of course from 

Regina Albert South constituency and Elphinstone 

constituency. There’s quite a number of them. 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day 24 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General: (1) 

what is the annual salary of the senior Crown prosecutor 

who is employed at the North Battleford Crown 

Prosecutor’s office and who was suspended with pay on 

October 25, 1995 arising from the investigation 

surrounding the Robert Latimer case in North Battleford; 

(2) how much has the said senior Crown prosecutor earned 

since he was suspended with pay; (3) how long will the 

said senior Crown prosecutor remain on suspension with 

pay? 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I 

shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation: 

(1) what was the total amount of tenders for capital asset 

construction activities in the fiscal year 1992-93; (2) if the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement was in place at 

that time, how much of that total would have been subject 

to the CCTA? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have 34 similar questions regarding the 

actual amounts of tenders for capital asset construction activity 

for the fiscal years ’92-93, ‘93-94, ‘94-95, ‘95-96, and the 

estimated for ‘96-97 pertaining to Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications, the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company, and Saskatchewan Water Corporation and 

SaskEnergy. I will, if you please, read each of them, but in the 

interests of time, I would like to present them as a group to the 

Assembly. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to all 

of the members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my great 

pleasure today to introduce 13 people from the Regina Baptist 

Academy. They are seated, as you can see, in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. I very much look forward to meeting with this group 

later for pictures and then a meeting in the appropriate-sized 

room which happens to be the Speaker’s boardroom. 

 

These 11 students are accompanied by their teacher, Nancy 

Smith, and chaperon, Daniel Lewis. I ask all members to join 

me in welcoming this group from the Regina Baptist Academy. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you and to the Assembly Mr. Manley 

McLachlan, seated in your gallery. Manley is the executive 

director of the Saskatchewan Construction Association which 

represents over 600 private contractors in the province of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Traffic Safety 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the importance of traffic safety. Knowing the rules of 

the road and driving defensively are two things all drivers 

should keep in mind. An excellent case in point would be the 

chain reaction of fender benders in the parking lot of the 

legislature this morning. Mr. Speaker, in a matter of seconds a 

vehicle belonging to my colleague from Arm River was hit, in 

turn he lost his grip on the road, and of course that should not 

be confused with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

that this government dismantled. 

 

As I surveyed the damage, I noticed several vehicles belonging 

to members opposite, which were also damaged; I was 

surprised of course that my own was involved. And I was 

surprised to hear that one of the New Democrats had a vision, 

in fact, an impaired vision. I calmed after seeing it was an Eagle 

Vision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thankfully no one was hurt and I can assure this 

House that the member from Arm River will keep demanding 

that we send him the bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Dairy Youth Ambassador 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

let me give you a quotation: 

 

The possibilities for our industry are endless. As 

competition gains more access to markets in 

Saskatchewan’s dairy industry, we must adapt by 

developing innovative tools to ensure our survival. 

 

This is a quote from a constituent of mine, an 18-year-old 

constituent. Mr. Speaker, Michele Schroeder, from the town of 

Leroy, has been named the 1996 dairy youth ambassador by the 

Saskatchewan Dairy Foundation. The award was given at the 

dairy association’s annual convention and was based on her 

knowledge, poise, and public relations skills. Michelle is 

currently attending St. Peter’s College in Muenster and plans to 

enter the College of Agriculture this fall, studying biogenetics. 

 

She grew up on the family dairy farm and she has been an 

active participant in the dairy industry at both local and 

provincial levels. Her parents, Lorne and Theresa Schroeder,  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

are understandably proud. As ambassador, Michele will 

represent the Saskatchewan dairy industry, raising the profile of 

the industry, its products and its producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say that I am happy to represent the 

Schroeder family. The Saskatchewan dairy industry has an 

excellent ambassador and the province has a certain future 

leader. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Humboldt Hurricanes 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to congratulate the Humboldt Hurricanes under 15 boys 

indoor soccer team for winning the provincial championships 

held in Prince Albert, March 9, 10, and 11. The tournament 

consisted of eight teams with Humboldt placed in a pool with 

Moose Jaw, the defending outdoor champions; Saskatoon 

Lakeridge Snipers, who have not lost a league game all year; 

and a very tough Regina UCT (United Commercial Travellers) 

international squad. 

 

In order to advance to the finals, the team had to finish in the 

top two positions of the pool. Under the direction of their 

coaches, Michael Suchan and Willie Kosokowsky, the 

Hurricanes played undefeated in the tournament winning the 

provincial championships. 

 

Congratulations, Humboldt Hurricanes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Land Management System 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During 

Agriculture Week we honour our province’s farmers, as we 

should. But I also want to commend the members of the 

Department of Agriculture who work with our farmers and 

more often receive brickbats rather than bouquets for their 

efforts. 

 

In particular, today I want to mention a little-known 

improvement begun in 1994 that saves the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan nearly $500,000 a year in reduced operations and 

support costs. 

 

The new Crown land management system is a new mechanism 

for managing nearly 9 million acres of Crown land we have in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is an example of public 

servants working quietly in the background without fanfare or 

recognition to reduce expenses and improve service to the 

public. 

 

The new Crown management system allows for the automatic 

generation of lease documents based on the client and land 

information. This will assist farmers and petroleum companies 

and municipalities. 

 

Essentially what we are talking about here is to use modern 

technology to streamline operations, to increase efficiency, and  

to improve communications with the clients of leased Crown 

land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the old saying goes, Mr. Speaker -- adjusted for inflation  

a loonie saved is a loonie earned. This is just one example 

where the cliché is a reality. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal By-election Results 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given the daily abuse 

in this House of the federal government, I want to point out to 

all my friends in this Assembly that there is a significant 

confidence which continues to exist. 

 

I rise today to offer my congratulations to all those elected in 

last night’s federal by-elections. As I’ve always said, the voters 

are always right. So clearly last night was no exception. 

 

The federal Liberal government defied all odds last night by 

winning a whopping five out of six contests. For a government 

that is more than halfway into its mandate, this is remarkable. 

The by-election wins were a significant vote of confidence in 

the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vote also showed the level of disinterest 

Canadians have in either the New Democratic Party or the 

Conservative Party, both of which barely made a blip in last 

night’s election results. 

 

On this side of the House, we may not always agree with our 

counterparts in Ottawa, but like I say, you can’t argue with the 

Canadian electorate. They know what’s best and what’s best 

right now is a Liberal government in Ottawa with the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) and Conservatives relegated to the 

sidelines. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Elk Processing Plant 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to speak 

about economic development in my constituency. Economic 

development continues to surge ahead in the city of 

Lloydminster. A $1.3 million elk processing plant is scheduled 

to open in the border city in May. This plant will be processing 

elk antler which has large markets in North America and many 

foreign countries. 

 

For example, the Koreans use it for health and strength because 

when it is processed, it is considered a herbal remedy; 85 per 

cent of the finished product will be exported to Korea and the 

remainder will go to markets in China, Japan, Taiwan, and 

North America. 

 

The antlers will be purchased from elk farmers around my area, 

processed, and eventually ground into powder to be placed into 

capsules for consumption. This plant will have the capacity to  



514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

process about 20,000 pounds of elk antler a year. Mr. Speaker, 

the finished product must be made to exact specifications and 

that is why skilled workers from Korea will be training local 

people how to run the plant. 

 

I would like to congratulate John Jhung, the manager of the 

plant, for creating economic development in the community by 

using this home-grown Saskatchewan resource. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation Award 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Gordon Lund memorial 

conservation trophy was presented to a Saskatchewan couple 

who have worked tirelessly for many years in the field of 

conservation. Dr. James Jowsey and Shirley Jowsey of Saltcoats 

have long been involved in conservation efforts and have 

promoted public appreciation of nature. 

 

One of the most important achievements of the Jowseys is the 

research and writing of Wildflowers Across The Prairies. This 

book, which is a prairie best seller, provided a needed 

comprehensive and easy to use guide to prairie wild flowers. 

Jim and Shirley have also conducted many field trips and 

classes in wild flowers resulting in a heightened interest in their 

conservation. They continue to assist as volunteers in many 

conservation projects such as providing botanical and bird 

inventories on protected areas and assisting in the study of 

wetlands and the reintroduction of whooping cranes and 

sandhill crane populations in the Yorkton region. 

 

Congratulations to the Jowseys for winning this award, which is 

presented to the person or persons who, by thought, effort, and 

deed are considered to have contributed the most towards the 

conservation of Saskatchewan’s renewable resources. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I would like to introduce some guests in the 

Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of people 

from the city here. We have Ted Walters; I ask Ted to stand. 

We also have Emil Leibel from Balgonie; Dave Ewart from the 

city here, Regina; Ron and Marge Yeo from the city; Harold 

Horner, also from the city here; Ken Manz, also from the city 

here; Roy Pretty from the city here as well; Darlene Sterling 

from the city here as well; and Lenore Shmeling from Riceton 

who is an RN (registered nurse). 

 

These people are here this afternoon and they’re from the Save 

the Plains Committee. I’d like to ask the Assembly to welcome  

these very special guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly two former sitting members of this Legislative 

Assembly. One for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, Bob Long; and one 

for Regina Wascana, Clint White. I was having a good visit 

with them and recall the days when Clint had taught me many 

good lessons of history and also had been a major influence in 

my being a sitting member here today. So I would like all 

members to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I note 

. . . oh I’m sorry; with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I note that in the 

east gallery there is a friend and well-known advocate for 

seniors’ issues for the province of Saskatchewan. An extremely 

knowledgeable person and probably well known to many 

people in this Legislative Assembly. I would appreciate very 

much if all of us would warmly welcome Ferdie Ewald. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Plains Health Centre Closure 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Liberal opposition has presented petitions on behalf of 

thousands of Saskatchewan residents opposed to the closure of 

the Plains Health Centre during this legislative session. And we 

will continue to do so until all 70,000 signatures have been 

presented in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health explain why his 

government is choosing to base many of its decisions on the 

advice of 5,000 people who participated in pre-budget 

consultation meetings, yet refuses to acknowledge the more 

than 70,000 people who oppose the closure of the Plains? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. 

member for the question. 



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

I want to say to the hon. member and to the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that the consolidation of services in the Pasqua 

Hospital and the General Hospital in Regina will not diminish 

the services available to people in Regina and southern 

Saskatchewan at all. But it will save the taxpayers $10 million 

per year and it will improve services, Mr. Speaker. And I find it 

strange that there would be anybody in this House that would 

disagree with that. 

 

There have been three boards of the Regina Health District 

looking at this issue. All three have come to the same 

conclusion. It’s hard to be on the losing side. Sometimes it’s 

hard to accept change. But sometimes we have to change to 

build a better health care system. 

 

That’s what the Regina District Health Board is doing; that’s 

what our government is trying to do. And I support what the 

board is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health claims 

the decision to close the Plains was made solely by the Regina 

District Health Board. However, I have in my hands  and I 

would like to send a few copies over to some of the cabinet 

ministers so that they could follow along today, Mr. Speaker  

a copy of a letter dated January 12, 1996, one day before the 

board voted on the status of the Plains, I might add. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this letter from Deb Jordan of the minister’s own 

department to Dick Chinn of the Regina Health Board states 

very clearly that the interim operating funding for the district is, 

and I quote, “predicated on the basis of the board moving ahead 

with the closure of the Plains.” Will the minister admit in this 

House today the Regina District Board did not choose but was 

forced into a decision to close the Plains Health Centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously the decision 

to close the Plains Health Centre was a decision for the Regina 

Health Board. 

 

Now the member is talking about funding for the Regina Health 

Board. I’ll admit, as I admitted in the media yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Regina District Health Board, like every other 

health board, has to live within its budget, just as we all do, just 

as this government does. And when you can provide the same 

services at a reduced cost, saving $10 million per year, I say to 

the members, change is difficult, it’s difficult to adjust to 

change. Sometimes you’re on the losing side of an issue  it’s 

disappointing, but the change is for the better. It will save $10 

million per year. 

 

Of course we’ve said to the Regina District Health Board, we 

provided funding on the basis of the consolidation which has 

already been occurring over the last few years, Mr. Speaker. 

And if the consolidation doesn’t occur, obviously we’re not 

going to provide funding that is based upon that consolidation 

occurring. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

Minister of Health did not realize when he had to apologize in 

this House the other day for not understanding what his 

department was up to, he should have taken note of that. He 

may well have to do the same again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter I’ve just quoted from shows very clearly 

that the health board had to go along with the government’s 

wishes or risk jeopardizing the health care of the people of 

southern Saskatchewan even further. 

 

As an ad by the Save the Plains Committee in Saturday’s 

Leader-Post states, and I quote: “With a gun like that at its 

head, what choice was left?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that the Regina District Board was 

held at ransom by the NDP government and the fact that no 

independent cost/benefit analysis has ever been conducted on 

the Plains, will the minister commit to such an independent 

study before any final decision is made on the future status of 

the Plains Health Centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  You know, I find this a bit strange, Mr. 

Speaker, because last week on two occasions the member from 

Wood River and the member from Thunder Creek were up in 

this House criticizing me because we had hired consultants to 

look into various aspects of health care, instead of just getting 

down to the job and making decisions. 

 

Well in terms of the Plains hospital, three boards have made a 

decision. There have been two studies, Mr. Speaker; not one but 

two. Last week they say don’t hire any consultants. This week 

they say hire consultants even though there have been two 

consultants. 

 

So I say to the House, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn’t matter what 

we do on this issue. The job of the members opposite is to 

complain, and I respect that. And the member from Wood River 

complains very well. 

 

But on the issue of decision making and consultants, we’re not 

going to study it more. We’re not going to have more 

consultants brought in at a great cost, Mr. Speaker. A decision 

has been taken by three boards, and we’re going to get on with 

the job, Mr. Speaker, and I invite that member to do so as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An ad appeared in 

Saturday’s Leader-Post indicating that the biggest health care 

recruiter in the United States will be in Regina next month to 

try and lure health care professionals from this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed closure of the Plains Health Centre 

will result in the elimination of some 200 jobs. Many front-line 

health care workers at the Plains will obviously be attracted by 

the proposal in this ad. Will the minister explain if he intends to  



516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

stand by and watch health care professionals leave this province 

for other jurisdictions that have a real commitment to health 

care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to that member, Mr. Speaker, 

that if she thinks that the jurisdictions that have a commitment 

to health care for their people are in the United States, I can 

only say that I disagree with that member. That American 

system is a system where 35 million Americans have no health 

care coverage, Mr. Speaker. And if the Liberals think that’s 

some kind of an example, I can only say it’s not the example 

that we’re going to follow. 

 

But I want to say the member, as I’ve said to the House, the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre doesn’t result in the loss of 

any services to the people of Regina or southern Saskatchewan. 

And I want to say to the House as well, Mr. Speaker, that 

contrary to what that member wants people to believe, the 

number of physicians and specialists practising in this province 

in the last few years has been going up, not down. 

 

And the American health care system is not an example for that 

member to be talking about as an example that the people of the 

province should follow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this NDP government continually 

talks about its commitment to the creation of meaningful, 

well-paying jobs to help provide a solid tax base in this 

province. Yet here we have 200 health care workers, 

representing a $7 million payroll, leaving. Many of these people 

are half of a dual-income family who are essentially being told, 

sorry, we don’t need you any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was this government that only a few days ago 

criticized the federal government for relocating 50 health 

care-related jobs. Can the minister or maybe the Minister of 

Economic Development explain why his government now 

thinks nothing of opening a door for 200 front-line workers at 

the Plains Health Centre to leave this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Plains Health Centre closure is not a jobs issue. It is an 

issue that has to do with providing services to the people of 

Regina and southern Saskatchewan in a cost-effective manner. 

The people that work and provide services at the Plains Health 

Centre will be working at the Pasqua Hospital and at the 

General Hospital, Mr. Speaker. The member simply does not 

have her facts right in that regard. 

 

This is an issue of health services. Those health services are 

going to be consolidated; they are going to be provided to the 

people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan better than they 

have before, but at a saving. And we support that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Canadian Wheat Board Monopoly 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 

Minister, Saskatchewan farmers want more marketing choices. 

Governments should be encouraging this rather than hauling 

farmers into court for simply wanting to get the best price for 

their product. 

 

Support is clearly growing for a dual-marketing system and an 

end to the Canadian Wheat Board monopoly. In fact your 

government’s own polling showed that 58 per cent of farmers 

believed participation in the Canadian Wheat Board should be 

voluntary. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to start listening to 

Saskatchewan farmers? Will you follow Alberta’s lead and hold 

a producer plebiscite to allow for dual marketing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee the 

member opposite we will not be following Alberta’s lead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  A government that spends about half of 

what we do per capita on agriculture, we won’t follow that lead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the western grain marketing panel 

meetings around this province where there was overwhelming 

support for Canadian Wheat Board  overwhelming support. 

We have seen a group of economic professors, Mr. Furtan, Mr. 

Tyrchniewicz, and Mr. Kraft out of Winnipeg, do a study telling 

us that there is hundreds of millions of dollars of advantage to 

the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the combination of the Liberals and Tories 

taking away $320 million a year through the Crow benefit, I 

don’t know why the member opposite wants to take another 3 

or $400 million away by destroying the Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I’m going by your 

own polling results. If you’re going to do this kind of polling, 

why don’t you listen to it. Seventy per cent of farmers want to 

be able to sell their grain to domestic markets without going 

through the Wheat Board, while 50 per cent think they should 

be able to sell to the U.S. (United States) outside of the Wheat 

Board as well. Yet the government continues to treat this as a 

criminal offence. 

 

Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan farmers are not interested in 

destroying the Canadian Wheat Board. In fact 81 per cent of 

those polled consider themselves supporters of the Wheat 

Board. They simply want more marketing choices, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, immediately after question period I’ll be 

introducing an amendment to The Referendum and Plebiscite  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

Act that will allow for a producer plebiscite vote on this issue. 

If you are truly interested in listening to Saskatchewan farmers, 

will you support this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think the member opposite should do his homework a little 

better. If he goes back to the Canadian-U.S. Free Trade 

Agreement, in article 705(5), the U.S. clearly indicate that any 

change in our marketing structure would cause them to 

implement on this newest regime of tariffs against our grain. 

Basically what they’re saying is they’re going to shut the border 

down if there’s any influx of grain at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add to that the numbers from the 

submissions to the western grain marketing panel. There was 

some 77 or 80 submissions. You know that 12 of them were 

opposed to the board? The rest of the them were in favour of 

the board. 

 

And this member here tries to use a survey, a poll that we put 

forward. The fact of the matter is if you ask the question -- 

here’s the real question -- if dual marketing or continental 

marketing means the end of the board, do you still support it, 

majority of people say no. And we know very well that 

continental dual marketing will be the end of the board. We say 

no to that. We say yes to producers earning millions of more 

dollars, to the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Plains Health Centre Closure 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I note that 

it was quite interesting that when I returned from lunch today I 

had a phone call from an individual who had called very deeply 

concerned about the question about the Plains health care 

centre. And I would like to ask the Minister of Health why his 

department or why his government will not accept 

responsibility for their decision? 

 

As we saw in the ad taken out in Saturday’s Leader-Post, the 

board, and some members of the board  people are very 

concerned about what’s happening at the Plains health care 

centre  indicated to us, and we’ve heard this for the past four 

years, that they really had no other viable opportunity or 

alternative because the government basically said we will just 

cut the funding if you do not continue the process of shutting 

down the board. It’s like they said, with a gun like that to your 

head, what choice is left? 

 

Mr. Minister, you have said you would give the boards 

autonomy. That they would have the real powers to make 

decisions. And yet in this city you appoint six members, allow 

eight to be elected. The chairman of this board happens to be 

Mr. Stevenson, and we know all what he’s done a number of 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. The member has 

had a lengthy preamble and I’ll ask him to proceed directly to  

his question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, when will 

you and your government and your Premier finally 

acknowledge to the people of this province that the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre came directly from your 

government and your department, not the boards? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, what the member really takes 

issue with, I think, is the concept that when you fund a board or 

you fund a government that there should be fiscal responsibility 

and accountability and that people should in fact live within a 

certain budget. There’s no question about that. And for that I 

accept responsibility, and the government accepts 

responsibility. 

 

We’re doing a good job funding the health care system, Mr. 

Speaker; we haven’t cut it. But unlike the Conservatives, we’re 

not going to give anybody in the province a blank cheque. We 

can’t have one ourselves and nobody else in the province 

should have one either. And if the Regina District Health Board 

 three boards now, Mr. Speaker, and two studies  say that 

they can provide the same services to the people of Regina, but 

do it and save $10 million . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the Conservatives did in the ‘80s in terms of 

fiscal responsibility is not the example to follow. This kind of 

thinking, that we should simply pour more money into the 

system regardless of what the experts tell us, and the boards and 

the communities decide, is not the kind of thinking that in the 

long run will keep our health system sustainable for the 21st 

century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I think what people across this 

southern part of this province, certainly outside of the city of 

Regina as well as in Regina, are looking for is a totally 

independent study. Not a study that is commissioned to just 

indicate to the public that the government’s right on track -- a 

closed study, as we saw the Minister of Agriculture just telling 

us about the Wheat Board, a study where they . . . well of 

course the Wheat Board would give that type of a report. 

 

Mr. Minister, you control the purse-strings. Mr. Minister, your 

department tells the boards how to spend their money, the 

allotment of funds for acute care, and all the other different 

levels of care within the board system. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’re responsible. Mr. Minister, why will you 

not listen to the people of this province and acknowledge the 

fact that it would be appropriate to do a totally independent 

study to find out whether this is a fiscally responsible choice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Speaking of fiscal responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s difficult for somebody like the member, who is 

part of the previous administration in this province, to do  



518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

otherwise than to come into this House and berate Garf 

Stevenson yet again, who doesn’t deserve anything but the 

highest praise from the people of this province and this 

legislature for his service to this province, and berate the people 

that have conducted studies with respect to the Regina Health 

Board. 

 

And the member says he wants independent studies, well let me 

say this to the member, Mr. Speaker. One of the consultants on 

this study was a Mr. Atkinson, who is the same Mr. Atkinson 

that the member and his government retained to do studies into 

these matters when they were in office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Change is difficult. Getting ready for the next century is 

difficult, Mr. Speaker, but you’ve got to change sometimes 

when you can do things better, when you can spend smarter and 

more efficiently. That’s what the Regina Health District is 

doing and it should have the support of the member, not this 

kind of criticism of various individuals throughout our province 

and country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Classification of Care Levels 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Health 

should be aware, the recent review process for special services 

in regional care homes is adopting the Alberta classification 

system, a system that relies heavily on documentation rather 

than on needs assessment. 

 

The Parkland Regional Care Centre in my constituency has 

been affected by this review. It has lost its regional status and 

therefore its regional funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recently learned from local health officials that 

British Columbia’s Department of Health is considering 

adopting Saskatchewan’s current classification system for level 

of care because it finds the Alberta system to be impractical. 

Maybe we have more in common with the Alberta model than 

just the name Cline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: when other 

provinces are looking at our system of classification regarding 

the level of care, why are we using Alberta’s system, a province 

that the Premier refers to as Alabama North, when that province 

has stripped health care dramatically? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  When the member says that we have 

something in common with Alberta, Mr. Speaker, I can only 

assume that the member is talking about the federal government 

in terms of its funding for health care. Because the federal 

government is cutting health care spending in this country by 

about 35 per cent to 1998. The Alberta government also has 

reduced health care expenditure quite significantly. 

 

We have not done that, Mr. Speaker, because our aim, unlike 

what the Liberals talked about today in terms of the American 

health care system, is to preserve the medicare system, the  

publicly administered system, the single-payer system that we 

have that we founded in this province, not just for ourselves but 

for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to do that, we need to work in cooperation with all the 

people in the province. And I hope that the members opposite 

will think about that. Think about the system we have, not use 

the American system as an example, and certainly try to 

encourage Ottawa not to pursue the policy that it has been 

pursuing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, local health care officials tell 

me that without proper funding of programs, patients suffering 

cognitive impairments such as Alzheimer’s or dementia will not 

receive adequate programs. These programs give patients some 

chance at renewed dignity and independence. The choices your 

government is forcing on district health boards will result in 

these patients being controlled through over-medication and 

physical restraint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that there will be sufficient numbers of beds and 

program funding to ensure that our parents and our spouses will 

not face a future of excessive drugs and restraints and 

understaffed long-term care facilities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m very pleased to hear in both the 

member’s first question and the second question, Mr. Speaker, 

that he acknowledges what a good system we do have in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the member has some fears that we will do things like 

Ottawa may be doing or he fears Alberta may be doing to 

change our system. And I say to the member and to the House, 

Mr. Speaker, no. We have no intention of doing that at all. We 

are going to keep our system the best, not only in the country, 

but in the world. And we’re committed to that, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think our health system is the number one system in the 

world and we’re going to keep it that way. And I thank the 

member for that vote of confidence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour. In the past I’ve asked the 

minister to justify wasting enormous amounts of taxpayers’ 

dollars as a result of the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. He has failed miserably in his attempts. All he had 

to say was that I had no model or way of documenting that the 

contracts actually cost any more than they would without the 

CCTA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have received information that a tender for a fire 

alarm system at SaskTel in Regina closed last week. This tender 

clearly shows the lowest bid using union labour is nearly  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

$60,000  over 20 per cent -- higher than the lowest bid using 

non-union labour. Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that 

the CCTA is in fact going to cost Saskatchewan taxpayers an 

additional $60,000 for this one project alone? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I would like to thank the hon. member 

for his question, Mr. Speaker. I would point out to the member, 

reflecting on his earlier questions, he was saying that last year 

the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement cost us 

100-and-some million dollars more. I’d point out to the hon. 

member that I’ve checked those figures since, and all of the 

Crown construction tendering that was done last year amounted 

to only about $15 million. So when the member says it cost us 

over $100 million more last year, and there were only $15 

million in total, I don’t pay much credence to the accusation 

that the member makes opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with all due 

respect, I would rather believe the figures from the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association than what nonsense 

that we had tabled here last week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CCTA is not a fair and open tendering policy. 

I don’t know why the minister is so ignorant to this. Mr. 

Speaker, the lowest non-union bidder for the SaskTel fire alarm 

system is a Saskatchewan firm. The minister stated in this 

Assembly that his tendering policy takes into consideration 

Saskatchewan workers, Saskatchewan content, and good quality 

of work. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that the lowest bidder using union 

labour is an out-of-province firm. This would leave me to 

believe that not only does the minister favour policies that help 

out his NDP friends, but also takes business away from the 

good quality construction firms right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally do the right thing and 

repeal the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d make a couple points with the hon. 

member, Mr. Speaker. One of the points is that sometimes bids 

are put in; they are almost vexatious in nature of the bid that’s 

being submitted because they know they don’t qualify for the 

bidding process. They put in a low bid so members like the 

member opposite can be confused when they place questions on 

the floor of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The other point I’d like to put forward is that from time to time 

there may be firms from outside of Saskatchewan get work in 

Saskatchewan. Why? Because we take the lowest qualified bid 

to do the work. We also want firms from Saskatchewan to be 

able to bid in other places in Canada. In terms of holding our 

country together and its fabric, we believe that the good policy 

that we have of lowest qualified is the policy we should stick 

with, not only so Saskatchewan firms can do good work in  

Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan construction jobs, but also that 

Saskatchewan firms can do work outside the province, in the 

good quality they do, for other places throughout Canada. 

 

So I don’t know. The member gets very confused in the 

questions he puts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 52  An Act to amend The Referendum and 

Plebiscite Act (Canadian Wheat Board) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Referendum and 

Plebiscite Act (Canadian Wheat Board) be now read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Snowmobile Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 

the day, I rise pursuant to rule 46 to ask leave of the Assembly 

to engage in a debate of urgent and pressing necessity regarding 

the proposed closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

The Speaker:  The member has requested leave to introduce 

a motion under rule 46. I’ll ask that the member explain very 

briefly, very . . . Order. Order. I will ask the member to very 

briefly explain the nature of the motion and then advise the 

House of the wording of the motion he proposes to put. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Closure of the Plains Health Centre 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday an 

advertisement appeared in the Regina Leader-Post. This 

advertisement finally provided an explanation as to why the 

elected Regina District Health Board would vote to accept the 

decision of previous, unelected boards to close the Plains. The 

reason was because the Saskatchewan Health department told 

the Regina District Health Board that they would have to repay 

$5 million which the government advanced them last year. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now I would ask the hon. member to 

explain the reason why this is a motion which should be put 

before the Assembly now, not to engage in debate. I will ask 

him if he wants to comment on that, to go precisely to that right 

now and then to – order -- and then to immediately advise the  



520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

House of the motion he intends to request be debated. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason for 

the urgent and pressing necessity is in fact because of the 

strong-arm tactics of the Health department and the minister, 

the confidence in our health system that will be eroded should 

we not have this debated fully in this House, and the fact that 

we have 70,000 residents of this province that have . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I will ask the member then to advise 

the House right now of the motion he intends to put -- or I will 

proceed to other business -- the motion you intend to have the 

House consider. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The text of the 

motion is as follows: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the government to take 

immediate action to suspend all decisions regarding the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre until the Minister of 

Health and the Department of Health can unequivocally 

assure the people of Saskatchewan that there has been a 

cost/benefit analysis, that there is sufficient number of 

acute care beds to handle patient waiting-lists, that the 

specialty services given at the Plains Health Centre remain 

as accessible to residents of Saskatchewan, and that the 

concerns of the people of Saskatchewan are addressed 

before further change occurs. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will table 

the answer to question no. 22. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 22 is tabled. 

 

Question 23 is converted to . . . Order. Question No. 23 is 

converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Redesigning Social Assistance 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is my pleasure to move the following motion, 

seconded by the hon. member from P.A. (Prince Albert) 

Carlton, after my remarks: 

 

That this Assembly work with the government in its 

determination to review and revise our social assistance 

program as outlined in the discussion paper, Redesigning 

Social Assistance, so that they can truly work towards 

eliminating child poverty and towards assisting people out 

of dependence and into independence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of this motion, as are members on 

this side of the House, because the motion and of course the  

redesign paper speak to reform. They speak to preparing for the 

changes over the next century. They speak to redesign. The 

document and the motion are futuristic. They afford all of us an 

opportunity to prepare for the next 10, 15 years in terms of the 

social assistance program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a hollow motion because it’s based on a 

specific discussion paper. The paper is very readable. It’s a 

discussion paper that has been widely circulated in 

Saskatchewan, and the Minister of Social Services and his 

officials have met with, I know, hundreds of clients, client 

representatives, advocates, and community groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to remind all of us that the 

potential to redesign income security programs occurs about 

once every 20 years, when you really have the opportunity to 

think creatively and redesign programs. So it’s a chance for all 

of us to do that in Saskatchewan. It’s a chance for 

Saskatchewan people to again show some leadership in the 

social arena, as we’ve traditionally done. And it really I think is 

a chance for all of us in Saskatchewan, but in Canada too  

because there’s interest from across Canada in this discussion 

paper, in these concepts  I think it’s a chance to reaffirm the 

values, the Saskatchewan values that we’re all proud of 

historically here. 

 

So there’s a window of opportunity with this discussion paper. 

And I believe that there is the potential for a future where 

people can have opportunities greater than they currently do, 

that is, low income and unemployed people. There would be 

some possibilities for them to reach their potential, to become 

financially independent, and perhaps more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, a chance for people to have some hope about the 

future  hope for themselves and their families, their children. 

 

So this is not a simple exercise. Major reform of this kind is not 

a simple exercise. There are no quick fixes. Income support and 

social programs are very complex. There are a number of 

interrelationships to take into account. There’s a relationship 

between income support programs and training programs. 

There’s jurisdictional considerations; the need to put 

appropriate monies in and so on. And there are no individual 

solutions isolated from a whole bunch of other factors, so an 

integrated approach is required. 

 

But I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are solutions though. We’ve 

demonstrated that in the past and we can demonstrate that now 

using, I think, the discussion paper that has been put forward by 

the Minister of Social Services. There are solutions if we work 

together, which is the strength and the character of 

Saskatchewan people. There are solutions if we cooperate, if we 

become creative, and if we’re constructive. And I believe that 

the redesign paper, Mr. Speaker, does provide us a wonderful 

opportunity. 

 

I believe that the government’s doing its job. Its job is to put 

forth a proposal for consideration to consider revamping, and 

sort of manufacturing, in a way that fits the ‘90s and the next 

century, a program that’s been in place for some 30 years. So 

there are changing demographics in the case-load. People are on 

longer than they used to be. The economy has restructured;  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

the labour market has restructured. And so I think we would all 

agree that reforms are in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important though not to sort of throw out 

things that are working. There are some things that are still 

working and you build upon the things that are working. And 

things have evolved over many years for important reasons. So I 

think it’s important that any solutions we choose, any new 

decisions, are more effective than the ones that they’re 

replacing. I think that’s important to keep in mind when we’re 

considering the options. 

 

And of course the challenge and the objective is, as the 

resolution says, to reduce child and family poverty; to provide 

opportunities for people; and of course to deal with the issue of 

supporting people with the tools and the bridges to become 

more independent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all members in this House support 

these concepts. I think we all are here because we believe that 

people who are unemployed and more vulnerable and less 

fortunate require the support. We all are here because we 

believe in strengthening communities. We don’t always agree 

on the analysis. We don’t always agree on what choices to 

make. But I believe that every member is here because he or she 

believes that they’re here to strengthen the communities, to 

strengthen the province, and to provide additional supports to 

families. 

 

We’re trying to prepare people for the future. We’re trying to do 

it in ways that allow us to forget about the old mind-sets and 

think open-mindedly and creatively. And most of all, I would 

say that we need to do this in a way that preserves the dignity of 

the people that are most affected. 

 

And it’s easy to criticize. It’s easy to condemn. But I think that 

it’s incumbent on all of us to not do what Alberta’s done, for 

example, to give people bus tickets to somewhere else. That 

doesn’t deal with the issue. 

 

It doesn’t deal with the issue, what Ontario’s doing. It doesn’t 

deal with the issue. They’re going to pay big time for the 

decisions they’re making to put people out on the streets and so 

on. Manitoba cut a big chunk of money out of the shelter rates 

last year. They’ve announced they’re cutting their rates by 10 

per cent this year. They’ll pay for that, I mean, because they’re 

investments. Our child action plan is an investment in families 

and in strengthening communities. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that the Ontario . . . we get out of 

Toronto here, I believe in today’s paper, that Toronto is moving 

to fingerprinting. Well why on earth, why on earth would you 

take pride in the fact that you’re going to start fingerprinting 

people on the systems. Well why would you do this to a 

particular group who are the poorest of the poor in the country. 

Why would you take pride in saying that you’re fingerprinting 

them? 

 

And as the article says, The Globe and Mail, that will give  

legitimacy to the welfare system if you start fingerprinting those 

who are getting benefits. It says fingerprinting will benefit a lot 

of people. Well what poverty advocates say, Mr. Speaker, is 

that lumping welfare recipients into the same category as 

criminals, who are already convicted, could be used for other 

purposes than welfare, in terms of keeping secret files on 

people. 

 

Well that may be an extreme view, but why on earth would you 

choose welfare people to fingerprint? It just doesn’t make any 

sense to me. And they go on to say, in Ontario  Toronto  

that seven states in the U.S. are doing this and it’s working very 

well. Well by what measure? 

 

As the Minister of Health said earlier today, 35 million 

Americans have no health coverage. Is that the model that we 

want to be our model? Mr. Speaker, it is easier to blame . . . In 

my 20 years experience in this field I found that it’s a lot easier 

to blame people on welfare than it is to come up with creative 

solutions to provide them with the opportunities. 

 

And so I think the Ontario situation is just getting bizarre, and 

it’s very, very rooted in punitive thinking, and to get the 

government off the hook, because they don’t have the solutions, 

nor are they even interested in the solutions for low income 

people. 

 

I believe that everyone in this House though is here for the 

reason that they want to make a better province for everybody. 

There are 78,000 beneficiaries, 34,000 being children, in this 

province who are on social assistance. Now that’s a fairly 

significant percentage of our population, although it’s the 

lowest in Canada of any province. But it’s not good enough. So 

every member here is concerned about those 78,000 people and, 

of course, those who are just above the assistance level who 

aren’t counted in the 78. I believe that every member is 

concerned about dealing with that. 

 

And I want to read a Christmas message which was in the 

Broadview Express, Grenfell, December 25 message, a 

Christmas message. The quote says, from Ron Osika, the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition, and I believe that the hon. leader 

agrees with me and he says, and I quote: 

 

Adversity forces all of us to pull together. And together, 

the people of Saskatchewan have weathered many a storm. 

It is my belief that this spirit of community will continue. 

 

We must never forget people right here in Saskatchewan 

(who are) less fortunate than (we are). 

 

In a world that is quickly evolving, where change is 

occurring faster and faster, Saskatchewan has no choice 

but to keep up with those changes. The way things were 

done 10, 20, 30 years ago no longer apply to today’s 

world. Adapting to those changes puts even more 

challenges in our path. But as we adjust to those changes, 

government cannot forget the human factor. Saskatchewan 

was built on neighbour helping neighbour. That message is 

especially important as we (move into) the 21st century. 

 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition. That is right on. So I anticipate that the hon. leader 

and his party, who are concerned about the less fortunate, will 

take the invitation of the Minister of Social Services, the 

invitation that this resolution or this motion provides, to in fact 

give their creative suggestions to the minister. 

 

And I know that they know that that’s a genuine, sincere offer 

by the minister because this is the opportunity for all of us 

together here to redesign a program that truly does deal with 

family poverty and give people the tools to make sure that they 

have opportunities to become financially independent. 

 

So I know that this is a motion that in spirit would be accepted 

by all members of the House and I really hope that all members 

will see fit to approve this motion. And then if there’s not 

agreement on all the elements of the program . . . I’m not going 

to go into some of those elements today, the specific elements 

like the child benefit and so on, because the hon. member from 

P.A. is going to do that and I did that to some degree the other 

day. But if one disagrees with some of those specific strategies, 

then that’s fine; make those suggestions known and I’m sure 

the minister will be open-minded about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this I believe is a compassionate document, 

the discussion paper on the redesign of the social assistance 

program. I believe that all members of the Assembly are 

compassionate. We’re all seeking solutions, to do the best we 

can. 

 

Family poverty must be dealt with. And we believe that in order 

to do that it requires a fairly major redesign. And I know that 

there are people in the community who feel  and many clients 

 who feel optimistic that if we implement this program it 

would even be better if there was enhanced federal support. 

 

I know that the Minister of Social Services met yesterday with 

his federal counterpart, discussing some potential joint 

cost-sharing on an enhanced child care program. I’m optimistic 

that something will come of that. And I think that that’s the 

kind of example between governments that will in fact give  

especially low income people  a hope that we can work 

together. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I will do then is, in closing, say that I 

move, seconded by the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) 

Carlton: 

 

That the Assembly work with the government in its 

determination to review and revise our social assistance 

program as outlined in the discussion paper, Redesigning 

Social Assistance, so that they can truly work towards 

eliminating child poverty and towards assisting people out 

of dependence and into independence. 

 

In closing, I think it is a positive paper. We need everyone’s 

ideas and I urge all members to support the motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr.  

Speaker, I want to congratulate the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview for putting this motion before the House. This is a 

very important issue and it’s an issue which really does 

distinguish this government, this New Democratic government 

of Saskatchewan, from many other governments in Canada. 

And I’m very proud to be able to stand here in support of this 

motion. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, the government 

indicated that we’re setting our goals in this session, and in the 

three years to follow, as preparing Saskatchewan for the 21st 

century. 

 

The part of that goal, and part of reaching that goal, is to 

redesign the social service network. And when I read through 

the paper I found that it was a very thoughtful paper. I was very 

pleased that it was a paper that was put out for discussion. And 

I was particularly pleased to see that the methodology and the 

attitude that the government was displaying here in 

Saskatchewan was markedly different from what was being 

done in the provinces both to the west of us and to the east of 

us. 

 

Particularly when we think back of what Alberta did. Alberta 

lowered the rates given to social service recipients, and 

basically gave their people bus tickets, ending up in an influx of 

people moving, people that were on social services, moving 

from Alberta to British Columbia. 

 

And then when we look at what was happening in Ontario, a 

very similar thing. In 1995, July of 1995, the Ontario’s 

Conservative government of the day proudly announced, and I 

think it’s a shame, that they were cutting social assistance rates 

by more than a fifth. 

 

So what we saw there in the case of both of those right-wing 

governments, Mr. Speaker, was an attitude of governments 

where they were blaming the victim and where they were giving 

them the back of their hands and saying, out of here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that distinguishes them from this government. 

What we are saying to the people on social assistance is we 

want to give you a hand-up, not the back of the hand. A 

hand-up, not a hand-out; not the back of a hand, but a hand-up. 

And that is what this philosophy of our social assistance plan 

and redesign plan is all about. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is a measure of a society, it’s a 

measure of a government, of how it treats its most vulnerable 

people  those who are unable to become independent. And in 

some cases this may be seniors, in other cases it may be 

children, and Saskatchewan’s case certainly applies to a lot of 

the people that are involved on social assistance, are children. 

Or people who for other reasons are unable to get their 

independence, whether those reasons be due to lack of 

education, or whether they be because of physical purposes, or 

due to illness. 

 

I’m proud of the system that we have developed over the years 

because we have a system where really nobody in our country, 

in our province, need lack for basics. This becomes very  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

obvious when you visit countries outside of Canada, 

particularly African countries or some south Asian countries, 

where you will see a friend or a relative take a leper and park 

him in front of a bank or in front of some business and leave 

him parked there for the day to beg for a living for the rest of 

the day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that we in this country have found 

ways of giving people dignity and have developed a system 

which is quite sophisticated, but needs constant attention and 

needs adjustment, but have developed a system where I can feel 

proud that we, together as a society, can claim that we are 

taking care of those that are most vulnerable and most poor in 

our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan as of November, there were 

79,615 people receiving social assistance. That’s about nearly 7 

per cent, but we must keep in mind that 34,600 of those are 

children, are children. 

 

If you want a comparison, Mr. Speaker, in Ontario where they 

have 10 times the population  we have a population of about 

a million, Ontario has a population of about 10 million  in 

Ontario there were 1.3 million people who were taking social 

assistance and that percentage is far higher than it is in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When you take off the numbers of children on here, what we 

found, Mr. Speaker, that there was a full 18,000 people  

18,700 people  who were actually employable. And this is 

. . . a lot of our redesign is to try to assist those people who 

would be employable or capable of being employed to get them 

into the employed list. Because what they really want, Mr. 

Speaker, is jobs. They want to be able to work for wages and 

not work for welfare. 

 

Of those 18,000, there are a thousand now who have full-time 

jobs and there are about another 4,600 who have part-time jobs; 

however, the system of pay does not always work to the 

advantage of people who may have large families. So if you 

were on rather a minimum wage, on a minimum wage, which is 

not quite enough to raise a fairly good-sized family on, the 

assistance plan kicks in. 

 

Our redesign is geared, first of all, to help those families with 

children. There is a Saskatchewan child benefit which fits into 

this, Mr. Speaker, and it’s designed to give families with low 

income assistance, those families with small children with low 

income. And it’ll be designed to give them a little more money 

to keep those families working so they don’t feel they don’t 

have to go on welfare to get additional money. But they will be 

able to keep working, and their children will still have the 

benefits necessary, such as health and health coverage benefits, 

and benefits to be able to go to school with good clothing and 

have the equipment necessary to go to school. 

 

There is also a proposal in this to supplement those people who 

are working with assistance. And those people who perhaps are 

working part time should not be penalized by having the money 

that they are earning through work being clawed back. So 

there’s a proposal that that system be reviewed. 

(1445) 

 

And last of all, I think, it’s also quite important that those 

youngsters under age 22 will have any disincentives to work 

and disincentives to move away from their families removed. 

The whole idea is to link up the youth with education and link 

them up with their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re doing all of this in the face of the Liberal 

cuts from Ottawa. In 1993 the federal government capped the 

amount that they were giving to the province of Saskatchewan. 

That meant from then on we were on our own. They offloaded. 

They said, we’re not going to give you any more. Then in 

addition to that, they changed the unemployment insurance 

system which caused a great deal of people who were ordinarily 

able to work and have income from the unemployment 

insurance system to fall on to the social assistance case-load. 

 

Then on top of that, the federal government offloaded 

aboriginal people that were off reserve on to the provincial 

system. And then on top of that, in the last year they cut back 

about $20 million to social services. That’s part of the $100 

million the Saskatchewan government is being asked to 

back-fill. 

 

So when you put those three programs together, I wonder where 

the federal government is? The federal Liberal government is 

doing no better than the Conservative government in Ontario 

and the Conservative government in Alberta. No better. They 

are trying to penalize the victim. They are giving the people at 

the very bottom of our income ladder the back of their hand 

when they should be giving them a hand up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We say that the answer to those people that are looking for jobs, 

that want to work but find themselves unable to work, is 

through training and through education. And we are again 

redesigning our programs in the face of federal cuts, 

tremendous federal cuts, in the face of great adversity. But we 

know that the people of Saskatchewan have said that we should 

keep our health, our social services, and our education 

programs as foremost. And, Mr. Speaker, the people on this 

side of the House are determined to carry their load on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will close by summarizing, by saying once again, 

that I am proud that this government is not victimizing those 

who are already victims and is going to be redesigning the 

program to protect those that are the most vulnerable. I thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have the opportunity to speak to this motion as our 

caucus has put forth our own motion on the very important 

subject for the last two weeks. At the end of my comments, I 

will propose an amendment to this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our caucus has some concerns about what is and 

what isn’t being addressed in this government’s discussion 

paper entitled Redesigning Social Assistance. In consulting with 

a number of social assistance recipients and with groups  



524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

striving to eradicate poverty in our province, I have found that 

their focus is on social development through sound economic 

development resulting in a greatly diminished need for social 

assistance. 

 

People presently receiving social assistance speak of their deep 

desire to become meaningful contributors to their communities 

through their own talents, abilities, and energies. 

 

In 1987 the New Democratic Party formed a four-member task 

force which directed itself to undertake a public review of 

Saskatchewan’s social services. The task force set about to 

draw information from the experiences and wisdom of the 

people in this province. One of their goals was to gain insight 

into how social services affect Saskatchewan people. Let me 

applaud the idea, and let me applaud some of the 

recommendations made in those seven public hearings and in 

over 190 presentations submitted to the NDP. 

 

I would like to at this time remind the members opposite of one 

of their own principles put forward in that 1987 report, nine 

years ago. It stated that social services must be designed to 

maximize dignity, personal responsibility, self-respect, and 

opportunity, and to minimize complexity, inequity, and 

opportunities for bureaucratic control over the lives of 

recipients. 

 

The theory was there already nine years ago. What has 

happened to that theory? Words are not enough, Mr. Speaker. 

Words must be accompanied by an underlying understanding of 

what is implied by the theory to put it into practice. I don’t 

believe the NDP understands that those words can only become 

meaningful and have substance if an environment is created that 

will allow personal responsibility and opportunity to evolve 

through policies that support their community-based initiatives. 

 

An environment that supports community-based empowerment, 

instead of policies that lend to government control over 

community decision making, which ultimately impede 

entrepreneurial initiatives, is needed. Excessive taxation, high 

utility rates, and the cutting of services in rural and urban 

communities are also a detriment to job creation. 

 

When a hospital is closed or its staff are laid off, those people 

may be forced to leave the community. Doctors and nurses 

leave. Next, clinics and pharmacies close. When these 

community services are forced to close, owners and employees 

have to leave and they take their children with them. 

 

In turn, school enrolments diminish. This means teachers lose 

their jobs and leave, also taking their families with them. By 

this time, more businesses are getting panicky and are afraid 

that they will not have the population base needed to remain 

viable. It’s a devastating chain reaction and it is happening in 

our communities right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We believe it is within the power of the Premier to create 

opportunities by lowering taxes and utility rates and by cutting 

through some of the red tape that hinders entrepreneurial spirit 

and restricts growth in the business sector. Instead, the 

government would rather introduce learnfare and workfare. 

People aged 18 to 21 will have to go to school or work in order 

to receive social assistance. Learnfare and workfare can only be 

beneficial if there are jobs available or if an environment exists 

that promotes economic and social development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Social Services, how can 

learnfare, with its exorbitant costs and more than likely yet 

another unnecessary layer of bureaucracy, possibly be an 

answer? We already have learning institutes that can take many, 

many people who want to learn, in. 

 

If this government does not foster an environment conducive to 

job creation, we can get nowhere. And what about the many 

young people who live in northern Saskatchewan, who have 

very limited access to post-secondary institutions or to 

meaningful, full-time employment? What about people in their 

30’s or 40’s on social assistance who want to go back to 

school? Where are they in this discussion paper? The youth and 

in fact all the people of Saskatchewan deserve better than what 

has been proposed in this discussion paper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I am drawn back to rural and northern 

Saskatchewan. I have to speak for these people because this 

government certainly hasn’t. The people of rural Saskatchewan 

have watched their economy and their way of life disintegrate 

before their eyes. 

 

Government speaks of partnership, but through its policies such 

as health reform, it pits communities against each other. They 

blame each other for taking away seniors’ homes or hospitals 

when they should be blaming the NDP government. 

 

When this happens to communities, Mr. Speaker, we see a 

ripple effect. The use of food banks in rural Saskatchewan is 

increasing. Poverty is increasing. Social problems are 

increasing. In fact the only thing that doesn’t seem to be 

increasing is the number of jobs, and it’s no wonder with the 

decimation of rural communities taking place under the present 

government system. I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but I 

see a definite correlation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have to touch on the proposed welfare 

reform and how disabled people get lost in the message. 

Perhaps not everyone here knows that disabled people represent 

a small percentage of Saskatchewan’s population, but they 

represent a significant portion of the welfare case-loads. 

 

Currently they are eligible to receive money through the 

vocational rehabilitation for disabled program. However, in the 

proposed changes, they would be lumped together with 

non-status Indians and Metis in a large provincial training 

allowance program. These people are afraid that they will get 

lost in the shuffle. I would ask this government to think for a 

moment about how they can assure these people, the majority of 

whom can possibly work, that their drastically needed 

vocational rehab programs will not fall by the wayside. 

 

I give the government credit for recognizing that something 

needs to be done with the social problems plaguing rural, urban, 

and northern Saskatchewan, but this discussion paper is only a 

band-aid solution that will not help heal a very deep wound, a  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

wound that has been created by the government slashing of 

programs and especially by its lack of real commitment to 

creating jobs. 

 

Before this paper goes anywhere we need to see some real, 

valuable consultations with the people it will affect. After all, 

the people affected by these changes deserve a say in how this 

government plans to drastically alter their lives. Now, before 

this government goes any further, is the time to step back and 

take a long, hard look at social programs in this province. And 

now is the time to refocus on the real need, the need for 

comprehensive social development. 

 

And this time we should include all areas of Saskatchewan 

when we create our model. That means we should include rural, 

urban, northern, southern, eastern and western Saskatchewan in 

the process. Because, Mr. Speaker, social development is at the 

very heart of our society, and social development programs 

deserve to be created in a thoughtful and compassionate 

manner. Because, Mr. Speaker, if this isn’t done, people will 

continue to fall between the cracks. These people are your 

children, my children, our parents, our neighbours, and our 

friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the best interest of Saskatchewan people I 

would like to move the following amendment to the motion, 

seconded by the member from Athabasca, to be read as follows: 

 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following words substituted therefor: 

 

condemns the provincial government for failing to 

recognize that significant and sustained job creation is the 

only way to cure the growing social assistance numbers in 

Saskatchewan, and because it has provided no real hope 

for those employable residents on social assistance to get 

back on their own feet with long-term jobs. 

 

Thank you. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before I begin, 

I want to say that I tire of the debate when it comes to social 

services and all the grand plans that governments have for 

people that are on social assistance not only in northern 

Saskatchewan but throughout Saskatchewan as well. 

 

I sincerely appreciated the comments of the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton in reference to the need to emphasize that 

governments should help people on social assistance. And 

certainly as a member from a northern Metis community that 

certainly has seen many problems associated with the lack of 

opportunity, both economically and socially, I also see the 

pressing need for a new approach to social services. 

 

I think we have to point out that we’ve got to re-emphasize 

compassion as government, Mr. Speaker. We have 58 people in 

here that make laws and create laws and create the legislation 

that would assist people and would help people. 

And I want to also add to the comments of the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton that particularly from my area, from my 

region, we certainly don’t want a hand-up attitude, nor do we 

want the back of the hand when it comes to social services. We 

cannot as a society justly beat our weakest member, the people 

that haven’t got employment and the people that haven’t got 

adequate homes and the people that haven’t got adequate 

control over their lives. 

 

The Liberals don’t want that, and they don’t appreciate any 

effort in that regard. So the northern people don’t want the 

hand-up attitude; they don’t want to come to the government 

with their hands up and say, please help us. They have a lot of 

pride, Mr. Speaker. They have the same dreams and ambitions 

as every single member in this House. 

 

They don’t want as well, Mr. Speaker, a hand-out attitude as 

well. Governments have got to start looking at northern 

Saskatchewan as a place that is very exciting, Mr. Speaker, and 

a hand-out is simply not going to do it. What the northern 

people want, and I think what the people on social assistance 

want, is they want a fair share and fair control over their own 

lives. 

 

The madness has to stop, Mr. Speaker. We’re going through a 

cycle of constantly turning people in and out of our social 

services system. And what do we end up with in the end as a 

north, east, west, south? You end up with a whole pile of 

children and a whole pile of problems that will not get any 

better unless we have a unique and better way to address the 

social services system, not only in northern Saskatchewan, but 

throughout the province as well. 

 

We have to, as human beings, re-emphasize our compassion to 

our weakest members of our society. So what the northern 

people want, and I think what people want in general when it 

comes to social services, is they want excitement; they want a 

new approach, Mr. Speaker, particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan. They don’t want a hand-up, they don’t want a 

back of the hand, they don’t want a hand-out. Mr. Speaker, they 

want a fair share of control and access to the resources, from 

governments. 

 

And we as government, we’ve got to give them that 

opportunity. We all know what needs to be accomplished, Mr. 

Speaker. We need to be able to give people the opportunity to 

control their lives, to design a future for their children, and give 

them the tools to accomplish that  education, training, 

adequate assistance for business development, and the list goes 

on and on and on. 

 

I think for years we’ve been hearing, as government, that this 

type of effort needs to happen. How many more years must the 

people on social services tell the government and tell us as 

legislators that we have to have a new approach; we have to 

have a unique approach; we have to have an exciting approach. 

We have to have an approach that consults with them. Say, how 

can we do things better. 

 

Right throughout Saskatchewan, we’ll all benefit if we invest in 

people  if we invest in people. And I say again, if we invest  



526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

in people. A truly socialist government, Mr. Speaker, would 

give people control over their lives, and I think that’s a very key 

thing when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. So while I 

appreciate the comments of the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton, I think we have to go much deeper than that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan there is a system of disincentives. 

The only place that is able to offer employment is the meagre 

jobs attached to the mining industry. Many people work in the 

mining industry, Mr. Speaker, and they have in essence tried 

their very best to create employment for northern Saskatchewan 

people. I am not knocking the mining company nor am I 

knocking the forestry companies that are operating in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But when it comes to addresses of . . . or government’s paper, 

Redesigning Social Assistance, from my perspective as an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from a northern 

community that does not have an economic . . . the economic 

might that others regions have, I want to express my feelings on 

this thing. And if it’s the feelings of many people throughout 

Saskatchewan, then perhaps the Saskatchewan government 

should listen. 

 

After we leave the Assembly here today we all go to our 

families, we sit down at a nice table and we have some food 

and we live in a nice home, and of course we have the 

opportunity to stay with our family. But in northern 

Saskatchewan, many times, Mr. Speaker, there’s so many 

problems associated with this system that we live under, 

including the social services system, that that same opportunity, 

that same contentment that we feel as human beings, is not 

prevalent. 

 

I talk about the unique perspective on social assistance and I 

share some of my views, and I hope to make this system truly 

responsible, Mr. Speaker, to all people in the province, not just 

to the bureaucrats’ design that say, well let’s tinker with the 

social assistance program.  

 

They’ve got to leave this cement building, go out to northern 

Saskatchewan or go out to the smaller centres, whether they’re 

100 people or 10,000 people, and visit people. See the 

dysfunction out there and see the frustration of people when it 

comes to social services. 

 

If you’re going to fix the system, I would urge this government 

to do a revamping of the whole system. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan may get a hundred million dollars from 

the mining royalties  and I quote that from a CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) news story. I don’t know how much 

they get from the forestry activity, the tourism activity, from the 

personal income tax, from the GST (goods and services tax) 

credits, and the list goes on and on. Now what northern 

Saskatchewan people get, in particular in my riding, what they 

receive in return is a system that really is filled with 

disincentives. 

 

I think the important thing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to share with  

the Assembly is a letter from a gentleman out of Green Lake. 

This is a gentleman that’s about 45 years old; he’s got children; 

he has hopes and aspirations, like many of us do for our 

children and our grandchildren, and I want you to read a letter. 

It has more to do with economic development, but this goes 

back to my point about social assistance. 

 

Dear Mr. Belanger 

 

Recently I had submitted a proposal to Saskatchewan 

Economic Development, small business division (in) La 

Ronge. 

 

This proposal was for financial support (which is a loan) a 

loan to purchase log hauling equipment, (which is a) 

tractor unit and a log trailer. 

 

These monies would be paid back at a monthly rate over a 

period of five years to the full amount of the loan plus all 

charges. 

 

I was visited by an agent from SEDCO the first week in 

November 1995. We filled out all application forms as 

required and also did up a business plan. 

 

I gave SEDCO a financial statement which was for the 

1994 season. 

 

This statement was audited by Deutscher & Aldous, 

certified general accountant of Meadow Lake. Also giving 

information regarding my company and myself that they 

asked for. 

 

For some time this proposal was going along quite 

smoothly, or so I thought, and I feel that I was led to 

believe that there would be no problem in having this 

completed. 

 

However, after a period of (several) weeks I was called 

around 11:30 p.m. telling me my proposal was declined. 

Then two days later another late evening call saying it was 

to be reviewed. 

 

In the past five to six weeks my credibility, (my) pride, 

(my) integrity, and (my) honesty have been screened to no 

limits. I have been contacted by SEDCO several times, but 

still have not only any sort of answers regarding my 

proposal, each call seems to be more screening. 

 

My understanding is SEDCO funds are for northern small 

business and people who meet requirements to receive 

such funds. 

 

I am a northerner Metis, a resident at Green Lake where I 

have lived all my life. 

 

I am not seeking handouts, but a chance to be independent 

and self supportive and employed. I have been so for the 

past two years and all I want to do is better my business 

and continue to be a self supporting individual. 

 



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

And this is a gentleman out of Green Lake, Mr. Speaker, that 

wrote this letter with all effort. And the point that he makes at 

the end, Mr. Speaker, is, “continue to be a self-supporting 

individual.” This points out, Mr. Speaker, that northern 

Saskatchewan is exactly that. 

 

There are so many problems, Mr. Speaker, that I would suggest 

that we take a unique and fresh approach when it comes to 

proposals of redesigning our system. We should go out in the 

community and see how some of the communities in northern 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The member’s time has expired. 

Debate will continue. 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on the 

motion made by the hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview. As 

a province, we have been fairly successful in protecting the 

most vulnerable, supporting those who are unable to support 

themselves, and providing assistance to our neighbours in need. 

 

But as you know, the federal government is changing the way it 

funds social services, health, and education. And in that 

process, it would reduce funding by 106 million in these areas 

in 1995-96 and by more in the coming years. Changes to the 

unemployment insurance program include lower income 

benefits and shorter periods of time for payment of benefits . . . 

have forced more unemployed to use social services for 

support. 

 

The federal government also withdrew from providing social 

assistance for first nations people living off reserve. These 

changes have put an additional financial burden on the 

province, but can we in turn cut programs to our most 

vulnerable citizens? Not in this province, not in Saskatchewan 

 this we can be assured of. 

 

We must address the problem of poverty, but we must address it 

with compassion, community, caring, and common sense. 

People have said that we should just cut benefits, but we must 

keep in mind that 44 per cent of recipients are children, the 

most vulnerable of all; 37 per cent are aboriginal, and this is 

expected to increase. How did this situation develop in a 

province with so much? 

 

As a government, we need to deal with this as we look at 

restructuring our programs and services for the future. That 

does not mean we need to cut our programs and services, but 

we need to make them cost effective and efficient. Across 

government we are downsizing our staff, reducing or 

eliminating duplication between the federal and provincial 

governments, and better targeting our services to meet the needs 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Social assistance is a cycle. This cycle of dependence must be 

broken. This is what Redesigning Social Assistance does  it 

breaks the cycle. Saskatchewan has taken some preventative 

steps to address child and family poverty through initiatives 

such as action plan for children, prevention and support grants, 

integrated school link services, and the child nutrition and 

development program. These programs address the needs of  

children, and the proposed Saskatchewan child benefit would 

address the needs of families by providing a monthly 

supplement based on family income. It would also supplement 

the wages of the many low income families who live below the 

poverty line but earn too much to qualify for social assistance. 

 

I strongly support these initiatives because it encourages 

families to take pride in their lives, knowing they are providing 

a better life and a better way for their family. 

 

Half of the individuals receiving social assistance in this 

province are unable to support themselves financially because 

of mental, physical, or emotional disabilities. These individuals 

will always need to be, at least in part, on social assistance. It is 

the reason we must remain committed to an effective support 

system. But for those who are able and want to be healthy 

contributing members of society, we need programs to 

encourage them. We need to educate and train, especially our 

youth. Educate and train, not only through school but with life 

skills  basic needs such as balancing a cheque book, cooking 

a nutritious meal, good hygiene, to teach them to be responsible 

and to have pride in their achievements. 

 

The member from Humboldt says the poor and disadvantaged 

are not being looked after, but let’s backtrack. We in 

Saskatchewan have maintained the social safety net despite 

attacks from the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  The record speaks for itself. We are not 

fighting the deficit on the backs of the people who can least 

afford it. We are maintaining the values of caring and 

compassion toward the poor. On the other hand, across the 

country we see people venting their frustration and anger at the 

federal government and some provincial governments for 

tampering with the country’s social programs in a most 

devastating manner. In Saskatchewan people are being 

consulted about change. At the federal level, people are being 

told about it after the fact. 

 

In preparing for the 21st century, we consulted our people about 

redesigning social assistance and are continuing to do so. With 

input from these consultations, the proposed system will 

address problems associated with the poor and disadvantaged. 

No family would have to rely on social assistance for their 

children’s basic needs. Low income working families would 

have an incentive to earn as much as possible. Youth would be 

involved in productive activities such as education or work 

experience. All persons attending training would receive the 

same level of financial help based on family size. 

 

The proposed changes will address Saskatchewan family 

problems, whether they live in the North, the South, the East, or 

the West. And I would also remind the member that the 

minister from the North is responsible for Northern Affairs and 

is very knowledgeable on issues affecting people in the North. 

 

(1515) 

 

I am learning by listening, and if the members opposite would  



528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

refer to Hansard, March 25, 1996, page 472, the member from 

Redberry Lake talked about a family service agency, an 

agreement with Social Services and Saskatoon Tribal Council: 

 

This . . . will promote the development of an . . . agency 

that will assume responsibilities for the delivery of child 

and family services to the first nations people . . . 

(promoting) the culture and traditions of the people 

involved. 

 

Positive initiatives, cooperative initiatives, through 

consultation. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek referred yesterday to the 

Academy Awards. He neglected to mention the movie, Sense 

and Sensibility; therefore I shall, because the redesigning of 

social services needed not only a brave heart but sense and 

sensibility. This government is deserving of an Oscar for its 

directing and editing with all of these qualities. When the script 

is finalized, we will have a finished production that all 

provinces can follow. We, as leading men and women, can play 

a supportive role in the redesigning of social services; thereby 

protection of the most vulnerable will be assured. 

 

I know that this government has accepted the challenges of 

restructuring social assistance so that it meets the needs of all of 

us. Therefore I support the original motion, introduced by the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview, and oppose the amendment. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very 

pleased to enter briefly into support of the motion of my good 

friend, the member from Saskatoon Eastview. And while I have 

respect for the remarks of the members opposite, I cannot 

support them and therefore will not be supporting the 

amendment but will be supporting the main motion. 

 

I think too that it’s worth saying that the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview was himself very responsible for the work 

that went into this social services redesign paper and is to be 

commended for the work that he did. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, social assistance programs are intended to 

be programs of last resort. When individuals or families have 

very little or no means of support, the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan provides for basic needs: clothing, shelter, utilities, and 

food. 

 

Now this program is 30 years old. Society has changed since it 

was first introduced in 1966. Originally the program was not 

expected to deal with large numbers of employable people. A 

small number yes, but generally they did not stay on assistance 

long and usually found their own way, using their own 

resources, back to a job. But now, Mr. Speaker, the labour 

market and the economy have changed. And these changes have 

a significant impact on our social programs. 

 

In the 1960s unemployment was around 4 per cent. Now 

unfortunately the figure is higher. There are fewer middle  

income jobs. There’s an increase in part-time work. And you 

really need a minimum of at least grade 12 to compete for new 

jobs, even entry-level jobs like working in a hamburger fast 

food outlet or working as a gas station attendant. 

 

As well the current system doesn’t do enough to address 

poverty and  and this is important  the current system sets 

up barriers to work, to achieving independence. And surely, Mr. 

Speaker, what we want to do is help people achieve 

independence. We believe that employment is far preferable to 

being on assistance. 

 

But at the same time we must protect the most vulnerable in our 

society. As Canadians we believe that we have a responsibility 

to each other and to the less fortunate. And, Mr. Speaker, as a 

government, we have a responsibility to use tax dollars wisely. 

 

Under this program, this program designed 30 years ago, our 

costs have risen from $190 million in ’91-92 to 317 million in 

’94-95. And there are more people on social assistance  

26,000 in ’91-92, and 40,000 in ’94-95. So people are 

concerned. Is the program effective? Is the program 

sustainable? 

 

As we all know, Mr. Speaker, the federal government is 

eliminating the Canada Assistance Plan at the end of this month 

and replacing it with the Canada Health and Social Transfer. 

This means less money for Saskatchewan  over $100 million 

less just this year. 

 

As well the federal government has withdrawn from providing 

social assistance for first nations people living off reserves. 

Saskatchewan has of course accepted this new responsibility 

and looks after these individuals and families. But this has 

added about $40 million to our provincial social assistance 

budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, our government has responded to the obvious 

need for change, for rethinking and redesigning social service 

programs to encourage individual, family, and community 

responsibility, and to provide opportunities to attain 

independence, to help social assistance recipients participate in 

the economic and social life of their communities. We need to 

help people so that they’ll be able to work to support 

themselves, not trap them in a dependency cycle. 

 

We need to support children of low income families so that they 

grow up to be healthy, contributing members of their society, 

and we need to do a better job of linking dependent youth to 

jobs and education. And to that end we have introduced a social 

services discussion paper, Redesigning Social Assistance. 

 

The key components of this paper are a Saskatchewan child 

benefit, a working income supplement, and a youth futures 

program. A child benefit would work like this. All children of 

low income families and children of families on social 

assistance would receive a benefit that is separate from social 

assistance. This would mean that children would no longer be 

dependent on social assistance and this will help low income 

families to move off and stay off social assistance. 

 



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

Supplementary health benefits would be extended to children in 

families receiving the Saskatchewan child benefit. This would 

ensure that children’s health costs are not a barrier to a family 

leaving welfare. 

 

Through our working income supplement for low income 

families, we would provide low income working families with 

monthly supplements so that they would be better off working 

than they would be receiving assistance. And this would reduce 

poverty levels and remove barriers to work which presently 

exist within the system. 

 

The youth futures program is, I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

most imaginative ways to break the dependency cycle. This 

program links low income, needy youth to school and their 

communities. This initiative would assume that parents are 

responsible for their children to age 21. Youth whose families 

are unable to provide for them would be eligible for financial 

assistance and would be required to enrol in school or work at a 

community service job to receive benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many government members have spoken about the 

commitment this government has to consulting. This discussion 

paper is no exception. Consultations have been very extensive, 

very extensive. Nearly 14,000 surveys have been distributed, 

and the results are coming back all the time. 

 

As part of the overall government’s new century consultation 

process, various ministers took part in 20 public meetings 

across the province where more than 2,000 people participated. 

The minister and departmental staff have met with 

representatives from approximately 250 organizations. The 

response so far has been very positive and the process is 

continuing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to redesign our social assistance 

programs. The challenge is to redesign it so that it protects the 

most vulnerable; redesign it so that it supports the people who 

are moving to independence; redesign it so that it is 

accountable; and redesign it so that it gives hope and a chance 

for a better life to those who need that chance. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the proposals outlined in this 

paper will do just that, and therefore I support the main motion 

before us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  If there are no further speakers, we will 

proceed to the 10-minute question and answer period, or 

questions and comments period. If there are no members 

wishing to put . . . 

 

Mr. Belanger:  A couple of questions on the actual social 

assistance. The member from Prince Albert Carlton, was there 

any discussions with any of the native organizations and the 

native women’s organizations in the Prince Albert area 

regarding the potential changes to this Act? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you very much for the question. The 

consultations are ongoing right now. The changes would not be  

implemented until consultation period is finished, so if there is 

anybody that you think might want to give a comment or a 

suggestion as to what should be done, we’d certainly welcome 

it directly by paper or through yourself as a member. 

 

I have consulted with some groups myself to date, but there’s 

certainly still some time to do this. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I’m going back to some of the problems that 

the government, your government, has associated with the 

cut-backs that the federal government has instituted on the 

province. 

 

How do you propose that this Bill  again, it’s a question to 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton  how do you propose 

to have young people either work for their benefits, or go to 

school for their benefits, when they’re cutting back training 

programs left and right? And plus the fact of the matter is, 

northern Saskatchewan, there’s a lot of problems in terms of 

creation of jobs  it’s an economically depressed area. 

 

And yet the only answer you come back with is, well it’s the 

main federal government. So how does this government 

propose to do the exact change that you speak about without 

blaming the federal government? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Well I think what we were trying to do was 

outline the nature of the problem, the extent of the problem; 

that our social services load has gone up in the last year or two 

when we were expecting that with an improved economy that it 

should be going down. 

 

And the reason it’s gone up is two reasons basically: part of it is 

because of changes to the UI (unemployment insurance) 

system; and secondly, because of the added load from the 

federal social service system through the Indian . . . Instead of 

Indian Affairs picking it up, the provincial government is now 

picking it up. 

 

So what’s happening is, through the budgeting process  and 

this will be announced, mostly announced, at budget time  

but through the budgeting process, we’re trying to do is to make 

sure that it’s not the people who are at the very bottom of our 

economic ladder that have to take the brunt of this offload. 

 

So there’s an attempt being made throughout government to 

pare all parts of government so that we do not offload onto 

those people that are the most vulnerable, and at the same time 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The member is taking quite some time 

in his response and I’ll ask if there are any other questions or 

comments. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to address a question to the minister from Saskatoon 

Eastview, I believe it is. 

 

Mr. Minister, in considering some of the things put forward in 

the discussion paper, I have noted that low income supplement 

will go to people of low incomes to supplement the income  



530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

they do have. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if this low income 

supplement will pertain also to farm people who have a very 

low net profit at many times and whether those people will be 

considered eligible for low income supplement? 

 

The Speaker:  Before the member responds, I’ll remind the 

members that it’s private member’s debate and questions are 

not put to ministers but to members. And I’ll ask the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview to respond. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much. I thank the hon. 

member for the question. Well I think it’s important to state that 

there are a lot of farm families on social assistance today. They 

may be rich in assets but poor in net cash and so on. And that 

number, you know, has increased over the years. And so there’s 

no distinction here; low income families in the province are low 

income families in the province. 

 

And so the idea of the child benefit is to provide another way of 

supporting . . . take the support for children out of the social 

assistance program, and that would be the case for families 

whether they’re on farm, off farm, in small communities, or in 

cities. 

 

Every citizen, by right of citizenship, has the same entitlements. 

And that’s the same for low income families in terms of the 

health care benefits that would be provided if you’re not on 

assistance. It doesn’t matter where you live, you get the same 

benefits. 

 

And of course in the North there’s a little extra, additional 

consideration there. The North has a special food allowance. 

Every family on assistance, where there’s a child in the North, 

every child gets an extra $50 a month that southern families 

don’t get, to take into account the cost of living. This is the only 

province that does that, by the way. 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

address the member with one more question. 

 

I was wondering whether or not, for instance, if people eligible 

to go through the learnfare in fact do that, possibly attain a 

part-time job and then are laid off in that job or a full-time job 

and are laid off in that job, whether they will be re-eligible for 

social assistance? 

 

Mr. Pringle:  My view would be that anyone who is willing 

to participate in retraining, go back to school, some community 

project, or work, the willingness is the key. And if through your 

own, or through some other circumstances, you’re back on 

assistance and you qualify, you would be entitled. So I think the 

minister would answer that the answer to your question would 

be yes. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I just had a question for the hon. member 

from Battleford-Cut Knife. In your view, what do you think is 

the greatest gift that a social program such as social services can 

provide to a family? 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you. I would thank the member for his 

question. I think that one of the most important things would be 

allowing a person to have pride in himself, independence, and 

being able to have some hope for himself and for his family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, could I ask the hon. member 

from Humboldt, if she isn’t concerned that in fact, based on 

decisions of the previous Tory government and the current 

Liberal government federally, if she isn’t concerned about the 

dismantling of the Canada Assistance Plan, which guaranteed 

rights to low income people across Canada, if that isn’t a 

concern of hers. And secondly, why she wouldn’t be concerned, 

or if she’s not concerned, that over the last two years, plus the 

next two, the federal reductions in this area that we’re talking 

about will be, in social assistance, will be about, and the 

offloading, equivalent to almost $200 million. Now I don’t 

know how you can’t be concerned about that. Are you 

concerned about that? 

 

Ms. Julé:  I would thank the member for his question. It’s 

not often that I get a chance to answer questions on this side of 

the House. I guess that the point is here, we’re all concerned 

about everything that is changing. There’s no doubt. And you 

have said we have to cope with changes and we have to realize 

that changes are happening. 

 

My main concern is that we have got the wherewithal in this 

province, with all of the heads that we have  the members 

opposite and here  to understand that we have a responsibility 

to come up with solutions and to come up with programs and 

developments ourself, rather than looking at what has been in 

the past or what is changing that might be a detriment. 

 

We are adults and we need to be able to recognize that we have 

got the capacity within us to do things, to actually move toward 

social development here. We know also that we cannot do that 

with simply our own heads. But if we do listen to the people of 

the province, as the member from Athabasca has said, in 

suggesting things that can truly change and that can truly lead to 

independence . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The member has been fairly 

lengthy in her response. We have time for one more question or 

comment. There being none, I will now put the question. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:36 p.m. until 3:46 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  11 

 

Aldridge McLane Draude 

McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 

Julé Gantefoer D’Autremont 

Toth Goohsen  

 

Nays  25 

 

Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 

   



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

Johnson Whitmore Goulet 

Kowalsky Renaud Pringle 

Koenker Trew Lorje 

Cline Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Flavel Murrell 

Thomson   

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 3  Wildlife Damage Compensation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After I present my 

splendid oratory here, Mr. Speaker, I will be presenting a 

motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just yesterday we brought up the issue of deer and 

elk damage to crops in question period. We brought it up a few 

weeks ago shortly after the session started, and we will continue 

to bring it up until something is done to address the serious 

problem, not because we are trying to grab the media spotlight 

but because the issue is near and dear to the hearts of 

Saskatchewan farmers. It’s also near and dear to the wallets of 

Saskatchewan farmers, and it’s because of this, Mr. Speaker, 

that we must discuss this important issue in the House today. 

 

On Friday night, our leader and I met with farmers from across 

Saskatchewan in Melville. The stories they told were of total 

crop devastation. Some of them had lost 100 per cent of their 

crops that have not been combined to deer and elk this winter. 

The Environment minister was also there, and he can support 

this story, and I hope he will convince all the members on that 

side of the Assembly, on that side of the House, that something 

must be done to help our farmers. Maybe he can convince you 

people by telling some of the stories that were shared that 

evening with all of us. 

 

I’d like to go into some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that were 

brought up that night and some of the problems in the crop 

losses that farmers have had. There were 21 RMs (rural 

municipalities) represented that night, and that’s just a few of 

the ones that have really had damage, but the ones that were 

present. 

 

Total damage of the people that had estimated their crop 

damage that were present that night is about $572,325, which 

shows the extent of this problem when we estimate that 

probably only about 10 per cent of the people with crop damage 

were there that night. The average damage estimate was around 

$13,000 per farmer, which no farmer, no matter how big or 

small, can afford to lose, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Their damages 

were from crop damage, yards, and bales damaged that were 

stacked in yards, equipment damaged. The lowest estimate was 

as low as $750 but the highest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 

$42,000, of the people that were there. 

 

I’d just like to go through some of the problems that people 

have had. The one fellow has a flax field with 60 acres,  

$12,600; another one has 35 acres oats, $6,000. There’s that 

other guy who has barley and alfalfa bales that have been 

ruined, 10,900; another guy, 50 acres of barley, $9,000; another 

fellow, 40 acres of durum, $6,000, and also he has a 130 acres 

of linola which is $19,250. 

 

These are figures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are enough to break 

any farmer out in rural Saskatchewan after what the NDP 

government has done to them in GRIP. They’re already down. 

And now we come along, and with no support, they’re going 

under. 

 

Another gentleman has 200-and-some acres of flax, $22,785. 

And the list goes on and on. So what I’m trying to say is it just 

shows the problem that these farmers have and the real need out 

there for help from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a long, cold winter. And as we continue 

to wake up to freezing temperatures, sometimes it feels like it 

will never end. And to the deer and elk, they must have felt the 

same way too. They were forced out of their traditional feeding 

grounds and onto farmers’ fields, and the only place they could 

find enough food to survive was on these fields. The problem 

was even made worse by the large deer population in 

Saskatchewan this past year. And I believe that was partly due 

to the underestimating of the population of the deer, which falls 

back onto the department of the environment and natural 

resources. They’re the ones that have to answer for this mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not suggesting that farmers or anyone should 

be allowed to hunt game out of season. But I think we have 

forced farmers in some cases to break the law because they had 

no other way to protect their livelihood, their crops, and to be 

able to buy groceries for their children. The only thing that was 

left to them was to go out and shoot some of these deer, and it 

was happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also think that it’s a safe way to say that 

it was no secret that deer populations were going to be higher 

than average this year. They should have saw it coming. And 

this is bound to adversely affect farmers even in a mild winter, 

so we can’t blame the winter for that. 

 

Our deer are also becoming more brazen, Mr. Speaker. They are 

becoming more habituated to humans and now seem to be 

afraid of nothing, where they used to shy away from farm yards. 

It’s nothing, Mr. Speaker, to look out your window on the farm 

now and to see a whole herd of deer right up in the yard where 

a few years ago they wouldn’t even have dared come in the 

yard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in this province I think enjoys wildlife at 

one time or another. And why then would we turn around and 

ask these few farmers to pick up the tab for crop damage and let 

everybody have the enjoyment of the wildlife and get off 

scot-free. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know this is wrong. It doesn’t matter 

how many lawyers you put in cabinet. It doesn’t matter how 

many city folks are elected to sit on that side of the House. The 

fact is Saskatchewan is still a province grounded in agriculture,  



532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

and the farmers are still an essential part of our economy, even 

though they don’t seem to realize that on that side of the House. 

 

I know the government is reluctant to give up money. We see it 

every day. I imagine the budget that the members will introduce 

this Thursday will be long on rhetoric and short on solutions. I 

can’t predict where the money will be going or exactly what 

cuts are coming down, but I feel pretty confident that rural 

Saskatchewan is not going to come out the winner when this 

provincial budget is brought down. 

 

Although we believe the debt and the deficit need to be 

reduced, we do not support having it happen on the backs of 

our Saskatchewan farmers. And that’s exactly what we’re afraid 

will happen. Maybe this would be a good time to return even a 

portion, and I mean just a dribble of the GRIP money that was 

taken from our farmers by this government. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to suggest to the members opposite they 

have other options and that they don’t have to penalize the 

farmers. If the member opposite would open their eyes and 

open their minds, they would be able to come up with solutions 

that help farmers without breaking the bank. 

 

I’d like to know, Mr. Speaker, how closely have they looked at 

the deer damage in Manitoba? Manitoba has had a wildlife 

damage compensation program since ’89. Perhaps I could just 

take a minute and outline the guidelines for that program to the 

members, just in case the members opposite have no idea what 

is being done by our neighbours to the East. 

 

The wildlife damage compensation program is as follows. It is 

administered by the Manitoba Crop Insurance Corporation 

through its agency offices across the province. And of course 

that will only work here if the government prevents further 

closures of our Crop Insurance offices. The program 

specifically covers damage by elk and deer. Original funding in 

’96 was $240,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Funding was quickly 

increased to $450,000 because of the high number of elk and 

deer feeding in farmers’ fields. Does that sound familiar? 

 

Manitoba Crop Insurance Corporation has applied to the 

Manitoba Treasury Board to more than double this amount to 

$1 million. Officials in Manitoba estimate that crop damage 

claims from deer and elk damage will reach between 800,000 

and $1 million. Saskatchewan is very similar and likely to have 

the same kind of situation with no program, and I repeat, no 

program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in place. These guidelines 

include the intercept feeding and capture, of sale and elk to 

professional elk ranchers, and special control permits that let 

landowners and tenants shoot deer and elk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one is advocating chaos by calling open season 

on hunting, and no one wants to see animals needlessly 

destroyed. But we live in a society that includes both humans 

and animals, and we must find methods of ensuring that a 

balance is maintained. It’s a difficult issue, but if you’re a 

farmer with a family to feed and you have to sit by and watch 

helplessly as deer and elk eat up your family’s income, the issue 

becomes clearer. Your priority will be to provide food and 

security for your family, and so it should be so. 

Mr. Speaker, Manitoba is not the only province that has 

introduced measures to help minimize and compensate for crop 

damage. Alberta has also an ongoing compensation program, 

funded by the wildlife damage fund there. In our neighbouring 

province to the West, the program is managed by the Alberta 

Agriculture Financial Services Corporation. According to their 

statistics for ‘94-95, administration expenses for the program 

were $85,910 and pay-outs to farmers were $445,810 including 

pay-outs for damage by waterfowl. Farmers do not need to have 

purchased crop insurance in order to qualify for benefits. 

 

An interesting note to Alberta programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that if a farmer has purchased crop insurance and makes a claim 

on this program, his benefits from the wildlife damage fund is 

deducted from any other crop insurance benefit. Alberta also 

ran a control program through the fish and wildlife division of 

the department of natural resources which ended February 17 of 

this year. This program allowed for a special elk hunt in a 

doughnut shaped area surrounding Calgary. The Alberta 

government recognized that this 50-square mile area is 

particularly hard hit by elk damage, and they took steps towards 

a solution. 

 

That is something that is sorely missing in this province by this 

government. What is particularly sad is that we are identified as 

an agricultural province, yet our government is barely willing to 

admit that big game damage to crop is a problem. How can the 

members opposite sit by nonchalantly as our neighbouring 

governments are working on behalf of their farmers? And I’m 

not sure if the members opposite don’t know what to do; or if 

they just don’t know, then they want to do nothing. Either way, 

the farmers of this province are the losers, and that’s simply 

unacceptable. 

 

(1600) 

 

By continuing to ignore crop damage caused by deer and elk, 

the government of the province is hurting our farmers. They say 

they don’t care if our farmers are at a financial disadvantage. 

But we as the official opposition are saying we do care. We 

don’t believe farmers should be punished for a serious gap in 

government policy. And as is often the case when government 

policy is weak or lacking, people are forced to create their own 

rules. 

 

Earlier this year, some Saskatchewan farmers were so 

desperate, they took the law into their own hands and shot the 

deer in their fields without permission. We don’t advocate 

breaking the law to make a point, and at the same time though 

we need to listen when a point is so deliberately made. 

 

An Hon. Member:  How many deer were shot? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Many, many deer. It means that something 

is wrong with our legislation, and it means that we as elected 

officials must work towards correcting this poor legislation. 

Earlier this year, the Minister of Agriculture made a comment 

that Saskatchewan farmers should be treated equally with the 

farmers from Alberta and Manitoba, and I agree. 

 

I’m sceptical though after having seen the fiasco with the GRIP  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

program where the government treated our farmers anything but 

fairly, even letting the federal government take back money that 

our farmers desperately needed and, for that matter, money the 

Saskatchewan economy needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it was possible, many of the farmers in this 

province would take their farms and move to Alberta and 

Manitoba, and the beauty of that being, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that we would get to see our kids because most of them are 

there. But they can’t. And instead these farmers are forced to 

stay here and to fight against a government that stopped 

listening to them a long time ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that our words today do not fall on deaf 

ears, because this issue deserves to be heard and to be 

addressed by the members opposite. On behalf of the farmers in 

my constituency, in my colleagues’ constituency, in every 

constituency throughout the province who elected members . . . 

who the elected members is forced to sit back in silence across 

the side, I bring forward the following motion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to immediately 

implement a real plan to address the urgent problem of big 

game foraging on farmers’ crops, firstly, by taking 

reasonable measures to remove or control the population of 

big game near farmers’ grain fields and, secondly, by 

putting in place a reasonable compensation plan for 

farmers whose crops have been destroyed or damaged by 

big game. 

 

I will read the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to immediately 

implement a real plan to address the urgent problem of big 

game foraging on farmers’ crops, firstly, by taking 

reasonable measures to remove or control the population of 

big game near farmers’ grain fields and, secondly, by 

putting in place a reasonable compensation plan for 

farmers whose crops have been destroyed or damaged by 

big game. 

 

Seconded by the member from Melville, Ron Osika . . . or the 

member for Melville. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. I want to remind the member 

that it is not parliamentary to use proper names. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 

privilege for me to speak in favour of the motion presented by 

the member from Saltcoats, to explain to the members opposite 

who aren’t familiar with some of the problems that we face in 

rural Saskatchewan. And I’ll be happy to enlighten them on 

some of the values that the wildlife, along with the farmers out 

there, the services that they provide. 

 

Farmers have gone through quite a traumatized decade as a 

result of some of this government’s policies, Mr. Speaker. And 

I would just like to share a few of those with you. Of course the 

main one is the GRIP fiasco which we’re under right now. This 

government’s plan of stealing the $188 million from the  

farmers’ GRIP pot is certainly an indication of the lack of 

commitment to our rural people by this government. 

 

Many other things that I’m sure that this government had 

nothing to do with . . . and I’m quite happy that elected people 

in general cannot affect mother nature; otherwise I’m sure that 

this government would have a major catastrophe on its hands in 

regards to mother nature as well. 

 

Farmers have gone through, this past year, a series of natural 

disasters: drought, frost. Mr. Speaker; we’ve seen the plight of 

the bertha armyworms from the South into Saskatchewan to eat 

on our canola crops. We also had the infestation of the wheat 

midge move farther south than it ever has before, even into the 

area of Saskatchewan where I reside and farm at. Last spring, of 

course, we had on the eastern side of the province the flooding 

and the late seeding caused by . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I want to bring it to the 

attention that  a mistake on my part  that the member from 

Melville is not in the House and therefore cannot second it. 

Would another member like to second the motion? 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I would be prepared to second 

that. 

 

Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for noticing that and 

giving us the opportunity to change that. We were just testing, 

Mr. Speaker; we were just testing. I notice the members 

opposite didn’t pick up on that, and I’m quite surprised, given 

the experience of some of them. Especially the Deputy Premier 

in the front row should have done that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I advise the member not to elaborate 

on the Speaker’s ruling. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll try and 

refrain from doing that. I’ll try and refrain from doing that . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member opposite is talking 

about leadership. I understand that he is in line as well for Mr. 

Romanow stepping down rather quickly. 

 

But to go on to the natural disasters that we’ve seen across 

Saskatchewan this year, I alluded to a few of them, from the 

drought to the frost, the wheat midge, the bertha armyworms, 

the flooding in eastern Saskatchewan, the hail storms which I 

talked about in previous days in the municipal hail Act 

amendment. 

 

Also we’re in a time, Mr. Speaker, when cattle prices have gone 

very flat and don’t appear to be picking up in the near future. 

So it’s an extra burden for the farmers that are feeding the 

wildlife with the hay that they need so desperately to feed the 

cattle. 

 

In this province, Mr. Speaker, as members opposite will know 

that hunting, tourism, and all the things that accompany that are 

a major source of income for this province, and we’d hate to 

see that jeopardized by a lack of commitment by this 

government to look after the farmers and the wildlife as well. 

 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

We talk about hunting, Mr. Speaker. We see hundreds and 

hundreds of hunters every year coming up from our neighbours 

to the South to access our wildlife in Saskatchewan. We see 

these very hunters being looked after, Mr. Speaker, by 

outfitters. Whether that’s their whole occupation or many of our 

farmers in the North now are engaged in outfitting as well, and 

it’s a major source of income for those farmers in the North. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, the tourism in Saskatchewan is a 

high source of income for the province, and the wildlife attracts 

many people to the province, just for their pleasure of viewing 

as well as for the hunting. It seems a little bit ridiculous to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government would be asking farmers to 

subsidize all those industries in the province when they’re a 

major boom to their economic development, if I could call it 

that, and asking the farmers and the people in rural 

Saskatchewan to subsidize that whole system of industry. 

 

Not only to the major sources of income from hunting, tourism, 

outfitting, and what have you, we also see these people that are 

coming up for those activities are utilizing our restaurants in our 

small towns, Mr. Speaker. They are using hotels for lodging. 

They’re certainly buying gas at the service stations across 

Saskatchewan, and many, many other spin-offs as a result of the 

activities that are attracted here because of the wildlife in this 

province. 

 

We also see that, as the member from Saltcoats mentioned 

earlier, that our neighbouring provinces are much more 

prepared to look after our farmers than what this government is. 

And they could possibly take a lesson from them, and maybe 

they should go and visit and chat with them and get some of 

their ideas if they’re having trouble coming up with some. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard  and the members opposite, many of 

them were at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) convention  we heard from a farmer that 

farms on the Manitoba-Saskatchewan border, that farms in 

Manitoba and farms in Saskatchewan as well, and how 

displeased he was with what this government has done for the 

farmers of the province. Whether it’s as a result of the GRIP 

fiasco, as I mentioned earlier, or whether it’s in regards to the 

lack of commitment to agriculture in what we’re talking about 

today in the wildlife damage across the province. 

 

We’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, and I alluded to it a couple of 

days ago, the commitment that the federal government has 

made to the province of Saskatchewan to its agriculture sector. 

And I’d just like to run over a few of those, Mr. Speaker, if I 

might. 

 

And we talked about the NISA (Net Income Stabilization 

Account) basic where in ’94-95 we had in excess of $23 million 

pumped into the province; in ’95-96, another fifty-one and a 

half million; and next year over $66 million. 

 

We move on then to the NISA enhance where we’ve got 

another 36 million last year, another 42 million this year, Mr. 

Speaker  a considerable amount of money that the federal 

government is kicking into Saskatchewan. And the members 

opposite continually criticize the federal government, but they  

fail to recognize that they have made a commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan and to agriculture and to the farmers. 

 

If we move on, Mr. Speaker, to NISA kick-start where there 

was some 40 million last year, another 60 million this year. We 

talked about the crop sector companion program where in 

’95-96 there’s about $55 million. We also talk in ’96-97 where 

we’re going to have in excess of $100 million. 

 

We can move on into an agri-food innovation fund that the 

federal government is providing over 4 million in the past year; 

20 million next year; and in ’97-98 there will be an additional 

$40 million, Mr. Speaker. No small sums of money for the 

agriculture sector of the province. 

 

We talked about crop insurance, which this government says 

they’re into doing studies now to see what the needs are of the 

farmers. They know full well the needs of the farmers. They 

want a sustainable crop insurance program that’s affordable, 

which we don’t have now. That’s plain and simple. Let’s get 

on. Put the commitment there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The federal government has put in, in its ’94-95, over $67 

million; in ’95-96, an additional 68 million; and in ’96-97, 

another $74 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To name just some of the programs we’ve talked about, and 

I’ve heard this government speaking in support of the 

interest-free cash advance. In ’94-95 that amounted to about $8 

million; this year about another eight and a half million; and 

’96-97 will be twelve and a half million dollars, Mr. Speaker. A 

lot of money for this program. 

 

As well, if we’re talking about GRIP, in ‘94-95 there was also 

about $143 million kicked in, whereas this government has 

tended to roll the monies from programs that were not usable by 

the farmers of the province and just keep rolling in year after 

year and not adding any new money into the agriculture 

programs. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about wildlife damage and a lot of it I 

know is on the east side of the province, and south-east, and 

north-east as well. I would like to let you know that even some 

of your relatives, Mr. Speaker, in the Liberty area of the 

province are being ravaged by this wildlife damage as well. 

 

We’re fortunate enough not to have any crops out in our area 

but there are cattlemen there with hay bales, hay stacks, cut feed 

out, where there’s 2 and 300 deer, Mr. Speaker, crawling all 

over top of those hay stacks and no compensation for the 

farmers. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that your relatives are not 

very happy about that and they’ve been calling me to find out 

what we can do, along with the rest of the farmers in the 

province, to alleviate this problem. 

 

I mentioned earlier that cattle prices, Mr. Speaker  as you 

know full well being a stockman yourself  that the cattle 

prices have gone down, gone to hell if I might, and the farmers 

are spending hundreds and hundreds of dollars trying to  



March 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

maintain their cattle with expensive feed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Alfalfa is expensive. There’s a great market to sell bales and yet 

this government seems to want to let the wildlife crawl all over 

these stacks and make them virtually useless for the cattle. I’m 

sure you’re aware, and I’m sure the members are aware, Mr. 

Speaker, the damage that elk and deer can do to stacks, and that 

when they’re crawling over them and virtually living on them, 

that after only a couple of days the stacks and the feed supply 

are rendered virtually useless, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars that the 

farmers, the cattlemen, are having to pick up on and pay for, 

and to subsidize a tremendous hunting and outfitting industry in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not prolong the discussion much longer on 

my behalf but I would ask that the members opposite, including 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview, recognize the plight of 

the farmers in this province and that he will do what he can in 

talking to his colleagues opposite to try and convince him that 

we need to move on this and do some of that. 

 

Also I would just ask all the members opposite, including the 

people in the back benches who are farmers and fully recognize 

the problem here, that they stand up with us today and try and 

get something done for the farmers of our province so that we 

can maintain a viable hunting industry in the province, and a 

viable tourism industry, Mr. Speaker, and a viable outfitting 

industry, Mr. Speaker; and all the benefits that spin off from it 

including the restaurants, the hotels, the gas stations, the bed 

and breakfasts, and all those things, including the hotels in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that I would be more than happy to second this motion, 

Mr. Speaker, and speak in favour of it and ask the members 

opposite to do the same. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I listened 

to the member who moved the motion, the member from 

Saltcoats and the seconder, the member from Arm River, the 

member who’s moved almost everything today, and I’d be 

certainly more concerned about the damage one might receive 

in the parking lot rather than the damage from deer damage. 

 

Anyway being serious though, Mr. Speaker, I certainly agree 

that both the hon. members raised very good points, and we the 

government recognize that the farmers across Saskatchewan, 

especially in the south-east part of the province this year and in 

years past, have been affected very adversely and we just want 

to acknowledge and recognize that. 

 

I want to provide just a little bit of background if I could, Mr. 

Speaker. Over the past 10 years, as anyone who has lived in 

Saskatchewan will know, we’ve gone through 10 very mild 

winters and as a result of that, it has allowed the deer 

population and elk population to increase rather significantly. 

 

The conditions this year though, as you will know, we’ve had a  

very severe winter with prolonged cold, above average snowfall 

in most parts of the province. I know that’s not happened in our 

area in the north-west, but also as a result of some of the warm 

weather mixed in with all of the snow resulted in ice crusting 

on the snow. And the net result of this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we’ve had above average deer mortality and also increased deer 

depredation damage on field crops and on some of the 

haystacks. 

 

If you tie all of this in with the late seeding and the poor harvest 

in the south-eastern part of the province as I referred to, you 

have a recipe for a major problem, which of course is what we 

now have. And as I’ve said earlier, Mr. Speaker, no one is 

denying that these farmers have every reason to be concerned or 

should be looking for some assistance in helping out in this 

problem. 

 

Although the government is not in a position to provide 

financial compensation, I want to tell you about some of the 

things that we are doing to provide some help for these farmers. 

Currently most farmers will be aware that under crop insurance 

there is coverage. Secondly, the government delivers a fairly 

extensive $330,000 big game damage prevention program and I 

just want to outline for you some of the coverages that are 

provided under that damage program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under that program there is the use of blood meal and scare 

cannons as crop damage deterrents. Also the Department of 

Environment provides temporary and permanent fencing 

material as barriers to protect stored forage products. They have 

a placement of quality feed to short stop deer and/or elk from 

entering farmyards, the use of additional hunting permits to 

increase the harvest of deer and elk in affected areas, and I 

know that that’s been used fairly extensively this year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to point out that there is no single solution in resolving 

the big game damage issue. The answer lies in taking a joint 

approach with landowners, doing as much as is legally possible 

to address their individual situations. 

 

Government is aware, as I’ve said earlier, of the big game 

damage on agricultural crops and the associated financial losses 

to landowners. 

 

Government is using all the available tools to minimize crop 

damage, Mr. Speaker. And landowners who are experiencing 

wildlife damage are encouraged to contact their local SERM 

(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) office 

as soon as is possible. 

 

I also want you to be aware that our government is reviewing 

and/or considering the possibility of implementing spot loss 

coverage for wildlife damage. This option is being included as 

part of the crop insurance review and may be an option for the 

1997 crop year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having provided a brief historical background and 

after having outlined what our government is doing and what it 

proposes to do, I would now like to move adjournment of 

debate on this motion. 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:24 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................511 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................511 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................512 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................512 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................512 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................512 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................512 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................514 

  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................514 

  Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................514 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Traffic Safety 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................512 

 Saskatchewan Dairy Youth Ambassador 

  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................512 

 Congratulations to Humboldt Hurricanes 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................513 

 Crown Land Management System 

  Whitmore ...................................................................................................................................................................................513 

 Federal By-election Results 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................513 

 Elk Processing Plant 

  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................513 

 Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation Award 

  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................514 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Plains Health Centre Closure 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................514 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................514 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................515 

 Canadian Wheat Board Monopoly 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................516 

  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................516 

 Plains Health Centre Closure 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................517 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................517 

 Classification of Care Levels 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................518 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................518 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................518 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................519 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 52  An Act to amend The Referendum and Plebiscite Act (Canadian Wheat Board) 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................519 

 Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 

  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................519 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Closure of the Plains Health Centre 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................519 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1996 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................520 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Redesigning Social Assistance 

  Pringle ................................................................................................................................................................................520, 530 

  Kowalsky ...........................................................................................................................................................................522, 529 

  Julé .....................................................................................................................................................................................523, 529 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................525, 529, 530 

  Murrell ...............................................................................................................................................................................527, 530 

  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................528 

 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................530 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3  Wildlife Damage Compensation 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................531 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................533 

  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................535 

 


