


















































April 18, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 975 
 April 18, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens with respect to the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from Kipling, 
Regina, White City, Grenfell, Edenwold, and other small 
communities from around Regina. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People of Regina and numerous Saskatchewan communities 
have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of the serious concerns of the landlords who 
provide rental accommodation to Saskatchewan renters. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 
rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent. 
 
And that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies 
available to the landlords who are not given sufficient 
notice by social assistance tenants who vacate properties, 
and whose rent in their new accommodation is paid by 
Social Services without regard for outstanding obligations 
in previous rental agreements. 
 

The petitioners are from Saskatoon, Hague, and Elrose. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present names of citizens in Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina, but also Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of concerned citizens about the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition are primarily from Regina and from 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names of people from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are mostly from 
Regina, but also from Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition of names from people in southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Pilot Butte 
and Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions of names regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people who have signed this petition are from Admiral, 
and the vast majority of them from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues on day no. 33 and with the people all throughout 
Saskatchewan to present petitions on their efforts in saving the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
mainly from the Regina area. In fact in particular I see from  
  



976  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

Regina Coronation Park, Regina Victoria constituency, Regina 
South, Regina Elphinstone, Regina Lakeview, Regina Centre, 
Regina Sherwood, Regina Wascana Plains, Regina Dewdney, 
and Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in particular, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
repeal the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Government: provide the 
revenue collected by the province from municipalities in 
the 1995-96 fiscal year for: (1) the hospital revenue tax; (2) 
the public health levy; (3) the social services levy. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskTel: (1) how does SaskTel 
determine the areas and when coverage for cellular service 
will be given; and (2) what is the status for the town of 
Kelvington in SaskTel’s plan for providing cellular 
service? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you a number of members of the board of directors 
of Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. Seated in your 
gallery, I’d like to introduce Mel Watson Mel, if you’ll stand 
up and be recognized  Trent Beatty, and Sherri Cybulski who 
are with us here today. 
 
They’re here to observe question period and then a board 
meeting to follow later. So I want all members to join with me 
in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Special Librarians Day 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me try out a 
new word on you  cyberjob. If we’re having trouble wrapping 
our minds around that word, how about this one   

cybrarian. 
 
A cybrarian is, for the most part, a traditional librarian whose 
role as information gatherer and distributor has dramatically 
expanded to the four corners of the electronic globe and back. 
 
All this by way of saying that today is International Special 
Librarians Day, the day we recognize the hard work of the 
people in the Legislative Library, who sometimes manage to 
make us look as if we know whereof we speak. A special 
librarian, as the term suggests, is one who provides special 
information to special clientele. This includes legislative 
librarians. 
 
The theme this year is, partners in global information 
management. And that is a daunting task, Mr. Speaker because 
we all know and hear constantly we are at risk of being 
electronically buried under a cyber-heap of information. With 
no one to organize, distribute, and otherwise filter this newly 
available blizzard of data, we are in danger of receiving less 
because we know not where to turn. Whether we like it or not, 
the days of the Dewey decimal system and the card catalogue 
are long gone. 
 
As members of the Assembly who use our Legislative Library 
extensively to approach issues with the best information 
available, we today recognize our resident cybrarians, Marian 
Powell and her staff, on this special day, for the excellent work 
they do for us all year round. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Harvard Scholarship Award 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize an outstanding student in my constituency, 
Terry Lechler from Middle Lake. 
 
Mr. Lechler is one of two Canadians awarded a full scholarship 
to attend Harvard Medical School this fall. With an average in 
the mid 90’s, he is among eight international students chosen to 
attend Harvard. During the five- to seven-year program at 
Harvard, Mr. Lechler will do a Ph.D. in biological and 
bio-medical sciences. 
 
He is presently completing a double honours degree in 
biochemistry and microbiology. Raised on a farm at Middle 
Lake, Mr. Lechler credits the Middle Lake High School for 
excellent education and for laying the ground work. His 
professors credit him with a combination of academic brilliance 
and common sense. Congratulations, Terry Lechler. We are all 
very proud of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expansion of SRI Homes Inc. 
 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to give you a 
specific example of how the Partnership for Growth is working 
for the benefit of Saskatchewan business and Saskatchewan 
workers. 
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

The Partnership is committed to cultivating a positive 
environment for economic growth through a number of steps, 
two of which are, reducing the number of regulations by 25 per 
cent over the next 10 years and simplifying the procedures for 
complying with regulations. 
 
SRI Homes Inc. in Estevan manufactures modular, mobile, and 
panelled homes. It employs 175 people. It also has plants in 
Alberta and B.C. (British Columbia) and serves those markets. 
Sales in Estevan are up in 1996 over 1995. 
 
Because of the workmanship of its products and because it has 
effectively pursued expanded markets, SRI Homes has recently 
received certification from the Housing and Urban 
Development department in the U.S. (United States), which will 
allow it to sell into the U.S. market, primarily in North Dakota. 
And due to this expansion, SRI is presently in the process of 
hiring 15 new employees  Saskatchewan jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan was able to assist SRI in its 
expansion efforts by issuing a permit to make transportation 
methods compatible with those in North Dakota. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the initiative, the business acumen, the product, 
are all due to the people at SRI Homes. I congratulate all 
involved and I am happy to be part of a government which, 
through its assistance, helps business to expand and prosper. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kelvington Wheat Kings Win Provincial Title 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many people 
across Canada know, Kelvington is a town in rural 
Saskatchewan that has had a very successful hockey tradition, 
producing several NHL (National Hockey League) hockey 
players. That tradition continued on March 28, when the 
Kelvington Peewee Wheat Kings broke an 8:8 tie to defeat the 
Strasbourg Maroons in the play-offs. The victory gave 
Kelvington its first ever Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey 
Association provincial crown. 
 
Kelvington’s peewee team had to advance through some tough 
competition to eventually capture the championship. They 
played a tough series against Buchanan, Naicam, Kenaston, and 
Dinsmore. Kelvington’s team was coached by Barry Schultz 
and Ken Len, and managed by Brian Schultz. The team endured 
a busy schedule this season, playing 51 league, tournament, and 
play-off games. Overall, they won 44, lost 3, and tied 4. 
 
I would ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the Provincial C Peewee champions, the 
Kelvington Wheat Kings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tugaske Co-op’s 60th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was  

happy to represent the government at a celebration at the town 
of Tugaske, a celebration that looked back over 60 years of 
cooperative success, and forward to many years of the same. 
 
The Tugaske Co-op was established 60 years ago. That was 
1936, during the Depression, not one of the great times of our 
history. Then, the people of Tugaske knew that the way to 
survive the hard times was not by turning against each other but 
by banding together in an economic unit  cooperation rather 
than competition. They obviously know this and do the same 
thing today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, the case of Saskatchewan 
cooperative initiative is just one example of what the Premier 
calls the Saskatchewan way. It is the way  the spirit that built 
the foundation of our society and our economy. It is the same 
spirit that is taking us into the new century. And just in case you 
think I’m romanticizing too much, let me quickly point out that 
yesterday’s celebration provided more proof that co-ops make 
good business sense as well as good neighbourly sense. 
 
Along with the birthday cake, accompanying the children’s 
choir singing to the assembled guests, as part of the ceremony, 
dividend cheques of 193,000 were distributed to the members. 
Now that’s something to celebrate. I congratulate the Tugaske 
Co-op and wish it all the more years of success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Human Rights in China 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
two days ago, many members made statements in this House in 
remembrance of one of the worst human rights atrocities ever 
committed in the history of the world. And today our Premier 
and University of Regina are honouring one of the top officials 
of a regime that continues to commit terrible human rights 
atrocities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree that Canada and Saskatchewan should 
continue to have economic relations with China; however, we 
should be using these relations as an opportunity to influence 
Chinese officials to clean up their human rights record and 
bring democratic reform to their country. 
 
The position taken by our Premier, that he would not speak to 
Mr. Qiao Shi about human rights issues, is a complete 
abdication of his responsibility as a leader of this province. Yes, 
we must have relations with China. Yes, we must meet with 
Chinese officials. But we should be taking these opportunities 
to express our dismay with the ongoing human rights violations. 
We should not simply be providing photo opportunities for the 
Premier; we should not be heaping honours of degrees on the 
former head of the Chinese secret police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the Minister of Education will be 
attending the honorary degree ceremony on behalf of the 
government. I have a list of 25 members of the Chinese 
pro-democracy movement who are currently being detained by 
the Chinese government. Ironically, many of them are  
  



978  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

university students and professors. I would like to give this list 
to the Minister of Education and ask her to show the leadership 
the Premier failed to show by asking . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 

Provincial Geography Challenge 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
report that there are two students in Weyburn who know exactly 
where they are and precisely . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I’ll ask members of the House to come 
to order, to allow the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy to 
make her member’s statement. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. All members will come to order. 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
report that there are two students in Weyburn who know exactly 
where they are and precisely where they are going. And they 
have a pretty good idea of what they will be going through on 
the way there. 
 
These two students are on their way to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
Brandon Swertz and Michael Larson, both of Weyburn, 
recently finished first and second respectively in the provincial 
geography challenge held in Moose Jaw on March 30. 
 
They will compete in Ottawa on May 18 at the national 
geography challenge sponsored by the Royal Canadian 
Geographical Society and the Canadian Council of Geographic 
Educators. The winners of the national go on to an international 
contest. The Canadian final will be hosted again this year by 
Alex Trebek, the Canadian host of the TV show Jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year one student from Weyburn was one of 
our three provincial finalists. This year, there are two. Next year 
it is only logical that all three finalists in the national geography 
challenge will be from Weyburn  geographically speaking, a 
small city in the south-eastern corner of Saskatchewan, a large, 
rectangular province in the heartland of Canada, the best 
province in the best country in the world in which to live. 
 
Good luck to Brandon and Michael. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Labour stood in this House yesterday and publicly 
rejected a request by striking SaskTel workers to take their 
dispute to mediation. In the words of the minister: 
 

. . . there does not appear to be sufficient flexibility in the 
bargaining positions for mediation to be successful at this 
time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if both sides are at loggerheads, this would appear  

to be the best possible time to bring in an unbiased third party, 
if only to provide both parties with the options to consider. 
 
Will the minister explain how his government can claim to be 
doing everything it can to bring an end to this strike when he 
has rejected mediation and appears to be dragging his feet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for 
his question, Mr. Speaker. I did not say outright that I rejected 
mediation. What I said was very clear, on the record. I read the 
letter that I had sent to the union in the House yesterday, and 
it’s very clear to me at this time, after consultation, that there is 
not enough flexibility on the positions currently in existence for 
a mediator to gain a reasonable chance of success. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the opposition 
not to try grandstanding in this legislature to pretend that 
they’re protecting the union members and the rights of working 
people. 
 
If you look at the statements of the hon. member in the paper 
just recently, he agrees that SaskTel should not pay its 
employees more because of the incidents that were there. He 
says, quote: 
 

They’re being paid adequately. If you do great, that’s fine 
and what should be expected, but this is not a share 
situation. 

 
So he comes to the House and tries to pretend that he wants 
something special for employees within this province, but yet 
on the other hand is saying they deserve nothing. 
 
The Speaker:  Next question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my comments made were . . . 
we weren’t getting into whether they should get a raise, 
shouldn’t get a raise, or any benefits. What we were saying is, 
let’s get the two sides back together and get this solved once 
and for all. The government’s reneging on its duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, David Durning, a spokesman for striking SaskTel 
workers, told reporters yesterday that in five days projects being 
conducted overseas by SaskTel International will be abandoned. 
Employees will leave their posts and return home to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister explain what, if any, plans he has to address 
the issue that could do irreparable damage to the reputation of 
SaskTel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not certain what the 
member opposite is reading from. The union made an 
announcement at the onset of the labour withdrawal that they 
would consider in about two weeks’ time whether they would 
recall some SaskTel in-scope employees who are working on 
overseas projects for SaskTel International. That time has not  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

yet elapsed, Mr. Speaker, and that request has not been made by 
the union to this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health District Boards 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when this government began to restructure Saskatchewan’s 
health care system, people were told by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government that district boards would 
operate in such a way that it would truly reflect the needs of 
local people. Obviously one of the main duties of the board is to 
voice concerns of those they represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a move that completely flies in the face of 
openness and honesty, the media reported today that the 
Saskatoon District Health Board has approved a policy limiting 
its members from expressing their opinions about board 
decisions. Will the Minister of Health explain what he intends 
to do to preserve the integrity of the board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this is 
not an attack on me or the government; this is an attack the 
member is launching on the Saskatoon District Health Board. I 
want to say that my experience is that if you want to stop people 
from expressing their opinions, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
effective way you can do that. 
 
But I do want to issue a stern warning to the Saskatoon District 
Health Board. I have a stern warning for them. And that is, be 
very careful listening to that member when it comes to being 
advised about openness and democracy. Because his practice, 
Mr. Speaker, is to get together with a small group of people, 
MLAs ((Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the Liberal 
Party, in a closed room in the Hotel Saskatchewan, to oust a 
leader democratically elected by men and women in the Liberal 
Party across the province. 
 
So I say to that member and I say to the Saskatoon District 
Health Board, be very careful listening to that member when it 
comes to talking about openness and democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the 
people in the Saskatoon Health Board District will in fact really 
appreciate an answer when the minister doesn’t even come 
close to dealing with the same topic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon District Health Board members who 
wish to speak out must first get permission from the board 
chairman or president, and there are a number of topics that are 
off limits, such as labour relations and personnel matters. 
 
Board member Bob Russell is quoted on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio as stating, and I quote: 
 

Restricting members from speaking out will stymie public  

input on important issues such as how to cope with the 
board’s $8 million deficit. 

 
Mr. Speaker, one has to question what happened to freedom of 
speech, democracy, and being able to carry out duly elected 
responsibilities by addressing health concerns of the public. 
Will the minister explain if the action taken by the Saskatoon 
District Health Board is the first step in muzzling all health 
board members from speaking out on issues which may reflect 
not well on that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I was 
momentarily distracted looking at this photograph of the former 
Liberal leader kicking down the door of this Chamber to oppose 
the introduction of medicare. But you know, the member was 
talking last week, or was it the week before, Mr. Speaker, that 
the nurses in the health care system weren’t going to get paid, 
because the member considers himself quite a champion of 
nurses and labour and medicare and everything else. 
 
But do you know what the president of the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses said about that kind of tactic, Mr. Speaker? She said 
that: 
 

This tactic demonstrates an appalling lack of moral 
judgement, using staff as pawns. We understand employees 
were encouraged to phone their MLAs and district health 
board representatives to complain. This is manipulative and 
demoralizing. It amounts to mental terrorism. 

 
And I say to that member, and I say to the Saskatoon District 
Health Board, be very careful about what that member says, Mr. 
Speaker. His actions are different than his words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Closures 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP plan to decimate rural Saskatchewan is gaining 
momentum each and every day. The NDP budget decisions may 
force the high school in Annaheim to close. 
 
I have in my hand a letter from the major employer in this 
community and in our province. Lionel Doepker, president of 
Doepker Industries, writes: 
 

Without a local school, we would have a difficult time 
attracting and keeping people. A decision to close the 
school would seriously jeopardize our future in rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the Minister of Economic Development 
doesn’t have the slightest clue about the intricate details of 
business as it works within a community. If he did, he wouldn’t 
sit back and watch the Minister of Education butcher our local 
schools, and on the other hand talk about economic 
development. The minister is out of touch with rural 
Saskatchewan. 
  



980  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is, does the Minister of Economic 
Development realize the effects school closures will have on the 
business community of rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. Mr. Speaker, the member and I had a 
discussion the other day about rural education  I believe in 
estimates  and what the member needs to understand is that, 
since 1971 in this province, we’ve lost about one-third of our 
rural school enrolment. Mr. Speaker, over the years we lose 
students out of rural Saskatchewan and we have students going 
into larger towns or small cities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our formula is based on enrolment. As well, our 
formula makes sure that we pay more for students living in rural 
Saskatchewan. The member will also know that The Education 
Act gives local school divisions the authority to determine 
whether or not to continue an educational program in a 
particular location. And I guess if she has concerns about that I 
would suggest she talk to her local school division. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, what the NDP government is 
doing to our rural communities is shameful. The neglect is 
apparent to everyone, even the muzzled NDP back-benchers. 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic Development summed 
up his commitment to rural Saskatchewan when he said, there 
was and still is no intention to provide a grant strategy for rural 
Saskatchewan. Obviously there is no strategy for rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s not one of this government’s priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that the devastating cuts to 
health care, education, and rural infrastructures, are making it 
impossible for businesses in rural Saskatchewan to create the 
jobs his government has asked us to create. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, who continues to preach gloom and doom 
about the economy of Saskatchewan even though almost every 
indicator  even though almost every indicator, whether it’s 
the price of grain, whether it’s the price and production of 
potash, whether it’s oil and gas, whether it’s uranium — would 
indicate to those members opposite that the economy of 
Saskatchewan, rural and urban, has never been stronger. And 
that’s the facts. 
 
And yet that member every day comes to the House, gloom and 
doom, talking about how terrible it is. And she reminds me of 
the former Liberal leader who now sits as an independent, who 
used to come here in the session before the last election and 
preach gloom and doom about the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
That is not what the public of Saskatchewan believe; it’s not 
what they want to hear. And I would urge the new member to 
take a positive view about the economy, because that’s the 
biggest contribution she could make as a new member. 

Don’t listen to the member from Wood River, the former 
member from Shaunavon; don’t listen to him any more. Be 
positive and believe in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Agriculture minister or his 
designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, a number of farmers have contacted our office 
recently because they have received threatening letters from 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. These letters, which were sent 
by registered mail, say that if their outstanding GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) bills are not paid by April 30, they 
will not be eligible for the crop insurance program this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that when you first broke your campaign 
promise and sent out the GRIP bills you said repayment would 
not be tied to the 1996 crop insurance program. Mr. Minister, 
why have you broken another promise to Saskatchewan 
farmers? Why are you sending out threatening letters? I want to 
pass this across to the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
opposite: the farmers in Saskatchewan know very well that 
when they have a bill owing that they are going to have to pay 
it. We have made the comment in this House many times that if 
the farmers have a concern with paying what they owe, that 
they should get a hold of the corporation and make 
arrangements so that in fact that burden, if there is a burden, can 
be lessened. 
 
So I want to tell the member that farmers are responsible in the 
province of Saskatchewan and they will pay their bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, what you have done is sent out a threatening letter 
suggesting that you’re going to withdraw crop insurance 
coverage for these people, even though you made the 
commitment, even though your government made the 
commitment, that that would not happen. 
 
If you had kept your word in the first place, farmers would’ve 
never received GRIP bills. Now you’re sending threatening 
letters out to withdraw crop insurance coverage to get farmers 
to pay GRIP bills they shouldn’t have received in the first place. 
 
Mr. Minister, when is your attack on Saskatchewan farmers 
going to end? Will you withdraw this threat today, Mr. 
Minister, and assure Saskatchewan farmers that GRIP bills will 
not be used as a way of leverage against their 1996 crop 
insurance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
opposite, I find it very hard to understand. Agriculture in the  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

province of Saskatchewan; yes, it’s still got some problems but 
is doing very well. We have not seen grain prices like we are 
seeing now for many, many years. 
 
I was just looking at an article here, herb and spice association, 
Mr. Speaker, from 10 members has grown to over 230 members 
in the last few years. There are over 150 businesses employing 
over 1,000 people in rural Saskatchewan, bagging and handling 
specialty crops. Farmers are diversifying: 296 food processing 
plants in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; 217 
licensed game farms in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And this . . . the member opposite says that when a farmer owes 
a bill he shouldn’t pay it? Farmers will pay their bills if they 
owe it. 
 

Political Function Advertising 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday your SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) minister 
was caught sending out partisan NDP material using his MLA 
fax machine. 
 
And in speaking with the media later, he said hundreds of faxes 
are sent out of his office every day so he can’t be expected to 
have a full knowledge of what’s happening in his office. He 
also said he can’t be expected to know what’s going on in his 
cabinet office with the fax machine there. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s a complete abdication of his responsibility 
both as an MLA and as a cabinet minister. And whether he likes 
it or not, he does have the responsibility to follow the rules. 
This is the second time he’s violated those rules. 
 
Mr. Premier, since your minister is not prepared to take the 
responsibility for his actions, will you do so? Will you remove 
this two-time offender from your cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
really pleased that I have the opportunity again to speak to this 
matter. 
 
First of all, I want to address the first point that the member had 
made and that’s the fact that cabinet ministers and MLA offices, 
as my member from Souris Cannington would know, are very 
busy. And I would be surprised, as I’d stated, whether or not he 
has in his repertoire of knowledge an understanding of all of the 
full activities that are faxed out of his . . . or correspondence 
that goes out of his office. 
 
Because in this business of being an MLA and working for the 
people of Saskatchewan, it’s not always that you have all of the 
pieces of information that you need when you’re dealing with 
the public. And certainly, when you have competent office staff 
 which I’m sure we all have  they perform tasks on our 
behalf which truly serve the people of Saskatchewan well and 
members do not always have a full appreciation of every piece 
of correspondence that leaves their office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m trying to 
figure out exactly where the buck stops in this particular 
government, because the minister won’t take responsibility for 
his actions; the Premier won’t take responsibility for the 
minister he appointed. Perhaps the Justice minister can look at 
this issue. 
 
Mr. Justice Minister, this is a clear violation of the Board of 
Internal Economy directives. This is this member’s second 
violation. Will you launch an investigation into this matter and 
report back to the House what actions your department will be 
taking against the minister for SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to respond more 
specifically to the question that the member asked me 
yesterday, and would have done that in my first response except 
that by the number of comments that he had made, it felt 
purposeful that I speak to them first. 
 
But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I did have an opportunity to review 
the information that was faxed out of my office in Yorkton, and 
it is true that there was a fax that was sent, and that fax, Mr. 
Speaker, was sent to the five MPs (Member of Parliament) who 
serve this province in Ottawa. And that fax was sent, Mr. 
Speaker, as an information to them, and that fax that the 
member from Souris-Cannington distributed is exactly the fax 
that went to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fax was sent by a member of . . . or by a staff 
who was serving in capacity of a part-time staff last week. This 
member had no knowledge  no knowledge, Mr. Speaker, of 
the fact that she was contravening any of the rules of this 
Assembly or that of my MLA office. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, if there is a contravention of the 
rule here, I will ensure that through the federal riding 
constituency association, when we determine the cost of what 
that fax was, we will make that remuneration to the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

No-fault Insurance 
 
Mr. Osika:  The government’s no-fault insurance scheme 
has now been in place for over a year. Mr. Speaker, since being 
elected to this House, I, along with my colleague from 
Canora-Pelly, have received several letters from Saskatchewan 
residents who have had trouble with SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) as a direct result of no-fault provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former Justice minister of Saskatchewan told 
the residents that a review of the new system would take place 
once no-fault was imposed to see how it was working for the 
people of Saskatchewan. My question for the Minister of 
Justice is whether or not this review will go ahead and when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that, first of all, I want to outline to the House and to the 
members of the Assembly that the SGI no-fault insurance 
program has now been in place for just better than a year, and it  
  



982  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

is clear that this program is providing very valuable services to 
the citizens of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Throughout this course of the past year, there have been 
implemented a number of programs that are going to benefit the 
treatment side and to help people in terms of rehabilitation and 
recovery. 
 
Truly, the no-fault insurance program, when it was 
implemented in 1995  the statements were clear that we 
would review the program after we had an opportunity to assess 
the value of the program in respect to all of the rehabilitative 
services that it’s provided.  
 
And the assurances are still there, Mr. Speaker, that within the 
five-year period of which the no-fault program was designed to 
operate for review, that review will be undertaken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Within five years, I 
believe I heard the minister say  that is a considerable length 
of time. There are already people that have suffered some 
personal, serious effects as a result of this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the October 1995 edition of the Bencher’s 
Digest, a newsletter of the Saskatchewan Trial Lawyers 
Association, the former Justice minister clearly promises a 
review will take place of the no-fault system. And clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, there are many concerns in Saskatchewan regarding 
the system. There are clearly flaws in the system that simply 
have to be addressed within a period less than five years. 
 
Will the new Minister of Justice live up to his predecessor’s 
commitment and conduct a review of no-fault insurance, this 
time asking those who have had to go through with the system 
what they in fact think of it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I want to just indicate that 
since the no-fault program has come into place we have seen, in 
this province, a reduction of the number of claims by better than 
3,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else we have seen with the implementation 
of the new program is that we have seen improved benefits for 
rehabilitation services. Where now the government is . . . where 
SGI is currently paying in the amount of $500,000 for the 
rehabilitation of people who are injured in a car crash, as 
opposed to the old program in which there were $10,000 that 
were paid for people to rehabilitate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all of the occasions that the members opposite 
can find where an individual might say that the benefits aren’t 
sufficient enough, I can provide probably 10 of those letters that 
can show that the program is working well. 
 
And I have here, Mr. Speaker, a letter from an individual from 
Saskatoon, who suggested that I might provide this to the 
members of the House, who says that, and I’ll just quote the last  

part: If it had not been for the SGI policy no-fault insurance 
program established for victims, I don’t know where I would be 
today and I don’t know that I would be able to be mobile. And I 
want to thank the employees of SGI and all of their staff and 
associates for the excellent services that this program provides 
to people. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister: accidents are continuing even if there was a no-fault 
insurance plan introduced on January 1, ’95. Minister in charge 
of SGI and this government have indicated that no-fault 
insurance protects the Crown agency from petty accident 
claims. However, as the minister is well aware, not every 
vehicle accident is minor in nature. 
 
Case in point: a collision that occurred in January of 1995 
involving the Markwart family of Regina, Mr. Speaker. A 
young girl died in this accident, while her father suffered 
serious injuries forcing him to undergo many months of 
therapy. Under no-fault insurance, Jan Markwart was paid 90 
per cent of his net salary following the accident, but not pension 
benefits or sick leave lost through the months that he was off 
work. 
 
In addition, Mr. Markwart, unable to return to his job as a 
fire-fighter, was also robbed of any opportunity to make claim. 
Will the minister indicate when people like Jan Markwart, who 
are victims of accidents, will no longer be victimized by this 
government’s no-fault insurance scheme? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I first want to indicate to the 
House and to the member opposite that he well knows and 
should be informed that it’s not the place of this minister, or any 
minister, to be able to talk about the individual issues as they 
relate to a family. 
 
And I want to assure the House that I personally, Mr. Speaker, 
have had the occasion of meeting with the Markwart family. I 
understand very precisely and clearly the issues that they face 
and also have had an opportunity to speak with the member 
opposite from Pelly-Canora about this case, and in great detail 
outlined for him the process under the no-fault insurance 
program and the benefits that it provides. 
 
And just as an example, Mr. Speaker, because I noted that the 
information that the member provided is that under the old 
program the maximum per week earnings that a disabled person 
might earn was $200 per week, Mr. Speaker. Today, under the 
new program, 90 per cent of the income derived from the gross 
revenue income program . . . or from the gross revenue income 
that they earn  earnings  is available to them, Mr. Speaker, 
to a maximum of $50,000  a far better benefit than has 
existed under the old program by a long way. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured today to 
present a response to question no. 72. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 72 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44  An Act to amend 
The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
move second reading of Bill 44, An Act to amend The Crown 
Corporations Act, 1993. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is embarking on a major review 
of our Crown corporations in order to ensure that they will meet 
the challenges of the future from a position of strength. 
 
And while it is true that these amendments are not directly 
connected with that review, it is in keeping with our stated 
policy of streamlining and modernizing the operations of our 
Crowns. In fact these amendments are directed at correcting 
some deficiencies we have found in Crown Corporations Act; 
deficients related to the operations of our Crowns in a 
fast-changing world. These amendments, Mr. Speaker, are of a 
housekeeping nature; nonetheless they are important changes. 
 
One of these amendments completes the definition of Treasury 
Board Crown corporation. The present definition, Mr. Speaker, 
does not include Crown corporations that report to Treasury 
Board but have their own incorporating statute. Crown 
corporations that report to Treasury Board, with their own 
statute, don’t fall within the definition of a Treasury Board 
Crown corporation or under the definition of a CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) Crown corporation. 
 
This amendment allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 
designate which Crown corporations are Treasury Board Crown 
corporations. The change is necessary, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
transparency in the operation of these Crowns. This ensures that 
these corporations will now fall under the authority of The 
Crown Corporations Act, 1993 in regards to such items as the 
tabling of annual reports. 
 
Another change in the legislation proposed in this Act would be 
to provide specific authority for the Crown Investments 
Corporation to amalgamate with a subsidiary Crown 
corporation with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a change being made in 
order to avoid problems which have developed in the past. 
 
An example of a problem remedied by this amendment, Mr. 
Speaker, would be the wind-up of SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation). When SEDCO was 
wound up, Mr. Speaker, and the decision was made to transfer  

its assets and liabilities to CIC, CIC did not have specific 
statutory authority that allowed it to get an order in council to 
amalgamate SEDCO’s activities. Instead, they had to rely on 
the general authority section within The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1993. 
 
This amendment allows CIC, with the approval of the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, to amalgamate with a 
subsidiary Crown corporation. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, is 
designed to assist our Crown sector in adapting quickly to a 
changing world environment. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, would allow CIC to provide 
financial assistance to any body corporate. The current Act only 
allows financial assistance where CIC owns shares in a body 
corporate. This has been found to be too restrictive, Mr. 
Speaker, and again we are trying here to ensure that past 
problems are corrected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIC is currently involved in a number of 
investments where it does not hold shares, such as many of the 
former SEDCO holdings. In order to ensure a proper 
winding-down and/or restructuring of such investments, CIC 
needs the proper authority and flexibility to make the best 
decisions for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, gives CIC the necessary 
authority to deal with its investments in a proper fashion. But it 
can only do so with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, which means the actions are disclosed to the public 
and more accountability is the result. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation adds a new 
section to The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. This new section 
is proposed to provide specific authority for Crown 
corporations to engage in capital market activities. This is 
standard in their normal course of business, Mr. Speaker. For 
example, SaskEnergy is involved in commodity swaps on a 
regular basis involving natural gas. 
 
A recent decision in an English court held that unless specific 
statutory authority existed for a corporation to engage in capital 
market activity, there is a question as to whether or not they 
have the authority to engage in those activities. The proposed 
amendments provide clear statutory authority for the Crown 
corporations to continue the activities that they are engaged in. 
Nothing new is contemplated by this section. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIC is the responsible manager of the public’s 
assets and, as such, it has with this section anticipated a 
problem which could result because of a legal precedent in 
another jurisdiction and taken steps to ensure the problem does 
not arise here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure all members of this Assembly can see, 
these proposed amendments do not encompass a major change 
in direction or policy within our Crowns. They do, however, 
clear up some important issues which have surfaced since the 
Act was passed in this Assembly some three years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I have taken over responsibility for our  
  



984  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

Crowns, I have said time and again that they must be in a 
position to meet the challenges of a changing world. In a minor 
way, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are proposed for that 
purpose. Because of this, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move 
second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to speak on Bill 44, entitled An Act to amend 
The Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations sector represents 
approximately 40 per cent of the government’s financial 
activity. The members opposite must agree that this is indeed a 
very substantial portion. The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
Assembly does not have a chance to examine the financial 
operations of the Crown sector. 
 
By law, CIC and its subsidiaries raise revenues and spend 
public money without an annual pre-approval of their budgets 
by this Assembly. As a result, Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
Legislative Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan are not 
able to fully understand the make-up of the Crown sector. 
 
Saskatchewan people are hard-working, responsible people. 
They’ve been subjected to stifling taxes and sky-rocketing 
utility rates. A large portion of the money in the Crown sector 
comes directly from the taxes and utility rates that 
Saskatchewan people pay every day. I, along with my caucus, 
believe that people have a right to know what their money is 
being used for. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this is not the case. 
 
Our own Provincial Auditor has gone to great lengths in an 
attempt to make the Crown sector more accountable to the 
public. His recommendations have fallen on deaf ears. This 
government refuses to take the advice of the Assembly’s own 
expert. 
 
The Provincial Auditor stated in his fall ’95 report, and I quote: 
 

CIC’s annual report and its subsidiaries’ annual reports 
lack essential accountability information. 

 
He went on to say that: 
 

. . . it is important to continue urging the Government to 
implement practices that will enhance its public 
accountability. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what the Liberal opposition is 
committed to do. 
 
Each spring the government introduces their budget for the 
upcoming fiscal year. Each year it is a budget that only tells 
one-half of the story. Obviously the Crown sector operates 
under different financial circumstances than do the departments 
which make up the General Revenue Fund. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are still dealing with the hard-earned 
money of Saskatchewan people. The people of Saskatchewan  

expect and deserve a certain level of service. Granted, our 
Crown corporations are providing the people with reasonable 
levels of service. These are the same Crown corporations that 
seriously lack public accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen what the government does with 
taxpayers’ dollars. They dump money into risky ventures and 
stock markets. The government has no place playing high-risk 
games with taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The members opposite may say, look at Cameco shares  
millions of dollars in windfall profits. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the 
stock market there are no guarantees. Saskatchewan taxpayers 
could have easily suffered major losses instead of profits. I say 
to the members opposite that the players play, and you’re not 
the player. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment to The Crown Corporations Act 
does nothing to increase the public accountability of the Crown 
sector. In fact it will allow the Crowns to hide more of their 
financial dealings from the public. 
 
This amendment would allow CIC to amalgamate with 
subsidiary Crown corporations by cabinet order. This would 
expose the public to far higher levels of risks than they are 
already subjected to. 
 
This amendment would grant CIC far greater authority to 
engage in capital market activities. CIC would have the 
authority to utilize virtually every financial vehicle possible in 
order to fulfil its objectives and purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t believe this is acceptable. This 
government has yet to stand up and take responsibility for the 
financial dilemma that Saskatchewan is facing. They sit here for 
four years and blame Tory administrations, and now they have 
set their sights on the federal government. 
 
When things go well in the province, the government is right 
there to take credit, but they’re nowhere to be found in tough 
times. 
 
The Minister of Finance actually believes that she balanced the 
budget, but it was really balanced on the backs of the 
hard-working people of this province. The Minister of Finance 
sat back with her knife and decided which budgets were going 
to get slashed. The result was substantial tax increases and 
severe offloading onto municipalities, schools boards, health 
care professionals. And the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is that this government is not very good 
at handling taxpayers’ dollars. They have criticized others for 
tax and spend policies, but they have taken it one step further, 
and they have adopted a philosophy of tax as much as humanly 
possible and then slash the essential services of health, 
education, and social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill gives CIC far too much authority to 
invest taxpayers’ dollars in capital market activities. The role of 
CIC is simple. They are to monitor the performance and 
coordinate direction of subsidiary Crown corporations. CIC  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

claims that the current Act is too restrictive, and therefore wants 
to have these amendments introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Act is not restrictive enough. Currently 
the Provincial Auditor is conducting an audit on CIC’s 
investment management system. The result of this audit will be 
reported in the 1996 spring report. I am sure the Provincial 
Auditor will have some serious recommendations for CIC 
investments management system. It is the hope of our caucus 
that his recommendations won’t fall on deaf ears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there obviously is some major problems with this 
Bill. Our caucus . . . that anytime you’re dealing with hundreds 
of millions of taxpayers’ dollars, it is a very serious issue. The 
people of Saskatchewan need  and they deserve  to have 
their tax dollars going into the programs and services they so 
desperately need. 
 
When we are dealing with the Crown sector we need to proceed 
with extreme caution. The members opposite know of several 
cases where Crown investments have and will continue to cost 
taxpayers very dearly. To open up the vault to CIC and say 
spend as you wish, but make sure it gets cabinet approval first, 
is ludicrous. 
 
Why don’t the members opposite be open and accountable with 
the Assembly and the public? We all know how order in 
councils work. It is definitely not an acceptable way to give 
CIC authority to go on long shopping sprees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government cries poor, closes hospitals, and 
threatens further cuts to health, education, and social services. 
At the same time, we see the size of cabinet and political staff 
sky-rocket. This is a time where prudent fiscal management and 
diversification needs to be at the forefront. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill needs serious examination and extensive 
input from the public. In order to do so, I move to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 43  An Act 
respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation 
of an Emergency 911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year 
municipalities were promised 10 per cent of VLT (video lottery 
terminal) revenues, and according to a Leader-Post article on 
February 1, ’95: 
 

By the end of the day, the NDP were giving 25 per cent of 
the VLT revenue, likely between 19 and $30 million dollars. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happened to change this back? This 
could have paid for an enhanced 911 system. Mr. Speaker, 
municipalities are sceptical  sceptical because the money 
could be withdrawn at any time because it stays in the hands of 
the government. 
 
(1430) 
 
I’d like to quote again from the Leader-Post, January 30: 
 

But government local officials, fed up with having a 
revenue-sharing plan with the province cut repeatedly in 
recent years, are already talking about obtaining new and 
secure sources of revenue that could not be cut at the whim 
of the government. 
 

Also in The Western Producer, October 26: 
 

Henry Lesieur, a professor from the University of Illinois 
said the government’s take on the machines is obscene. It 
is the worst take-out rate I have every heard of anywhere. 
Already people are losing even when it comes to winning. 
The amount the government’s giving back is hurting them 
even more. 
 

Another quote in the Star-Phoenix, February 2, the Premier said 
his moral opinion on VLTs is, I don’t approve of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m worried that this 911 system will be just like 
amalgamation with municipalities and will be forced on 
municipal governments. I wonder again, were the communities 
ever asked about the government’s 911 system, or is it like 
everything else the government does  they just don’t listen 
and go ahead and do it on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 911 as presented in this Bill is only a number; a 
number of convenience, but falls far short of providing a service 
for emergency services for rural Saskatchewan  for that 
matter, all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
first of all thank the House for adjourning the debate on this 
issue yesterday so that I may have an opportunity to participate. 
And the reason that I wanted to is that since about 1994, in 
some extent I’ve been involved with the attempt to put a 911 
system into the north-east of the province. 
 
In 1994 the Melfort & District Chamber of Commerce was 
instrumental in recognizing the concern for emergency services. 
And it’s really strange that sometimes good ideas come about in 
the very simplest way. Because what had happened is one of the 
children of our members had said that they were watching the 
911 on television, the program that we’ve all seen. And they 
right away identified with that and they asked one of the 
members, who was the parent, is there 911 in Melfort? And of 
course they had to say, no there isn’t. 
 
And so the chamber of commerce at that time entered into 
initial discussions with the fire department and the district 
health board to see what indeed was the level of service for 
emergency care in the Melfort area. 
  



986  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

And what we found was sort of a patchwork of very sort of 
disjointed services. If you wanted to phone for a policeman, you 
phoned one number. If you wanted to phone for an ambulance, 
you phoned for another one. If there was a fire you phoned a 
third number. And so it was very, very disorganized. 
 
And coming out of this whole initial indication of, do we have 
911 in our community, the chamber of commerce in Melfort 
and district decided that they would take the initiative to see if 
other people in the whole north-east were concerned about this 
as well. 
 
And so in ’94 they sent letters to all the RMs (rural 
municipality), all the municipal governments, all the fire 
departments, all the health boards  all of the people that we 
thought would be interested in discussing the whole concept of 
911 in the north-east, sort of bordering on an area from Prince 
Albert down to Humboldt, across through Watson, and sort of 
north of Yorkton right up to the Manitoba border. 
 
And they met in Melfort in an initial discussion and we brought 
a gentleman from the south-west part of the province who had 
been very instrumental in bringing forth a proposed 911 system 
into that area, almost to completion at that time. And it was 
very interesting about how much of a common concern that 
people had in the north-east about a 911 system. 
 
And so out of that initial meeting, they formed a steering 
committee of people from across the north-east who have been 
working since that time to bring a 911 system into the 
north-east. 
 
It’s interesting, because shortly after this initiative was 
undertaken by the chamber of commerce, it seems that even the 
past member of the Melfort constituency occasionally read the 
paper, and just before the last election, all of a sudden there was 
a great flurry about how this government was going to look at 
911. And that came as a great surprise to people of the steering 
committee, because they had heard a million reasons of why 
this was impossible and how SaskTel just couldn’t possibly do 
this. 
 
In the discussions that ensued after that, it became critical that if 
this was going to work, it had to truly be a 911 system that 
people had come to expect and understand, not just in the cities 
of this province, but also, because of television and the 911 type 
of emergency shows that people saw, all through this country; 
that people came to expect that if 911 was actually called upon, 
the full kind of 911 enhanced services that they came to realize 
were necessary, would also be delivered. 
 
And so the whole steering committee have clearly stated time 
and time again, that what they want is 911, but not just a speed 
dialer on the phone. What they don’t want is just an operator, 
somewhere in Regina, that gets routed a call and then phones 
the fire department, phones the police department, phones the 
ambulance in Melfort in again a non-functional, disjointed way. 
 
Because it would be really quite simple for everyone to just put 
in a speed dial button into their telephone so that these things 
could be done. And we’d save ourselves a whole lot of time and  

we wouldn’t be making any false expectations for the people 
through rural Saskatchewan who really do believe that this is an 
essential service that’s needed. 
 
It became really essential because number one, the number of 
entry points for emergency services have decreased. Now 
there’s been hospitals closed all over rural Saskatchewan and so 
the access points for people in rural Saskatchewan are much 
less now than they were in 1991. 
 
If you had a problem, you knew where to go in your local 
community as quickly as possible. And now you get a situation 
where people don’t know where to go, or the distances are so 
great that they do not have the ability to deal with that sort of a 
situation. 
 
And of course the government points very proudly to their first 
responders. And that is a program that has merit in so far as it 
goes. It’s a glorified St. John Ambulance course. And I have to 
tell you that farmers and people that are working in high-risk 
industries throughout the north-east and throughout rural 
Saskatchewan are not going to be very satisfied by the fact, if 
they get their arm or leg into a piece of machinery, that 
someone down the road or down the street or in the 
neighbourhood or at the farm next has taken a 40-hour course. 
 
What they need to do is, number one, when there’s a panic 
setting in, when this happens, is they need to go somewhere 
where they know that they can get reliable entry-point 
emergency care. And everyone in the province, everyone in the 
world, in North America for sure, understands that that’s what 
911 is meant to be. 
 
We talk about what’s happening in the cities, we talk about 
what we see on television, and we realize that that’s what the 
expectations are. And we are very much in favour of a 911 
system. But we are very much concerned that unless it’s the full 
system, that we are doing a disservice to the people of the 
province. 
 
What we really need to do is have the uniform expectations 
across the province and across the country. If someone is hurt 
and injured in Zenon Park, Saskatchewan, when they dial 911 
they should have services on the other end of that telephone line 
that are the same as if they are hurt in downtown Saskatoon. 
 
They need to have the enhanced service where there’s a trained 
emergency measures technician on the other end of the line who 
can talk to them, who can counsel them, and while that’s going 
on, electronically through the mapping system, which we think 
is very important and worthy of support, that they can see that 
this call is coming from Zenon Park. 
 
Their equipment tells them that the nearest response facility is 
down the road as an ambulance or an emergency responder or 
whatever it is. And so as that conversation is taking place, that 
is so important that the appropriate emergency professional 
response teams are put into action. 
 
And that is absolutely critical. Because if it isn’t, all is you end  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

up with is a panicky telephone operator at the other end of the 
line who just is doing glorified call forwarding. And that simply 
is a second-class standard for rural Saskatchewan that we’re not 
prepared to accept. 
 
And so I think that there are things that we believe are in this 
legislation that are very important. For example, the initiative to 
do the mapping so that the whole province can be set out so that 
the technology can indeed identify where calls are coming from. 
That’s very important. 
 
We need to make sure that this legislation, when you talk about 
a 911 entry point or a location, it isn’t just a telephone operator 
who is doing nothing more than phoning the local authorities or 
ringing a beeper over there. What we need to do is make sure 
that everyone is linked into the system. 
 
A number of years ago, in my area, there was an interesting 
example of how a system should work if it was operating 
possibly as we think it could. A farmer got his leg in a grain 
auger about a half a mile off of the highway. What happens 
when this occurs is everybody panics. All of us can say we can 
deal with this very dispassionately and we are going to 
rationally and logically go to the phone and we’re going to dial 
the number that we need to dial and all the rest of it. 
 
But in nine times out of ten, that doesn’t happen. People panic. 
They see blood, they see pain, they see a lot of disturbance, and 
what they want to do is take the appropriate action. And so the 
wife of the individual that got into this accident, she’s panicking 
and she’s trying to help her husband. She’s yelling to another 
son into the farmyard to phone for help. The son goes into the 
house and he doesn’t know who to phone. 
 
So in panic he dials an operator. The operator didn’t know 
where exactly to go, so they phoned the hospital. Well the 
hospital is not the ambulance. And so then the hospital directed 
it to the ambulance and the whole system sort of took time. 
 
Good intentions were executed by everyone. But the very tragic 
thing about it, an ambulance was returning from Saskatoon, and 
when this was exactly happening, there was an ambulance fully 
equipped with two EMTs (emergency medical technician) in it 
who were less than a half a mile away from this accident site. 
And so this individual lost his leg because of this situation 
where he might have lost his life, and yet much better service 
could have been provided if the linkage electronically with the 
proper 911 system had been in place. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members, what we’re concerned 
about is . . . First of all, let me say I’m very much in support of 
the principles of what I believe is the intention of what’s being 
offered in this Bill for a 911 system. But I am also very 
concerned that what may happen is we only go just a small step 
of the way and that may indeed do more of a disservice to rural 
Saskatchewan and the people that think that they’ve got a true 
911 system. 
 
That is our major concern, that we want to assure ourselves, and 
I’m sure members opposite want to ensure to their constituents, 
that indeed the full 911 system is going to be made available  

across this province for our people and the people travelling 
through it. And those concerns, I’m sure, can be addressed in 
Committee of the Whole and we will be proposing suggestions 
at that stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 39  An Act to 
Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My pleasure to rise 
again. Just a few comments before that I ask that we adjourn 
this debate once again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In listening to the minister some time ago when the Bill was 
introduced and talking about the wide consultation process with 
irrigators across the province, of whom I am one of, I kind of 
thought that possibly things had been kind of agreed upon 
amongst irrigators across the province. Upon some of the 
dozens of phone calls and letters I’ve received over the last 
week and a half, I have some concerns that possibly the 
consultation took place but the people that were issuing 
concerns to the government weren’t listened to too closely. 
 
There seems to be a lot of questions that the irrigators out there 
have, Mr. Speaker, that there doesn’t appear to be any answers 
for. And once again, those producers and irrigators were given 
the same story that we’re given in the House, that we will do all 
the things for the Bill in the regulations. 
 
Of course we all know how we as Liberals, and myself as an 
MLA, feel about regulations, and it gives rise to some major 
concerns with this Bill as well. Some of the questions that are 
being asked out there is, is there just going to be further 
bureaucracy created, Mr. Speaker? They want to know if this 
opens the door for the province to sell water to irrigators  all 
sorts of questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also a question arises that, is there going to be an 
overlap here with where we are headed with these two 
corporations along with the group that is coming together now 
of water users, Mr. Speaker. And we’re wondering where that’s 
headed and what the minister will have to say about that. 
 
I know that the minister wants to ensure that these changes are 
brought about smoothly and I know that he wants to do it with 
the cooperation of all irrigators, Mr. Speaker. And with that in 
mind, I would ask that we’d again adjourn debate on this until 
such a time that the irrigators across the province, especially in 
the constituency of Arm River, where we have hundreds of 
them, both on Lake Diefenbaker as well as on Last Mountain 
Lake . . . And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you probably even 
have some in your constituency. 
 
So with that in mind, I would ask that we could adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
  



988  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

Debate adjourned. 
 
(1445) 

Bill No. 51 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 51  An Act to 
amend The Film and Video Classification Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to have this 
opportunity to speak on this legislation, which proposes some 
major changes to Saskatchewan’s film and video classification 
system. 
 
In this age of information, the influence of films and videos and 
television on the public is undeniable. For years, the 
Saskatchewan film and video classification board has reviewed 
thousands of movies scheduled for release in the province. The 
board was to rate the movies and videos hitting the theatres and 
the home video market. It applied a criteria designed to reflect 
community standards in Saskatchewan. 
 
The amendments proposed in Bill 51 will significantly change 
how movies entering Saskatchewan are classified. The 
proposed changes would allow the Saskatchewan board to 
accept the classifications arrived at in other jurisdictions. 
 
For example, Saskatchewan’s board might simply accept 
British Columbia’s rating and review of a movie. Therefore, 
Saskatchewan’s board would not have to even screen the film 
before approving its classification. In these times of fiscal 
restraint, when much needed social programs and services are 
being cut, it’s hard to rationalize funding for Saskatchewan’s 
own separate film and video classification board. Apparently 
about 95 per cent of the board’s decisions were the same as 
rulings by other classification boards across Canada. 
 
But at the same time, we must not relinquish responsibility for 
upholding the standard of movies that enter Saskatchewan. The 
amendments to The Film and Video Classification Act could 
lead the way to the dismantling of the board entirely, which 
causes us some concern. 
 
The issue of censorship can trigger strong emotions and hot 
debate among Saskatchewan people. We cannot forget the 
uproar over the Saskatchewan film and video review board’s 
ban on the movie Exit to Eden. Our province was the only 
jurisdiction in North America that imposed the ban on that 
particular movie. The board’s decision quickly gained notoriety 
and fueled Exit to Eden’s publicity campaign. It sparked angry 
calls to radio open-line shows and was the fodder for some late 
night talk shows in the States. 
 
Of course the decision was appealed and reversed, but many 
people across the province were incensed that a 
government-related body was restricting their choice of movies. 
I believe that it’s important to make a distinction between 
adults’ choice of movies and protecting our children from the 
senseless acts of violence and sex that are becoming more 
commonplace in films. 

It’s critical that Saskatchewan maintains strong representation 
in some type of film and video classification body, but we must 
uphold some standards for the sake of our children. Study after 
study has shown that children can be influenced by the violence 
and sex they are subjected to on television or in movies. 
 
Ultimately, parents should be responsible for monitoring what 
their children are allowed to watch. Unfortunately, parents are 
not always able to supervise what their children are viewing. In 
this instance, the film and video classification board plays an 
important role in deciding what movies are suitable for children 
under 14. 
 
Hopefully the staff at movie theatres and video stores are 
regulating admission or rentals according to those ratings. It is 
very sad to see our children becoming desensitized to horrible 
acts of violence or sex because they are exposed to so much of 
it through the media. It is this type of thing that is slowly 
pulling apart the social and moral fabric of our society. 
 
I hope that the amendments proposed within Bill 51 do not 
mean that our province will eventually relinquish total 
responsibility for upholding the standard of movies entering the 
province. But we can discuss these concerns further in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to intervene briefly in this debate to say that I want to 
associate myself with the remarks of both the minister and the 
member who spoke previously, the member from Humboldt. I 
think she expressed concerns that I feel very well, as did the 
minister. I think this is a positive initiative and therefore want to 
see this Bill proceed. 
 
At this point, I don’t want to say anything further and want to 
leave an opportunity for the third party, the Progressive 
Conservative caucus, the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
caucus, to make its comments known on this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the 
members of the third party, the Progressive Conservatives, have 
nothing to say about this Bill, I would like to say a few words in 
support of it. 
 
I think the member from Humboldt spoke very eloquently about 
some of the concerns she had with the Bill. Nonetheless, I 
would like to support it. I think film and video classification is 
very important and that this is a proper way for us to move in 
Saskatchewan on this matter given some of the financial 
constraints that we are experiencing. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 50  An Act to  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

amend The Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to 
make a consequential amendment be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And thank you. 
 
I’m pleased that I’ve been given this opportunity to address the 
Assembly today with regards to the amendments that have been 
proposed with respect to The Personal Property Security Act. 
Due to the fact that the current legislation ruling the security of 
personal property is somewhat unclear, it is good to see that the 
Bill is before us today and that it does in fact clear up these 
inconsistencies of terminology and definitions. 
 
The most confusing and unclear parts of the current legislation 
are the sections dealing with crops. This new Bill proposes to 
distinguish between produce and the land on which it is grown. 
This is a definite necessity for the determination of time limits 
on security interests on personal property. Due to the confusion 
that has been created over the years by the lack of clarity with 
regards to crops, it is due time that legislation is introduced to 
clear up terminology that is used throughout the content of this 
Act. 
 
One of the intentions of this Bill is to distinguish between crops 
that are already in full existence and crops that are continuing to 
grow and mature. This is done in an attempt to eliminate 
confusion among secured lenders. 
 
There are many other changes included in this Bill, but as a 
caucus that has the interests of rural Saskatchewan at heart, we 
feel that any legislation that changes the way the people of this 
province deal with the land and the crops that provide for their 
livelihood is extremely important. The agricultural sector is the 
cornerstone of our economy. Not only does rural Saskatchewan 
depend on agriculture for the survival of their communities, but 
so too does the rest of this great province. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan has been suffering constant hits by the 
NDP administration since the day this session began. We are 
glad to finally see some legislation aimed at the people who are 
part of the cornerstone of our society. This may be a small 
move by some standards, but any legislation that begins to 
recognize the importance that rural Saskatchewan has in our 
province is a step in the right direction. 
 
Most of the farmers and people in the agricultural sector of our 
economy that we have consulted are in full support of these 
changes. If this Bill will make their lives a little bit simpler with 
regards to security interests, then they are in favour of the 
changes. No one can deny the fact that by simply clearing up 
definitions and terminology, confusion on the part of farmers 
and lenders will be lessened by a great degree. 
 
We have not only consulted with many stakeholders regarding 
this Bill, we have also gotten some legal opinions on it. The 
standard conclusion has been that the existing legislation is so 
unclear and full of contradiction that even the lawyers that we 
have talked to had to admit that the wording of the current Act 
is extremely unclear. 
 

Since the Bill before us today does clarify the definitions at 
hand and further straightens out terminology with regards to 
crops, I see no reason to hold up debate on this Bill at this point 
any further. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 12  An Act to 
amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to 
enact consequential amendments be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 
already spoken at length on this particular Bill. My colleague 
from Humboldt and I brought forward some of our concerns, 
particularly as they relate to families and to the well-being of 
children. These concerns have not changed. We are still deeply 
worried about the effects these amendments may have on 
children caught in bitter custody battles. And we will continue 
to raise these concerns until we are satisfied that the legislation 
protects our children as much as possible. 
 
However, we won’t drag out this debate by restating our past 
arguments. Instead, we would like to raise some further 
concerns about this particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleagues and I have all been talking 
to our constituents hoping to get a better indication of how this 
Bill will affect Saskatchewan people. And like always, our 
constituents have some intelligent, interesting perspectives that 
we would like to pass on to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the concerns we continue to hear 
relates to the suspension of drivers’ licences. As the minister 
himself explained when he introduced the Bill, the amendment 
allows the director of maintenance . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I believe that the hon. 
member has already spoken to this Bill once and therefore 
cannot speak again. 
 
Yes, on March 21, Hansard on page 434, the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition has spoken on Bill No. 12 already. Therefore 
another member will have to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I understand that it would 
be possible, I suppose for this one time only, to make an 
exception. And if the member wanted to continue, if you maybe 
check for unanimous consent to the House for the member to 
speak on this Bill. 
 
We would be willing to offer that from this side of the House, 
but not to make it a standard practice. It would be an exception 
in this one case. If he wished to continue and wants unanimous 
consent to continue his remarks, we would be willing to offer 
that. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the Assembly for the  
  



990  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

oversight and would ask leave to continue to speak to this Bill. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank my 
colleagues in the Assembly for allowing me to continue. I will 
pick up where I began speaking about my colleagues and I 
having spoken to our constituents, and the comments that we’ve 
received, the interesting and intelligent perspectives that I 
would like to share with my colleagues here. 
 
And I’ve mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the concerns that 
we continue to hear are related to the drivers’ licences. And the 
minister explained, when he introduced the Bill, the amendment 
allows the director of maintenance enforcement to direct SGI to 
suspend the licence of a person if he or she is in default of 
maintenance payments. 
 
The minister claimed that this will only be used as a last resort. 
He described the steps to be taken before this last resort is 
reached. So my perception is that the government still has some 
underlying concerns about this section of the Bill as well. 
 
Going back to what I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must 
look at how this Bill affects the children. Will this help prevent 
default payments? I don’t think the members opposite or 
anyone can answer this with a very clear yes. 
 
Let’s say, for instance, that a person makes a living as a truck 
driver or a courier or something that absolutely relies on driving 
a vehicle. That same person has defaulted on maintenance 
support for three months and the director has taken all other 
reasonable steps to collect the payments. Who is suffering? The 
children, because the money that could be needed . . . the 
money could be needed for food, shelter, clothing, or 
medication. 
 
But if the court orders SGI to revoke that person’s licence, he or 
she will no longer be able to make a living. With no money 
coming in, it will even be less likely that he or she can or will 
make the payment. So who is suffering? Still, unfortunately, the 
children. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not coming out in defence of men 
or women who default on payments; we are coming out in 
defence of children. And although we know that the 
government’s Bill is an attempt to help the children, we aren’t 
sure that that is the best answer in all cases. 
 
We would like to see some sort of amendment that would 
recognize the unique circumstances behind each case. We 
believe that there should be some kind of panel to decide if and 
when it is appropriate to revoke the licence of a defaulter. In the 
long run, having a rigid law with no leeway could end up 
harming the very people this law should protect  the children. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have also been reviewing this issue of 
visitation as it relates to this Bill because it too is of great 
concern to some of our constituents. From our initial research,  

we think this Bill is lacking direction. Parents are worried that 
the new law is designed to protect one side of a custody battle 
and ignoring the other. 
 
Even people who agree that the maintenance enforcement 
should be tightened are upset that the issue of visitation is not 
discussed. 
 
Let me give you another scenario, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s 
say a man is consistent  or a woman  with his or her 
payments. He or she is setting aside a portion of their earnings 
every month to make sure the children are provided for. But he 
or she and their spouse went through a nasty divorce. One or the 
other is refusing to let the other see the children even though the 
court has given visitation rights. What legal backup does he or 
she have? This is not a rare scenario, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
something that affects hundreds of men and women in this 
province. They feel helpless. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when people feel powerless because a law 
is too difficult to enforce, the law must be changed. Our legal 
system is designed to uphold law, to protect society, and to 
guarantee individual rights. As elected officials, we are 
obligated to do everything in our power to make sure the laws 
are effective. We must ensure that people have faith in our legal 
system, because if people lose faith in our laws, they will rebel 
and society will end up paying the price. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not alone in believing the visitation 
issue must be addressed. We have just started to scratch the 
surface of similar Bills from other provinces. Still, even from 
initial studies, we have discovered that both Manitoba and Nova 
Scotia have provisions respecting visitation rights of 
non-custodial parents. It’s in the legislation. That means the 
courts will have more power to enforce visitation rights given in 
the divorce settlement. 
 
We would also like to see some way of tracking defaulters 
when they leave the province. As the law stands now, there is 
no reciprocal agreement with other provinces. What happens is 
that when a defaulter moves, the province has no legal way to 
retrieve the money. And in the long run of course, it is the 
children who end up losing the most. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize that all cases are different 
and I have little respect for parents who default on child support 
payments. However, I must admit I do have sympathy for 
parents who continue to pay and yet are still denied access to 
their children. 
 
I can understand why some of these people would want to react 
in anger and withhold payments until their former spouse 
allowed them access. Again, I’m not saying I support it, but I do 
feel some sincere sympathy. We believe that if visitation rights 
were better protected, we may hit at the root of the problem. 
Maybe we would see a decrease in defaults because parents 
would not have any reason to justify, even in their own minds, 
withholding payments. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know laws are often used as both a 
punishment and a deterrent. And we know that sometimes this  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

is the only answer. But any time we can get to a problem before 
it takes root, we should. 
 
In the long run it will benefit everyone. It will give more power 
to parents on both sides of the custodial battle. It will help 
prevent a backlog in our already overcrowded courts. And most 
of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will make sure our children are 
receiving the money they need to survive. And as we all know, 
that’s the most important thing of all. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, we are examining the maintenance 
enforcement and visitation Acts in other provinces, but we see 
no reason to halt progress on this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 58  An Act to 
amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential 
amendment be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to have 
the opportunity today to further discuss the proposed 
amendments to The Land Titles Act. 
 
Like many of the previous Bills already introduced in the House 
during this session, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 1996 will 
have some great impacts on many people and organizations 
across this province. 
 
We feel that this Bill affects, for the most part, Indian bands 
across the province, especially those bands who are financially 
sound enough to be looking to purchase land and gain land 
titles. 
 
There are five or six basic amendments proposed through this 
Bill, the most important of which allows Indian bands to own 
land in their own name. Through this Bill, Indian bands will no 
longer have to be registered as a corporation in order to 
purchase and own land. Regulations to this Act, as we 
understand it, will set out the names that bands will use when 
dealing with the land titles system. 
 
While we do support the intentions of this amendment, we do 
have some concerns about the potential outcomes of such 
changes to The Land Titles Act. We agree in principle with the 
reasons for many of the amendments included in this Bill, one 
of which being the desire to reflect Indian bands in the land 
titles system. But we do have some concerns that this Bill does 
not deal with the issue of taxation. The key issue here is 
whether this land that bands will now be able to purchase will 
be tax exempt. This is an extremely important issue that needs 
to be looked at more closely before this Bill passes through this 
House. 
 
Many of the other amendments included in this Bill are simply 
housekeeping, and we really have no concern with those. An 
example of such an amendment is one in which duplicate  

certificates of title can now be destroyed a year after the 
duplicate is cancelled. As this change simply aids in the 
reduction of administrative paperwork, we have no problems 
with this. 
 
In the process of improving and streamlining services to the 
public, amendments to this Act allow for more flexibility when 
it comes to providing personal information. Current legislation 
requires only original copies of documents to be submitted to 
the Land Titles Office. Amendments will allow for certified or 
notary copies to be used. And again this is just one more 
example of the Land Titles Office working to simplify the 
process in order to save time and money. 
 
The other key issue in this Bill is with regards to the lapse of a 
caveat. Current legislation puts responsibility to notify the 
caveator of the intent to lapse the caveat by the person who has 
the intent to lapse the caveat in question. These procedures are 
confusing and some time consuming for all parties involved. As 
these procedures are often strict and unfamiliar to most people, 
they have proven time and again to be inefficient. Through 
amendments to The Land Titles Act, the responsibility to notify 
caveat holders of the pending lapse will now be in the hands of 
Land Titles personnel. The reason behind this is to reduce errors 
and to streamline the process. Again this is seen as a positive 
move, as it simplifies the process for all parties involved. 
 
(1515) 
 
The main changes to The Land Titles Act are being done to 
simplify administration and eliminate red tape. While we agree 
to this in principle, we feel that some issues with respect to land 
purchase by Indian bands have been left out of the discussion. 
Taxation of land owned by Indian bands has not been addressed 
in this Bill. Not only this, but there is no mention of 
amendments to be made to current legislation that does deal 
with taxation of land. 
 
For many people that will be involved in and affected by the 
amendments proposed by this Bill, the issue of taxation is an 
important one. And it must be dealt with before this new 
legislation can go any further. 
 
Full consultation with bands involved needs to be pursued 
further. The issue of whether land purchased by bands will be 
taxable or not needs to be cleared up and straightened out for 
the benefit of all parties involved. We fail to see how legislation 
that directly involves Indian bands does not also deal directly 
with the issue of taxation. And it’s for this reason that I would 
respectfully request that the debate on this Bill be adjourned. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Order. It has been brought to my 
attention that the hon. member from Thunder Creek has already 
adjourned debate on that motion once, so another member will 
have to adjourn the motion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
move that we adjourn debate. 
  



992  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 32  An Act to amend 
The Local Government Election Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is John Edwards, who is the director of municipal policy 
and legislative services. Behind me is Jean Lazar, who is the 
manager of municipal management services. And on Jean’s 
right is Jim Anderson, who is the senior policy analyst in the 
Department of Municipal Government, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, I’d like to also welcome 
your officials here today to the House. We really have very few 
questions on this, Madam Minister. We really find no fault with 
this. We think it’s probably mostly housekeeping and agree 
with most of it. 
 
I just have a couple of questions. In section 10 where we’re 
talking about, “at the time he or she submits the nomination 
paper, is a Canadian citizen . . .” and one of our questions, has it 
ever been considered to include landed immigrant? And why 
we’re asking that is there is a number of landed immigrants 
such as British subjects that have been within the country for 
50, 60 years, have never got their Canadian citizenship. We 
wondered if that has ever been taken into consideration. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for that question. I think the purpose here is to be 
consistent with the election Acts at other levels. And as the 
member will be aware, this is the case as well in provincial and 
federal elections  that landed immigrants or other than 
Canadian citizens, don’t have the privilege to vote. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you. Going on to section 11, Madam 
Minister, and I realize it’s just a housekeeping thing that has 
been changed, but one of the things we wonder about, and I’m 
just going to quote from the explanation. It says: 
 

26.1 (2) No person is disqualified from being nominated, 
elected or holding office as a member of a council by 
reason of his (and that’s been changed) having an interest 
in a contract with a municipality. 

 
I think possibly where our concern is, and I don’t think it’s with 
the very small contractors  and I know how it works, how a 
member who is affected by it can ask for leave from the 
meeting and exclude themselves  but I’m wondering, in the 
case of a very large contractor that a contract may be up into the 
hundreds of thousands dollars with the municipality, if there 
isn’t a concern where a conflict of interest would come in at that 
point. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  This is meant to apply to not so much 
. . . not people that are doing business with elected bodies, but 
employees of elected bodies. And this one makes the provision 
for school board employees to have the same . . . to be in a level  

playing-field with employees of municipalities, universities, 
and so on. So it’s just meant to make it consistent for the 
employees of school boards. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
I’d like to also question on where we’re talking on  and I’ll 
quote. It’s from section 13(3.2) and I’ll just run through it: 
 

If all or Part of the contents of the notice mentioned in 
subsection (1) are, in the discretion of the returning officer, 
distributed by mail or delivered to all resident electors of 
the municipality, or school division, as the case may be, or 
if reasonable actions are taken . . . 

 
I agree with the intent of this. I know how expensive it gets for 
municipalities, school boards, etc., to advertise in the papers. I 
know it’s been a bone of contention in our RM for a number of 
years. 
 
The question I have though, is to do with reasonable actions. 
What really is the definition of a reasonable action I guess, is 
what I’m asking. And possibly, who makes that decision? Who 
would that lie with  the administrator, or who? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 
question raised by the member opposite I think would be that in 
the first instance, the definition of reasonable action would be in 
the discretion of the returning officer, and ultimately, if his 
discretion was to be challenged, it would be decided in the 
courts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to go 
on now to voting machines, 59.1. And I guess the first question 
I have is what kind of voting machines would be allowed or 
what specifications are we going by there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well the member may know that 
particularly the larger urban centres have been studying the 
voting and tabulating votes by computer for some time. And 
this is meant to be an enabling clause. There’s no one doing it at 
the moment, but it’s enabling so that when they’re ready they 
would be able to use that kind of electronic equipment for 
voting. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
I’d like to ask too, could voting by phone, say with a PIN 
(personal identification number) number be included in this 
category? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this would be specific 
to computerized tabulation, for instance. And PIN numbers by 
phones wouldn’t be covered. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, my first concern about this 
Bill regards some of the provisions allowing school board 
employees to run for school boards. I have some serious 
questions about that because basically I feel board members 
need to look after the interests of their ratepayers and of the 
students as the number one situation. 
 
Can you tell me, Madam Minister, what provisions will be  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

made to ensure there’s no conflict of interest involved in having 
employees sitting on the board. Will they be expected to exempt 
themselves from discussions relating to staffing, school 
closures, and those sort of things? Will the conflict of interest 
regulations be similar to those used by health boards who have 
district employees serve on the board? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the response to the 
question posed by the hon. member is that if they are successful 
in the election, they would have to resign. So the situation you 
described could not occur. They take a leave of absence in order 
to campaign and run for office, but if they are successful, they 
must resign. The provision that’s added is their ability to take a 
leave of absence to seek the office. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister, because I think 
it’s too bad that the health boards don’t have similar 
regulations. Because what happens now, you basically end up 
with a board of units in many cases because they can’t get 
involved in two-thirds to three-quarters of discussion that takes 
place. 
 
A question on resort village elections. This Bill extends a 
franchise to out-of-province cottage owners for the councils of 
resort villages. In proposing this, you cite precedents that allow 
out-of-province property holders to hold office in RMs. 
However the fact that there’s a precedent for it does not 
necessarily make it right. 
 
Madam Minister, could you tell us how many other 
jurisdictions, particularly neighbouring jurisdictions, are 
reciprocal privileges extended to Saskatchewan residents who 
own property in their jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that 
information. I’m not sure. We haven’t copied our legislation or 
modelled it after what exists in our neighbouring provinces. 
What we have responded to is the applications or submissions, 
if you like, by the Provincial Association of Resort 
Communities on behalf of their members. 
 
We have done an analysis to the effect that we are assured that 
out-of-province owners and lessees do not form a majority, or 
close to form a majority in any community. And we haven’t 
extended it to . . . they can’t hold office; they can simply vote. 
They cannot run for office. The privilege that’s added is strictly 
the vote and it applies to municipal elections only. They cannot 
vote in school elections. There the same provisions apply that 
you must be a resident for six months and so on. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, thank you and I appreciate the 
direction that you’re going with that one. 
 
On the computerized voting, have any provincial standards on 
voting machines been established and what studies have been 
done on them? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question about whether any standards have been set,  

this hasn’t been done yet. The Act simply is enabling in terms 
of the method, and any standards would be developed through 
regulation pursuant to the Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  A question I have a little further to the 
machines, Madam Minister. Will the system simply be used to 
count physical ballots that are marked in the usual way or will 
the voter vote through the machine? And will any sort of 
physical ballot be retained? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the response is that 
either of the circumstances that the member describes could be; 
it would depend upon the system adopted by the municipality. 
And that’s when, in consultation with them, we would take a 
. . . have more analysis and develop the regulations along those 
lines. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, and I guess the concern, Madam 
Minister, that I’m trying to express is that we ensure that no 
voting irregularities could take place because of using a new 
system that’s there. 
 
Madam Minister, this legislation throws the door open with 
regards to how people can mark ballots. The Bill in fact allows 
them to mark their ballot with any kind of marking device, any 
colour, not just an X. 
 
On the one hand, I think we appreciate these changes will make 
it harder for ballots to be unfairly discarded, and that part’s 
definitely a positive one. On the other hand, we may have gone 
too far with these changes. Given how very loose these 
provisions are, how will the electoral officers be able to tell if a 
person actually intends to spoil their ballot or not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, what we would do in 
this instance is we would monitor this very closely. People 
would want to be sure that the scrutineers at all levels of 
election were properly schooled before, and that if any 
problems of this type do emerge, we would certainly be 
prepared to amend the regulations to deal with that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair:  Will the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
Mr. Vern Gorr, the director of policies, rates, and regulations, to 
my left here this afternoon. On my right hand side is Mark 
Guillet, general counsel and corporate secretary to SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would like to 
welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon and do 
appreciate their attendance and their close scrutiny of our  
  



994  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

questions and the answers thereafter. 
 
TransGas, being a wholly owned subsidiary of SaskEnergy, 
through this Bill and its loosening the franchising with respect 
to TransGas, will that have any effect on the profitability of 
TransGas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No, it should not have an effect on the 
profitability of TransGas. The changes that are being proposed 
are more amendments to cut down on some of the red tape in 
some of the transactions that have to be gone through. 
 
We feel that the franchise is fully protected; the amendments 
just help clarify the franchise. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Does the 
government have a ballpark figure on the number of new 
natural gas recovery projects that would start up in this province 
as a result of this proposed legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’m not sure what the hon. member 
means by gas recovery projects. These amendments we don’t 
believe will adversely affect the future development of natural 
gas within the province of Saskatchewan. It just clarifies what 
our franchise is and what the rights of the producers are in 
terms of how they differentiate between a gathering line and a 
transmission line, with some other minor details that flow into 
it. 
 
But in terms of gas recovery, I’m not quite sure . . . you’d have 
to clarify what you mean by that. I don’t understand the term in 
the context you’re using it. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Would you 
please then explain, will this have any effect on any gas 
wholesalers? For example, CEG in Saskatoon, would there be 
any effect on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No, there should be no effect on the 
companies like the ones that you have mentioned. If this does 
anything it enhances the private sector’s opportunities to do 
business, especially those who would be new coming into the 
province or have not had a long track record in the past. 
 
Because I think what’ll happen is that the industry that’s in 
existence now doing the development of natural gas within the 
province would look at this and see it as a smoothing of some of 
the red tape that’s there, a better clarification of what 
TransGas’s franchise actually means. They would in turn be 
talking to other companies who are involved in exploration and 
development of natural gas. And therefore we see this as having 
a positive side. We don’t anticipate any downside from the 
amendments that we’re proposing to the legislation here this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So then this 
does appear  and I just would ask again for your 
corroboration on this  but it does appear that this would have 
a broad industry support. And if I might just have you just 
reiterate that again, please. 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  As far as I know, and I’ve checked with 
the officials here today, we are not aware of anyone in the 
industry who has a negative comment about what we’re doing 
here. It’s been done in consultation with Saskatchewan Energy 
and Mines who have a long track record with the oil and gas 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have not had any feedback. Many of us keep in touch with 
companies who are involved in the exploration and 
development of natural gas, both as elected officials and also 
people who work within the Crown corporation. And as far as 
we know, there have been no negative comments by anyone in 
the industry about this. They see it as a benefit, not a detriment. 
And it is a benefit to us because it clarifies our franchise within 
the province. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s nice to see 
a positive piece of legislation coming forward then, and I would 
just like to thank the minister’s officials for those answers. 
Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just before 
we move on too fast along the Bill, I want to give the 
Conservative opposition a chance to ask a few questions also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I appreciate the intent of the 
member, but as I say, we have done wide consultation on this 
Bill and we’d like to proceed with it now. Others seem to have 
concluded all the comments that would indicate interest in the 
Bill. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1545) 
 

Bill No. 40  An Act respecting  
Pharmacists and Pharmacies 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me today 
is Mr. Drew Johnston, who works for the Department of Health; 
and Mr. Rick Hischebett, who is a solicitor with the Department 
of Justice and the legal adviser for the Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And first of all, Minister, welcome to your officials. We’re 
certainly not going to put them through a very hard scrutiny this 
afternoon because I think it’s important to acknowledge right  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

up front that you’ve worked very closely with the pharmacy 
association in the drafting of this Bill. In fact the information 
that we have, in talking to some of the pharmacists, that it’s 
been a good number of years that they’ve actually been 
lobbying and hoping that this type of legislation is brought 
forward. And so I would like to congratulate you in terms of 
that process. 
 
There are a couple of questions that some of our pharmacists 
raised, and I think it’s important to get clarification on the 
record. Because it’s our expectation that perhaps it’s just 
clarification and misinterpretation or vagueness in the way the 
people we consulted read this. 
 
And it has to do around the issue of, will the district health 
boards have an opportunity through this legislation in essence, 
if they choose to, to be able to be recognized as applications for 
permits to operate pharmacies under the Act. 
 
And it's, I think, running out of page 14, section 19 that they 
point out as a particular concern. And this section has caused 
concern that perhaps organizations like district health boards 
would be able to own and operate pharmacies under this 
section, and they’re concerned about that. Can you tell me, 
Minister, is this a concern that’s legitimate, or is this a 
possibility that’s envisaged or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well firstly, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to 
thank the member for his comments about the legislation and 
the consultation that has gone on. And I agree with the 
member’s characterization of the legislation as long overdue 
and generally welcomed by pharmacists and other health care 
professionals. 
 
I would not want to say to the member that the concern is 
illegitimate; what I would want to say is that the concern is not 
really altered one way or the other by this legislation. This 
legislation will be new professional legislation for the 
pharmacists, but it will not really change the status quo with 
respect to the issue of regulation of pharmacists. 
 
But I want to say that while the current Act does not change the 
current situation, it is not our intention that publicly funded 
health facilities compete with the private retail pharmacy sector. 
This has not presented a problem in the past even though there 
are some pharmacies in health facilities. And they really have 
only existed where there is an issue as to the availability of 
drugs or the availability of certain drugs that retailers don’t 
wish to carry because there’s no volume to them and somebody 
might like to get the drug from, for example, the Royal 
University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
If it becomes a problem  which we don’t think it is; we’ve 
had 28 full-time hospital pharmacies with permanent staff so 
far; 43 part-time pharmacies; 3 hospitals which dispense to the 
public; these have not presented a problem — but we have 
agreed with the association, and I’ve met with the association 
myself, that we will revisit the matter should it become an issue. 
 
So the Act does not address the issue but nor does it change the  

current situation in this regard. If there is a problem, we’ve 
agreed that we will address it. We don’t anticipate a problem. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, in your meeting with the 
association, I would expect that from your remarks that the 
association has accepted your undertaking to review it if it 
becomes an issue. Is there a protocol in place to have that in 
place or is it just simply an undertaking that you’ve agreed with 
the association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No specific protocol. It would be a matter 
of ongoing dialogue; that if there is a problem, I’ll be getting 
together with the association. And they’re aware of that with 
respect to that problem or other problems that they may have. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I think that’s 
particularly important. It’s sort of a double-edged sword, I 
suppose, in some northern areas where it’s maybe necessary 
that district health boards, through hospitals or emergency 
stations, would be in a position to assist the community, where 
pharmacies may not be available. 
 
On one side you have that dilemma; on the other side you have 
the great concern of small, local pharmacies, particularly in 
rural Saskatchewan, that would feel really pressured in their 
practices if the local hospital, or whatever the facility is, would 
get into the dispensing of drugs. So I’m sure that you and your 
officials appreciate the concern that’s been expressed. 
 
In section 34(1), with regards to disciplinary action by the 
discipline committee, a person found to be at fault can be 
ordered, among other things, to seek medical treatment and/or 
counselling. Is there going to be or is it envisioned that 
someone in the disciplinary committee has a medical 
background to be able to decide if a person is indeed in need of 
this kind of treatment and/or counselling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That, Mr. Chairman, would be on the basis 
usually of expert medical advice that would be presented to a 
professional conduct committee, such as a discipline committee. 
And this would not be unique to The Pharmacy Act. This would 
be more or less common provision in professional legislation 
generally, The Legal Profession Act or The Medical Profession 
Act. That it might be that a member of a particular profession 
has a problem, perhaps abuse of alcohol for example, and one 
of the conditions of practice might be that that person had to get 
the appropriate counselling and assistance to deal with that 
problem. 
 
But normally no, there would not necessarily be a medical 
expert on the panel that would be reviewing the matter. They 
would rely on an expert witness with respect to that matter in 
the same way that a judge in a court would not be a medical 
doctor, but might make a decision based upon medical evidence 
presented to him or her. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. Essentially those were 
the main points that the pharmacists that we consulted with 
raised. I believe that, from our discussions, that the association 
is very supportive. Were there any other issues that I raised, that 
are flagged, that are of concern, that individual pharmacists  
  



996  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

have maybe have raised with you in regard to this that you 
would like to put on to the record? Because I think that this 
seems to have very wide support. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, not in particular that I’m aware of. I 
think the member is correct that the Bill does have wide 
support. 
 
I’m sure that there are particular members of the pharmacy 
profession, and perhaps even the profession itself, might wish 
that the wording in some respect or other was different, but 
these matters, as the member knows, are always a matter of 
compromises between health professionals and the association 
and the government and so on. And I think it’s fair to say that 
the pharmacists generally, and their association, are quite 
pleased with the Bill and anxious to have it proceed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I would like to 
particularly thank your officials, not so much for the effort they 
had to put in it today, but in recognizing the fact that because 
there was so little grilling today probably is an indication of the 
work that you did previously. So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I thank the member for those 
comments on behalf of the officials. And I too want to thank the 
officials very much for the good job that they have done, as 
well as the association of pharmacists in the province who has 
worked very well with the province on this issue. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 71 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 

Bill No. 41  An Act to amend  
The Mental Health Services Act 

 
The Chair:  Will the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is Dr. John Elias who works for the Department of Health. And 
also, I previously introduced Mr. Rick Hischebett who is a 
lawyer with the Department of Justice, who also is the legal 
adviser to the Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister, and I welcome your officials. We’re very pleased to 
have them here with us today. 
 
I would ask you to refer to section 33, it’s just a comment I 
have on that. And the section is amended so that the nearest 
relative of a person with mental health problems no longer has 
to be notified. There has been concern regarding that current 
legislation . . . it is my understanding that there has been some 
concern regarding current legislation which requires the closest 
relative to be notified no matter what the situation. 
 

I can understand the intent and the necessity of the amendment, 
because in the case of spousal abuse, this simply is not 
appropriate. For instance, you know, with spousal abuse, it’s 
not appropriate that that relative should be notified. So in most 
part, I do understand the reasoning behind the change and I 
approve of it, but it’s still a bit vague and so I have a couple of 
questions. 
 
There’s no mention of the age of the person in question. Is it 
correct to assume that if the person is under the age of 18 that a 
parent or guardian will be contacted with regard to the minor’s 
mental health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I thank the member for the question, Mr. 
Chairman. The answer to that is different outside a hospital 
setting than a counselling setting or a doctor’s office type 
setting. There is no statutory or regulatory provision that says 
anything about the specific age of 18. And so the common law 
applies. That is the law that has been set down by the judges 
over a long period of time. 
 
And that law would say that the person providing the treatment, 
in this case a psychiatrist I suppose, would have to make an 
assessment whether the person was of sufficient maturity to 
make an informed consent to the treatment. 
 
And so generally speaking, when you’re dealing with a younger 
person, the parents or guardians would be informed, but not 
necessarily if the psychiatrist was of the view that a 17-year-old 
for example, was capable of consenting to the treatment on their 
own. And in that respect this Act wouldn’t change the law one 
way or the other. That has always been the law, and this would 
not alter that state of the law. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I certainly am not completely 
informed about what the law has been in the past, but I do have 
some concern with the fact that in rural areas we have got a 
shortage of psychiatrists, as your own government has stated in 
some of their documents here. And that if a physician in fact, 
rather than a trained psychiatrist, would be taking this upon him 
or herself to determine that community treatment would have to 
be necessary and he can do that without consent of parents, I 
feel that there is a little bit of apprehension on my part with the 
authority there being misused possibly at times, or just not 
appropriate. 
 
It’s just my belief that if there are parents certainly there and 
they have got sound minds and bodies, that if they’re able to 
come to the assistance of their child and to determine whether 
or not treatment could be needed, I believe they should be there 
and they should be informed of this. If it comes to the point 
where a physician has overall authority, without question, about 
treatment of a youth, without in fact having some sort of 
responsibility to parents, I question whether that would be good 
for our society. I would ask you to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I should have more clearly stated in my last 
answer two things, Mr. Chairman. The first is that it would only 
be a case, I think generally speaking, of abuse by the parent of 
the child where the medical person would make a decision that 
it was not wise to advise the nearest relative which, if there was  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

a parent, would always be the parent, unless the child under 18 
was married, for example, in which case it would be the spouse. 
 
But if you’re dealing with a parent and somebody under the age 
of 18, the only circumstance I can think of where the parent 
wouldn’t be advised would be where the medical person made 
an assessment that there was abuse in the family, and therefore 
for that reason it might not be appropriate. 
 
But there’s another aspect to it that I should have advised the 
member in answer to the first question, which I didn’t, and that 
is that where the physician did not advise the parent, the 
physician would be required to bring that to the attention of the 
official representative, and that person is a person appointed by 
government in various districts throughout the province to 
oversee the rights and interests of the people in cases where 
their affairs are being handled by somebody else. 
 
So that the safeguard you would have in a case where the parent 
was not advised is that another person  not the physician, 
because as you said the danger is that somebody has too much 
control  would have to be informed of that fact, and the 
official representative would be obligated to sort of look out for 
the interests of the person undergoing the treatment and make 
sure that if the relative wasn’t being advised, that in fact what 
was being done was appropriate. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Are there any sort of mandatory 
requirements for the status of that person that you refer to that 
would in fact have the authority to, I guess, get permission for 
their treatment?. I’m assuming that you mean if a person is 
under the care of the department or something in some way or 
other, the department of maybe Social Services or whatever. 
Who is . . . give me some examples of who that other person 
may be that a physician would be obligated to contact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the answer to the question is that these 
official representatives I’m referring to are people in the 
community who do not work for government and are not 
usually themselves physicians, or in any event if they were, 
would not be involved in treating a person. 
 
And they are appointed on a part-time basis to advise people 
who are made subject to treatment orders as to their rights and 
the procedures they can follow to appeal if they feel something 
inappropriate is being done. So that in effect, they are sort of 
like ombudspersons for people who allegedly have a mental 
problem and who have been made, in effect, subject to an order 
at the behest indirectly of the state because of the legislation. 
 
And so if you didn’t have the nearest relative advised, you 
would have consultation between the physician and the official 
representative. And the official representative, in carrying out 
their duties, would speak to the person concerned and see what 
they had to say. In many cases of course, they would be quite 
happy to have the treatment because they might appreciate the 
fact that they do need some treatment in the community. 
 
And in cases where they were not happy, the official 
representative would advise them to go to another step which 
would be to appeal the order that was made with respect to  

them. At all times, it being the intent of the legislation to make 
sure that the rights of the individual concerned are duly taken 
care of. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I still am not completely 
clear, and I somehow need to be completely sure that I 
understand who those official representatives might be. Would 
it be a judge of a court in a town? Who would it be? Because as 
time goes on we have a lot of communities that may have a 
physician’s service in one way or the other but we don’t have 
maybe judges or whatever, so I need to know who that might 
be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, these official representatives, I’m 
advised, are all lawyers in private practice throughout the 
province. And so somebody would be appointed in Saskatoon 
and Regina and Swift Current and Weyburn  wherever there 
was a need. And they would not be civil servants; they are not 
employees of the government; they’re not judges; and they’re 
not medical people. They are lawyers who are, among other 
things, trained in being advocates for people and trying to look 
out for their rights. 
 
And as a practical example, if a community treatment order was 
made in my community, say  well say for me, that I had to 
see a psychiatrist every two weeks. I would go . . . or to you  
I hesitate to suggest that  then I would go, if I was 
dissatisfied, to the lawyer who was appointed in Saskatoon and 
I would say, I am being mistreated by the state, or by the 
psychiatrist, or by somebody else; what are you going to do 
about it? And their job would be to assist me, first of all, to be 
aware that I’m complaining, because maybe there is something 
to the complaint — so it’s a safeguard — and secondly, to help 
me go through whatever hoops I have to go through to appeal 
the decision that has been made with respect to my case. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the case, Mr. 
Minister, where there would be for instance, a person needing 
treatment or recommended for treatment that is under the care 
of Social Services, would the lawyers appointed be legal aid 
lawyers or would there be other lawyers that . . . and if there is, 
who is paying for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, the lawyer would be the same in every 
instance whether you were on social assistance or not on social 
assistance. The Department of Health would enter into a 
contract with a lawyer in the community to provide the service 
as official representative. And then the lawyer would be paid 
for the time that the lawyer would put in dealing with whatever 
problems were brought to the lawyer’s attention. 
 
The individual concerned would not pay the lawyer. The lawyer 
would send a bill to the Department of Health, and the 
Department of Health would then pay the bill of the lawyer for 
whatever services were rendered. And it might be that no 
services were rendered because nobody had any complaints. Or 
it might be that there were a lot of complaints and then the 
lawyer would be paid according to the volume of the work. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I can see this, you know, in my mind’s 
eye, I can certainly see a big bill being tallied up to the  
  



998  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

government in time over it with this sort of thing. I think it 
would be much more advisable to make sure that we have a 
situation in this province where we have enough psychiatrists in 
the first place. 
 
What is, in fact . . . is the government doing anything to 
counteract the shortage of psychiatrists for you know . . . and 
we don’t have enough in the rural areas and I guess it’s 
basically because rural areas are being depopulated as such. But 
what is being done to get more medical graduates and 
psychiatrists to stay in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I should say to the member, Mr. Chairman, 
in my last answer I was not quite correct in the sense that the 
amount that we would pay the lawyer in each area is determined 
in advance. There’s sort of a block amount based upon the past 
volume of matters to be dealt with in that area. So that you 
make an estimate of the time that has to be spent. 
 
The question of the lawyers is not directly related to the 
availability of the psychiatrist. You would have the lawyers 
being the official representatives and doing what they do, 
whether or not you have psychiatrists. In fact you might have 
the lawyers being busier where you do have the psychiatrist 
because then presumably there are cases that have to be dealt 
with because the official representative would be safeguarding 
the person from the psychiatrist, if I can put it that way. I’m not 
suggesting that that has to be done in a lot of cases. But in 
theory, the idea is that if somebody is being abused by a 
medical person, then they can go to this third party. 
 
(1615) 
 
In answer to the last part of your question, which was what are 
we doing about the availability of psychiatrists in some of the 
rural areas, I would say to the member that in the last few years 
the number of practitioners in the province has been relatively 
stable. I would agree with you that there are probably not a 
sufficient number of psychiatrists in some areas of the province. 
But that isn’t a problem that has recently arisen or is getting 
dramatically worse in the recent past. 
 
I think the answer to it is probably that some of the districts pay 
specialists a salary as opposed to fee-for-service because the 
volume of work in a given area may not be such that a specialist 
would be attracted to a smaller centre as opposed to a larger 
centre. But in some districts they will pay a specialist, which 
could include a psychiatrist, a certain salary because they wish 
to have that specialist service available to the people in their 
area. 
 
And so I think the answer primarily is probably just providing 
an adequate salary for the psychiatrist through the district in 
areas where the volume of work is not such that a psychiatrist 
would be attracted to practice there by the fee-for-service 
system. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how many 
people do you estimate are directly affected by community 
treatment orders in Saskatchewan annually? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that presently the number is 15 
or 20, but it could be as high as 35 to 40 people per year that 
would be affected by community treatment orders in the 
province. 
 
And I should say that the community treatment order is 
designed to be less intrusive to the individual than if you 
committed them to an institution. The idea is that if you have a 
person who needs treatment because they may be a danger to 
themselves, or their family is having trouble with them but they 
are not a danger to society in the sense of being violent and 
they’re not suicidal, then the idea is, under the community 
treatment order, is they could be treated in the community. 
 
And the order simply would require them, for example, to 
attend at a medical office perhaps to take their medication if 
there’s a problem with them staying on their medication. Or 
perhaps they need psychiatric counselling, or perhaps a variety 
of other circumstances. 
 
But I would stress that it’s not a large number of people. And in 
some ways the concept that this Bill amends is a concept that is 
less intrusive and more respectful of the rights of the individual 
than the traditional committal order which simply would 
commit the person to an institution somewhere. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It sounds a little bit to 
me like you’re leaning then towards deinstitutionalization in 
cases where there is not a really extreme danger to society or 
the person. Is that correct? Okay. 
 
Is there any kind of a monitoring of patients that are under 
community treatment order  close monitoring by anyone in 
the community or by a wellness clinic, anyone responsible 
maybe through a wellness clinic for these patients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that in each case the 
individual’s situation is monitored by their psychiatrist and also 
by a designated case manager who normally would be a 
community health nurse. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. But in rural areas, if there isn’t a 
psychiatrist there and it’s been the attending physician that in 
fact ordered care and a lawyer that has helped the patient 
understand their rights  which is very nice  but we just then 
have a physician, and we don’t have a psychiatrist, so . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Okay. If you had that situation, you 
wouldn’t be in the situation that this legislation would apply to. 
In other words, you’d have to have a psychiatrist providing the 
treatment before you would have an operative community 
treatment order. So in every case where there was a community 
treatment order, a psychiatrist would have to be involved. 
 
And you raise a valid point that perhaps there are some places 
where there is no psychiatrist. If that was the case, you wouldn’t 
be dealing with a community treatment order. In that vicinity at 
least, some other step would have to be taken. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s certainly, I think, 
incumbent upon your government to realize that there is a great  
  



April 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

number of centres throughout Saskatchewan who may have a 
physician coming into the community and giving these kind of 
orders, but where there certainly is no access to a psychiatrist. 
So it’s just a little bit of a concern that I have there. And I’m 
just wondering again about going back to the validity of a 
physician taking on the full authority to recommend treatment 
when there is no psychiatrist around, and never mind the first 
psychiatrist, there’s not a second one around. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well there is no case, I should explain, Mr. 
Chairman, where you would have an order made by a physician 
alone. In every case the order would have to be made by a 
psychiatrist. The only issue here is that, where you need a 
second signature, for a period of 21 days you can have a 
physician who is not a psychiatrist, but is certified to perform 
this function, sign as, in effect, the second psychiatrist, whereas 
now you need two psychiatrists. 
 
But there is no problem with respect to coverage of the province 
by the first psychiatrist. There has been no problem in terms of 
availability of at least one psychiatrist to make any community 
treatment orders that are necessary. And the psychiatrists do 
travel around the province, and there is accessibility there. 
 
What this Bill does is it simply says, if you don’t happen to 
have two psychiatrists available, then for 21 days a physician 
could sign as the second psychiatrist. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I thank you, and I have no more questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. You know 
as we’re hurrying through the Bills in these past days, I note 
that the member from Greystone and the Conservative 
opposition never seem to get a chance to stand up in the House 
and ask questions on any of the Bills. Perhaps if they’re in the 
House, they could really offer them that opportunity. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair:  Will the minister move that the Bill be reported 
without amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, before I do that, I’d 
like to thank the member opposite for her questions and thank 
the officials for attending today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask that you 
test the House on a Bill that passed through adjourned debates 
earlier today, Bill No. 50  The Personal Property Security 
Amendment Act. I’ve had consultations with the Opposition 
House Leader and I feel that there is a disposition within the 
House to pass this through Committee of the Whole today. And  

that I would ask you to test the House that this Bill could be 
reported without amendment. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property 
Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that Bill 50, The Personal 
Property Security Amendment Act be reported without 
amendment. 
 
The Chair:  We have to vote this one through clause by 
clause, Minister, before we can do that. So you’re just a little bit 
ahead of yourself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was anxious 
and overstepped my bounds. If you would proceed with going 
through the Bill, clause by clause, I would appreciate that at this 
time. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I think as a 
whole the Bill has no concerns from the official opposition, 
other than I would just like one clarification. Section 37, I see 
we’re striking out the word “growing” in relation to crops. Are 
you able to just give me an explanation as to why this is being 
struck? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the officials aren’t here at the 
present time. As I mentioned, there has been consultation. I 
thought that there was agreement between the official 
opposition and the government side of the House. I can’t 
answer that question and I know full well that the member 
opposite knows that I can’t answer that question. If he’s trying 
to embarrass me, it worked to some extent. But I’m a hard 
individual to embarrass, so I’d like to offer to you that I have no 
explanation for your question and to see if we’d be willing to 
proceed without having a specific answer to the question that 
was asked  the very serious question that was asked by the 
hon. member opposite. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well all right, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m sure 
that there isn’t a lot of consequence from the striking out of this 
word. And I don’t think there are any concerns by our party. 
But there again, if the member from Greystone or the 
Conservative opposition, or the third party, if they’re in the 
House, would they please get up and ask a question. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1630) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32  An Act to amend 
The Local Government Election Act 

  



1000  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 40  An Act respecting 
Pharmacists and Pharmacies 

 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 41  An Act to amend 
The Mental Health Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property 
Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you to test for 
leave of the Assembly to do third reading of the Bill at this 
time. This Bill was dealt with earlier today in the adjourned 
debates, it passed into committee, we dealt with it in committee, 
and I understand we need leave of the Assembly to pass third 
reading today. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:39 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 975 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 975 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 975 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 976 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 976 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 976 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
International Special Librarians Day  

Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 
Harvard Scholarship Award  

Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 976 
Expansion of SRI Homes Inc.  

Ward ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 976 
Kelvington Wheat Kings Win Provincial Title 

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 977 
Tugaske Co-op’s 60th Anniversary  

Stanger ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 977 
Human Rights in China  

Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 977 
Provincial Geography Challenge 

Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 978 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

SaskTel Strike  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 978 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 978 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 978 

Health District Boards  
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 979 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 979 

School Closures  
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 979 
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 980 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 980 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 980 
Renaud ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 980 

Political Function Advertising  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 981 
Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 981 

No-fault Insurance  
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 981 
Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 981 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 983 

 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 44  An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993  
Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 984 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 
make consequential amendments to other Acts  

Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 

Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation  
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 987 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video Classification Act  
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 988 
Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................. 988 
Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 988 

Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendmen 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 989 

Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact consequential amendments 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 989 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 989 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment  
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 32  An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act  

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 992 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 992 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 992 

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act  
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 994 

Bill No. 40  An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies  
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 994 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 

Bill No. 41  An Act to amend The Mental Health Services Act  
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 996 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 996 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 999 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 

Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 999 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 32  An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act  

Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act  

Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
Bill No. 40  An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies  

Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
Bill No. 41  An Act to amend The Mental Health Services Act  

Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 

Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
 


