


















































June 11, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2389 
 June 11, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is John Edwards, director in municipal policy and 
legislative services in the Department of Municipal 
Government; and behind me and behind John is Graham 
McNamee, the Chair of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
And I think we may be joined later by another legislative officer 
from the department but is not here at the moment. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials back today. We do 
not have a long line of questioning for you and your officials 
today, but we do have a few short questions. 
 
Maybe you could start off this morning, could you just on Bill 
45 just touch on the reasons for the changes to refresh all our 
memories from where we left off before? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in large part, just 
broadly, the Act is being amended or proposed to be amended 
in order to streamline the assessment appeal procedures. 
 
So it changes the provisions for review by assessment appeal 
issues to the court. It changes the provisions respecting fees to 
be paid when appeals are filed or prior to appeals being heard. 
And generally the size of quorum for a board of revision to hear 
appeals and the number of members of the Municipal Board 
that are required to hear an appeal is changed. And basically it’s 
meant to simplify and streamline the assessment appeal process 
provincially, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As I said in 
my address on the second reading, I agree with the spirit of the 
amendments. However I’m concerned about section 3 which 
may shorten the publishing period too much. To avoid 
embarrassment to those who are possibly, for no fault of their 
own, late by a short period . . . I guess is what I’m saying, could 
you explain why a two or three month grace period wasn’t 
maybe considered instead of where it is now, right dead on 
January 1? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I was wondering why 
the question doesn’t seem to relate to the section of the Act the 
member opposite is referring to. And I wonder . . . We’re 
dealing with The Municipal Board Act and the question being 
raised seems to apply to section no. 3 of The Tax Enforcement 
Act. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Madam 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. I have a couple  

of questions as we go along here, Madam Minister, so I just 
want to jump in at this point because you’re still fresh on this 
part of the subject matter. And then I’m sure that the members 
of the opposition will want to go back at some other areas. 
 
But in the simplification of the assessment process  I like 
simplicity and I think everybody does  but there’s always an 
inherent danger in simplifying matters of law and principles of 
law and the process of achieving fairness. What worries me is 
that while we’re building in this simplicity of the process, are 
we perhaps short-circuiting the ability for people to receive 
justice and fair play? How do you see that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think what the 
whole intent is, and if you look at the whole thing — and we 
don’t do it that way — but as a package, the amendments 
proposed to the rural, urban, northern municipal Acts, these 
ones relating to The Municipal Board Act  some of the others 
that we will be considering as well  is to modernize the 
assessment system to make it more equitable, more fair. 
 
And in the case of appeals, to shore up, if you like, the integrity 
of the process at the local level by changing the times required 
. . . or from the time from the assessment roll is open until the 
deadline for an appeal is passed and so forth, to try to avoid 
what I think we’ve all seen in the past. And I know in your 
experience, the experience that the member opposite has as a 
reeve, is that sometimes there’s a tendency for a complex . . . an 
appellant that has what they consider a complex appeal or 
precedent-setting appeal to try to deal at the local level in a 
rather frivolous manner, hoping to get a denial so that their 
appeal can be elevated to a higher level. 
 
So the intent, the broad intent, is to try and have as much 
decision making as possible done at the local level where the 
people sitting on the local board of revision are intimately 
familiar with all the details, are really in the best position to 
make a fair and proper judgement. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Well you’ve 
obviously thought this through very carefully and I have the 
highest respect for your abilities in these areas, and having 
known you as well as a reeve and a person concerned with rural 
problems and rural things, and of course now some of this is 
going to apply as you say to the North and to other urban 
settings as well. 
 
However, I can understand your argument that some people 
might want to get into the process in order to carry the process 
to a higher level. But quite frankly, down home, most folks just 
want to go into the municipal council and say look, you’ve 
raised my assessment on this quarter of land and I think you 
made a mistake. You’re going to be charging me more taxes 
and I really don’t think that that’s fair because of whatever 
reason. Maybe I got an alkali slough that’s getting bigger 
instead of smaller, as you must think it is, and we just want to 
get this thing straightened out. 
 
And I’m wondering, at that simple level has this made very 
much change? Or do people still have those same opportunities  
  



2390  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

that they used to have  simply to go into the council meeting 
and at a specific time during the meeting set aside when the 
board of revision is in session and people sit down and chat 
about these things for a few minutes and get them solved? 
 
Has that part changed at all or will it be changed at all? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the provisions of this 
Act, or the amendments proposed to this Act, don’t affect that 
process at all. Any appellant who has their situation dealt with 
at the local level and satisfactorily resolved at that level would 
never come into contact with the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board or any of the provisions that are in the current Act or 
would be in the Act as amended. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. That was the answer I 
was hoping for. Now when you talk about the quorum on the 
board being made easier to deal with, obviously now this is no 
longer at the municipal level; this is a step higher. What is a 
quorum on the board, who’s on the board, and how do your 
remarks, in simple language, identify the changes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the intent of the 
amendments is to reduce the number of members who 
constitute a quorum for the appeal process on the Municipal 
Board, because there may be . . . there’s travel costs for instance 
involved. And these amendments will permit a quorum of one, 
for example, where . . . this wouldn’t be used in a complex 
appeal, but where there’s a fairly simple appeal and what 
appears to be fairly straightforward in a remote area of the 
province, then it would reduce the time involved and the travel 
costs and accommodation costs and so on, if the quorum could 
be reduced. And broadly that’s the intent, is to keep it simple. 
 
(1015) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I understand 
what you’re doing even though I haven’t used this process 
myself. But it does make sense to do that because you have the 
whole province to cover. And what you’re saying, I believe, is 
that often you will try to have your meetings of this type, of the 
people involved, close to the area where the problem exists. I’m 
going to give a scenario and sort of ask you to confirm my 
thinking and see if I’m right or not. 
 
If there was a problem in the south-west, mostly likely the 
hearing would be in Swift Current; if there was a problem in the 
south-east, most likely it would be in Weyburn or Estevan. And 
of course, if it was up North, it might be P.A. (Prince Albert) or 
North Battleford. Some place close to where the people are. 
 
So you would then have a board that is provincial based, but the 
members might come from all over the province. And you don’t 
want to truck people from Swift Current all the way to P.A., so 
you might say, well we only need two-thirds of the people there 
today and these guys that are furthest away can probably stay 
home because they likely don’t really understand the problems 
of the North anyway. And the people most likely to understand 
the problems would be the ones most encouraged to be at that 
particular meeting. 
 

If that’s the process, you can confirm that. And if that is the 
process, I would say you are probably on the right track. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that is the process as it 
is now, in principle, but the numbers of people who would form 
the panel are reduced to reduce expenses and complications. So 
the short answer to your scenario is yes, that’s how it’s seen. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  It’s always good to find out that we’re on the 
right wavelength, thinking through what’s happening, so that’s 
great to hear. 
 
Now the fees that we’re talking about  how expensive can 
this be? If a farmer decided he wanted to challenge the process, 
not so much because he wants to get 40 of his neighbours 
together to challenge a principle, but simply wanted to 
challenge something that he has to have done for himself, is he 
looking at the possibility of being dragged through the court 
system sort of, as the terms would be used, and cost him the 
farm? 
 
Would that be possible to happen or is that not there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the minimum fee is 
$50. The range is from 50 to a maximum of 600 based on the 
amount of the assessment and so on. There’s a schedule that’s 
fairly straightforward. Of course an appellant who wished to  
it’s at their option  engage a solicitor and that sort of thing 
might have other expenses. But in terms of the fee which 
permits you to appear before the board and have your appeal 
heard, the range is from 50 to 600. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I guess 
that doesn’t seem all that bad when you consider the kind of 
costs that are incurred. And obviously the government or 
somebody is subsidizing this process But I’m glad there are 
these caps, that people can avail themselves of the system and 
find justice without having to be afraid that if you seek justice 
in our society, you automatically may have to sell the farm to 
pay for winning. 
 
And often times in our society that’s what’s happens. People 
who take on these kinds of problems in their own lives find out 
that they win, but they really lose because, when they’re done, 
they’re broke. And the lawyers in the system have eaten up 
everything that they could possibly gain plus everything they’ve 
ever had in life. And I don’t think that that is fair in a real, true 
democracy that I envision, so I’m glad you have those kinds of 
caps. 
 
The next question I have is one of simple logistics to the rural 
community. This board, when it sits and takes these appeals, do 
they sit in seeding time or harvest time, or do farmers have the 
option to ask or make a request that I want to have my quarter 
section reviewed, but I can’t be there in harvest time. 
 
Are there any provisions that can guarantee people that they can 
have these things set into time frames that they can work into 
their lives, or is it hard and fast? Or do you have to have 
attorneys to represent you, or do farmers for the most part 
represent themselves at these types of things? And then we’ll  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

get on to some other areas. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, as the member 
opposite will know, the board of revision is usually made up of 
members of the local council, and the initial appeal is heard 
there first. Then if the appeals . . . just say, I’ll give you a 
scenario in your council out in the south-west. Maybe you hear 
20 appeals. You deny half of them, and 10 of them you think  
that’s probably an unusual proportion  and 10 of them you 
allow. So the ones that you deny would, if they wish, have a 
recourse, could appeal the decision of your council to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
And so after the board of revision is held, of course your 
council, being local and being made up of farmers with the very 
same interests as the appellants, would try to schedule the board 
of revision at a time that would be convenient for the local 
farmers or local citizens. 
 
And then once your board of revision has made their decision, 
then those appeals . . . the appellants then contact the Municipal 
Board at the provincial level if they want to carry their appeal 
further. And then a schedule is set out. And at the very same 
time, the Municipal Board is receiving appeals from all over the 
province, based on the results of the boards of revision that 
have been held all across the province. Then they schedule the 
times and allocate the personnel that they require based on the 
load, the number of appeals and the regions that they’re coming 
from. And they do try to be flexible and they try to be as 
accommodating as possible in terms of harvest time, seeding 
time; that kind of thing. 
 
And there is one provision however, that an appellant must be 
very careful . . . You do not, as an appellant, have access to this 
Municipal Board process at the provincial level if you are not 
present at your own appeal at the local level. You have to have 
been there in person in order to elevate your appeal if it’s 
denied at the local level. But other than that, every effort is 
made by the local council and then by the Municipal Board to 
be accommodating about the kind of situations, like the 
workload of farmers, in certain seasons. 
 
The Chair:  Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the 
Minister of Municipal Government and the member from 
Cypress Hills for this courtesy. 
 
Seated in the west gallery, Mr. Chairman, is a group of 38 grade 
4 and 5 students from Dr. Brass Elementary School in Yorkton. 
And I make this introduction on behalf of my colleague, the 
member from Yorkton. They are accompanied by their teachers, 
Mauri Ingham and Les Herauf, and their chaperon, Mr. 
Novakowski. They have had . . . Well I think actually they are  

just about to have a tour of the building after they’ve spent 
some time here, and then I hope to have some time to go and 
visit with them. 
 
We’re very happy to see you here in Regina on this wonderful, 
warm day and we hope you enjoy your stay here. Would you 
please join me in extending to them a warm welcome. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
it’s always nice to be interrupted for such a good reason as to 
have the young people watch how we do the business of 
organizing the laws of the province. And I think it’s very 
important that they know at this point that in Municipal Affairs, 
the department you are fortunate enough to be the minister of, 
common sense and fair play have always been the order of the 
day. Very rarely have I seen in Municipal Affairs anything that 
is seriously deviant from a normal, respected way of doing 
business. And I often wish that at the provincial and federal 
levels we could conduct ourselves somewhat more in that same 
light and in that same context and process. 
 
Realistically there are very few problems that we have with this 
law and the way that you are trying to correct things here. 
Because quite frankly in my experience, we’ve had very few 
people ever come in and ask for the RM (rural municipality) to 
do a reassessment or to correct the assessment on their 
properties. Most of the times in my experience, if we had five 
or six people that wanted just a marginal change, that would be 
about it. 
 
The only time we ever had any real serious problems was if the 
whole province was going into a transitional period of some 
sort where everybody was up in the air and you either had 150 
or you had none, kind of a thing. And we never could really 
blame the process at the local level for those things, because 
those were the major changes that people had to learn to 
understand. 
 
And I do recall that when we updated the assessment a few 
years ago, people just simply didn’t understand that you could 
cut the mill rate in half and you’d have the same tax base and 
that we were just updating figures to I guess reflect the 
inflationary dollar values of adding zeros on the numbers. 
 
And when people got to understand that, our list went, you 
know, rapidly to zero. And we never really had more than a 
couple of people that wanted to challenge the system. And they 
didn’t even want to challenge it on that basis. They were simply 
saying, well again we have a quarter section where there’s more 
rocks than you people have given us credit for, therefore you 
shouldn’t have had it quite so high. Those kind of things are 
important to the individuals and we’ve always dealt with them.  
  



2392  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

But it’s always been on a very rational, reasonable process. 
 
I’m not surprised at all to hear you say that there’s every 
consideration given to farmers in seeding time and harvest time. 
I expected you to say that because I wouldn’t have expected 
anything else from either your department and yourself or from 
the municipal system. But it’s nice to have it on the record so 
that people can go back and read it and say yes, this is what 
people in our provincial legislature talked about and they 
confirm it. It’s not just a sort of a gentlemen’s agreement; it’s 
on the record and we do live by those kind of principles and 
those kind of standards. 
 
And I want to congratulate you for keeping those kind of 
standards high in this province, and I hope that you are able in 
some way to carry that municipal background further into the 
rest of the realms of government. 
 
And with that kind of a compliment, I guess I probably better 
quit or people will think I am on the wrong side of the House. 
Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I’d just like to apologize and explain what happened 
to start off with this morning. You were on Bill 46, I was on 
Bill 45. And I might have an explanation for that. I have a farm 
background and usually by this time of day we have over half a 
day’s work in and we stop for a 10-minute nap  I just took 
mine. So I’m refreshed and I’m awake. 
 
I really don’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I thought I better 
explain that or you’ll wonder where I’m coming from. 
 
My learned and very knowledgeable friend from Cypress Hills 
actually has touched on every point that we wanted to make this 
morning on this Bill, the proper Bill that we’re dealing with. 
 
I just might touch on one thing, that I’m very glad you didn’t 
change the local input of where the farmer can come to the local 
council and start the process there without costing himself 
money. And I think we have to keep that local level, that local 
input. 
 
I would like to add that we have had occasion where not only 
did we agree with the farmer’s appeal, we have helped him 
follow it up and testified on his behalf. So I’m glad that these 
type of rules have not been changed so that the farmers do have 
access without spending a big pile of money, which they do not 
have right now, and they can follow that process. 
 
So I also, Madam Minister, am satisfied with where we are at. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to respond 
that. Yes, if I was at home as a farmer, I’d have a day’s work 
done by this time too. But actually now that we’re in extended 
hours, the member may know that we already did some work 
this morning before we went to bed last night. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and also welcome to Madam 
Minister and to her officials. I have a question on RM 
assessments. I wonder if you could just in general inform us on  

exactly how the evaluation of the assessment of a piece of farm 
property is arrived at. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the question posed by 
the member opposite is an interesting one but I’m not sure that 
it’s really relevant to the appeal process at the provincial level, 
which is what the amendments to this legislation relate to. 
 
But I would just respond by saying that no provisions for the 
assessment of farm land are changed by this or any other Act. 
That’s a responsibility of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency). And it has always been done based upon 
the productivity of the land. In the case of farm land, it’s the 
ability to produce wheat, and there is no change to that. And 
any of the provisions of this Act that respect appeals of farm 
land wouldn’t take any different factors into account than have 
traditionally been used, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay. A follow-up question on that. As we 
know, the whole farm system has been changing rapidly with 
new crops and new developments that are taking place. If a new 
crop comes on the scene which dramatically changes the 
possibility of the value of production on a piece of farm land, 
how is that reflected in the assessment, or is it ever? 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as the member 
opposite will know, some of the diversity and specialty crops 
are fairly new, and so for this particular assessment the 
productivity of farm land based on its ability to produce wheat 
will still be the basis for the assessment, but certainly, as in the 
crop insurance programs, new crops are being analysed and new 
models are certainly being explored in terms of addressing the 
issues that you raise. 
 
And since the assessment legislation  not in this Act but in 
the other one  provides for a reassessment every three years, 
I’m confident that by the next assessment, which will make the 
base year 1997 — and that work will be done prior to the year 
2000 — that we will likely have enough information on the 
returns from some of the specialty crops to begin to use those as 
a basis, and the groundwork is being laid for that now. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an 
amendment to clause 7(1). The amendment to clause 7 of the 
Bill and section 33.2 of the Act will clarify who must be served 
with a notice of appeal when a decision of the Municipal Board 
is appealed to the Court of Appeal. 
 
As the Bill reads now it does not state that all parties to the 
Municipal Board hearing are required to be served with a notice 
of appeal to the Court of Appeal. In fairness, every party to the 
Municipal Board hearing should be served with a notice of 
appeal. 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

The Chair:  It has been moved by the minister, an 
amendment to clause 7 of the printed Bill to: 
 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) in subsection 33.2(1) of The Municipal Board Act, as 
being enacted by that clause, by adding “all parties to the 
matter before the board giving rise to the appeal and on” 
after “appeal on”; and 

 
(b) by striking out section 33.3 of The Municipal Board 
Act, as being enacted by that clause, and substituting the 
following: 

 
“Stay 

33.3 All proceedings under an order, decision or 
determination appealed from pursuant to section 33.1 
may be stayed by the judge hearing the application for 
leave to appeal, for any time and on any conditions 
that the judge may determine”. 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think, 
Madam Minister, that it is in order to make a comment on your 
amendment. Normally, as folks will recognize, when the 
government brings in a Bill, they pretty well have researched it 
and know what they’re doing. When they bring in an 
amendment, it normally is something that sends up a red flag 
for opposition members to be aware of, because obviously last 
minute changes usually mean that something’s going to be 
changed that ordinarily might trigger some controversy out in 
the country. 
 
In this case though, I believe that you are doing something that 
likely you should have caught to start with but didn’t and it 
looks to me like it makes sense that people should be notified 
about these things. And so I would say for our learned friends 
out in the country who might be concerned with these matters, 
that most likely in this case it is not a red flag. And probably 
they should look at it and see how it’s going to affect them, but 
seriously I don’t think it’s going to be a problem. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to respond 
briefly by saying that there are also two other brief House 
amendments in addition to the one that’s being moved at the 
moment. And these all arise as a result of . . . As you know, this 
is very complex legislation, and upon introduction of the 
legislation into the House, when people get to review it  
municipalities take it to their solicitors and ask them to look at 
it  slight wording changes that would constitute an 
improvement come to our attention. And we therefore bring 
forward House amendments. 
 
They are considered minor, but they are considered 
improvements. And it could have been a drafting oversight. It 
could have been an interpretation that, upon further study, 
needed some clarification. And that’s what these three 
amendments will be, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

Clauses 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The final House amendment to clause 
11 of the Bill on section 33 of the Act will clarify that stated 
cases from decisions of the Municipal Board continue to their 
conclusion under the current process if they were initiated 
before these amendments were proclaimed. Although our legal 
advice says that The Interpretation Act should see that this 
happens in any event, it is best to clarify the matter in 
legislation so that there is no doubt as to what process will be in 
place for such outstanding cases. 
 
The Chair:  It has been moved by the minister, an 
amendment to clause 11 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 11 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by renumbering it as subsection 11(1); and 
 
(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 
“(2) Section 33 of The Municipal Board Act, as that 
section existed on the day before the coming into force 
of section 7 of this Act, continues to apply to: 
 

(a) cases stated pursuant to that section prior to the 
coming into force of section 7 of this Act; and 
 
(b) decisions of the board made before the coming into 
force of section 7 of this Act”. 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
just a little bit of clarification on this one. 
 
Now it seems to me . . . I just read this very quickly here as it 
was passed over. It looks to me like those matters that were in 
the process before this Bill now is made law, when it’s 
proclaimed, they will still then be dealt with under all the old 
rules. And so people don’t have to fear that halfway through a 
court case or something the whole process is changed and that 
they will then have to start all over with a new set of rules, and 
everything will sort of be wound up on that day, and from that 
day you have a definitive line drawn in the sand of when to 
start. 
 
If I’m correct on that, then we can see the logic of it, and I’ll let 
you respond. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite is exactly right. This simply clarifies that any appeal 
that’s in any stage of the process now will continue under the 
process that’s now in place. And that all future appeals will be 
dealt with under the legislation as amended. 
 
And there is a piece of legislation called The Interpretation Act 
which applies broadly to all provincial legislation that would 
serve to clarify that. But we felt that it was better to clarify it 
within the legislation itself so that appellants wouldn’t have to 
look to another Act for the clarification they sought. 
  



2394  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 
that answer, and I think you’re on the right wavelength. It does 
set up sort of a little pink flag for us, although not a red one, and 
that being of course that it looks to me like we’re having to 
change a lot of things here in anticipation of a major load of 
complaints when the new assessment process comes into effect 
in the near future. Is that what we’re preparing for? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we think that . . . 
as the comments that the member opposite made earlier about 
the fear that struck into the hearts of people when farm land was 
reassessed and almost in effect doubled about 10 years ago, and 
people were very afraid their taxes were going to double, but 
they found that in general the mill rates halved and life went on 
much the same as it had before. 
 
And we anticipate that as the new assessment system rolls out 
and people become more familiar with it, understand it, a lot of 
the fears of the unknown that are out there now will be allayed. 
But on the other hand, if there is confusion and there are 
slightly more appeals than you would expect in the normal 
course, then it’s better to be safe than sorry, and so we want to 
be prepared. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’m just 
wondering if you could give us an idea of how many appeals 
are ongoing at this time and if you have an idea of what kind of 
a date in the future we could look forward to these appeals 
being completed with? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I’m advised that there are something over 500 
outstanding appeals to the Municipal Board now, that it is 
anticipated . . . these are basically current appeals, and it is 
anticipated that those would all be dealt with prior to the end of 
this calendar year. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Madam Minister, I’m looking at the clock and 
trying to rush here, but there’s other questions that come to 
mind. When you have cut the number of members on the appeal 
board from two to one, why would you do that if you wanted to 
get these appeals completed by the end of this year? Five 
hundred appeals are quite a few of them. It seems to me that it 
would have been better to make sure that there was a sufficient 
number of members on the board to deal with this load. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this is exactly 
the reason that we would reduce the number of board members 
required to hear an appeal, so that they would be able to . . . just 
say you had a panel of six as an example and they had to travel 
around and every appeal had to be heard by six people. If we 
changed the quorum to one, those six people can go to different 
parts of the province and be hearing six appeals simultaneously, 
you know, in different locations. So the change is meant to 
expedite the process. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you for that clarification, Madam Minister. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 

Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
(1045) 
 

Bill No. 45  An act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Provincial Mediation Board Act 
 

The Chair:  There’s some new officials. I will ask the 
minister to introduce them, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. Still on my right 
is John Edwards. Behind John is Gord Hubbard, the senior 
municipal adviser, and behind me is Sharon Markesteyn, a 
senior policy analyst from the Department of Municipal 
Government. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I again, Madam 
Minister, would like to welcome your officials. I only have a 
couple of questions here. 
 
Going back to where I started before when I was mistakenly on 
the wrong Bill, but when we changed the grace period of 
advertising from, I believe it was, six months back to January 1, 
can you tell me the reason for that, Madam Minister? I have a 
bit of a problem with that, that anyone, for possibly reasons not 
being of their own doing, are somewhat late, and you got a 
council that had a problem with that person for whatever 
reason, could get carried away and cause somewhat of an 
embarrassment. And I don’t think that’s really what this was 
intended to do. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the basic premiss, the 
objective, of the amendments is to shorten the period of time 
that a municipality can take title, for tax enforcement, to 
property. Now the municipality doesn’t have to shorten up their 
time lines, but right now if they do everything in the most 
expeditious possible way and there is no hope that the taxes will 
ever be paid  for example, the property might even be 
abandoned  the minimum length of time is about 28 months. 
 
So these provisions are to make that . . . to shorten up that time. 
And I think it’s important to note the principle that other 
taxpayers are carrying the load for those property owners who 
are not paying their taxes. 
 
As long as the situation is fair and allows ample time and an 
appeal process at each step, then it seems like a positive thing to 
do. And it certainly has been asked for by clerks’ associations, 
administers . . . administrators from rural and urban 
Saskatchewan, that we do allow  not make it mandatory but 
allow them  to shorten up the process in cases where they 
know that taking title to tax property seems inevitable. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I agree 
with that wholeheartedly. I was just questioning whether we  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

had gone maybe past the part that we should have. 
 
One other question, Madam Minister, is when we advertise as 
RMs, the list of arrears, and the first time a person is in arrears 
we can advertise, at that point, the next year, if he stays in 
arrears, we do not advertise. Is this part of a law? Or is there a 
reason for this? 
 
We always felt this was in a very poor piece of legislation, if 
that’s the way it’s really set out and meant to be. Because a 
person that got in arrears and then paid his way out of it, got 
clear, and went back in is advertised again, where the ratepayer 
that never made an attempt to even get out of arrears was only 
advertised once and then he was let go. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the procedure is now 
that when you fall into arrears, then the list is published in a 
newspaper that circulates locally. If another year goes by, 
you’re still on this list, but you also then, you have reached a 
stage where the municipality can take a lien. And then they 
serve you, the ratepayer who is in arrears, with that legal notice. 
But you’re technically . . . like you’re still on the list from the 
time you first fall into arrears until the issue is settled one way 
or another. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Yes, thank you, Madam Minister. I realize 
that, but I think where the problem was is that when you stay in 
arrears, that officially in the newspapers, etc., that the list is 
advertised. Unless I’m misunderstanding the law right and we 
weren’t following the letter of the law, that we could only 
advertise once; if they stayed in arrears, we were not eligible to 
advertise in the newspapers the second year. Whereas the 
person that really tried to pay his arrears, say by November he 
paid them but then he got caught and he went back into arrears, 
he could be advertised again. 
 
So my feeling was that the person that was really out there 
trying to keep his taxes paid was actually being penalized over 
the person that said, I’m not really going to worry about it; I’ll 
only be advertised once. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the issue in an 
interesting one, but it’s not a cumulative thing. Like you may be 
in arrears for one year, and that’s the year your name would be 
published on the tax enforcement list. But you might not be . . . 
and that may be cranking its way through the system with liens 
and mediation and all the other things that flow from that. In the 
meantime there may be a different year that’s not in dispute that 
you’re not in arrears for. 
 
So you only . . . your name is only published, you only come on 
the list, when you fall into arrears. And then that’s deemed to be 
following the process that’s prescribed for that. And each year 
is a separate issue. The same as if you win an appeal on one 
year, it’s not a blanket situation for other years. Each year is a 
separate issue, and that’s why this happens. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But I think 
we’re maybe not grasping where I’m coming from here. 
 
We have had occasion to have a ratepayer that was in arrears  

for possibly seven, eight years. And that was my next question 
so I’ll bring it into this one. My problem was with the mediation 
board, Madam Minister. It seemed to me that there was no set 
rules. And in this ratepayer’s case, he was a real pro at bending 
the rules, using the mediation board to his advantage, Farm 
Debt Review, or whatever means he could go through, and 
ended up owing us in excess of $40,000 taxes. 
 
And we knew he knew and everyone else knew he was going to 
lose the land eventually. But he used these tools to hang on to it 
and actually farm it for nothing because he was not paying 
taxes, he was not paying the bank his mortgage payment. 
 
But through all the loopholes he could find . . . And the 
mediation board was the biggest problem we had here because 
he could lead them along, and they kept telling us well no, we 
can’t grant consent right now because he is going to try. 
 
I think this is the problem, Madam Minister, is that that person 
should have been able to . . . we should have been able to 
advertise that that person was in arrears so much here; he just 
kept getting worse and worse. 
 
I guess maybe it’s not a nice way to look at it because we’re out 
to protect our ratepayers like everybody else, but this was an 
exception. And I felt the embarrassment we could’ve caused 
him, for lack of a better word . . . He had no intentions of 
paying his taxes. He had no intentions of paying FCC (Farm 
Credit Corporation), or whoever, the mortgage. 
 
He was using the system to get away from it and after 10 years 
finally the accumulated interest and everything is built up. The 
bank had to take over the land. Everybody was a loser except 
one person and that was the ratepayer that wouldn’t pay his bill. 
 
And I felt he should be able to be advertised every year and at 
least the public would know. Because when you advertise one 
year, a lot of the other ratepayers feel that this person has 
cleaned his act up. And in essence, he hasn’t touched his tax bill 
at all. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, actually the provisions 
of the amendments that are being proposed here are meant to 
shorten up that process. But I think it is important to recognize 
that human ingenuity is almost infinite. But the taxes, the 
assessment, is not on the person  the assessment is on the 
property on an annual basis. And I know the member opposite 
is aware of that. 
 
But this is meant, these provisions are meant, to shorten up that 
process, particularly when there is a situation where people at 
the local level know that in the end enforcement is going to be 
inevitable. Then why drag it out for 30 months? Why not 
compress the process? And that’s what this does. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just one little 
short reply to that. I’m not trying to be very hard this morning 
for any farmer that is possibly sick today and in watching this, 
because I would hope that would be the only way he’d be 
watching this. I’m not trying to be hard, but I think we have to 
run RMs and that as a business also. And this is one of the  
  



2396  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

loopholes I feel that is a weak spot. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
a few minutes ago you alluded to the 20 months that it could 
take under the present system to take title of land. And you say 
that that has been shortened. Somehow I missed the minimum 
amount of time now that it would take under your new 
provisions  the minimum amount of time that it will take for 
an RM to take title. 
 
And then in doing that answer, would you briefly discuss 
whether or not this is then mandatory on the RM to take this 
action in that short period of time, or is there still some 
discretion as to the process that a local municipality might take? 
In other words, if an RM thought, well it looks like this guy’s 
got his act together; we can give him a few more months, do 
they still have that discretion or are they compelled to obey by 
the order of this law and go ahead and seize the property? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the reply to the 
member opposite on this issue is that the minimum time under 
these new provisions would be 16 months. And yes, it is 
voluntarily, and the discretion at the local council level is 
certainly respected, because as the member knows, there are 
various situations that can occur. There might be times when 
it’s in the public interest to be very expeditious when there’s 
property that’s seriously deteriorating, when there’s perhaps 
health and safety factors in the deteriorating building or 
property, something like that. 
 
But yes, the minimum is 16 months and discretion at the local 
level is still the order of the day. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate the 
fact that that provision is still available to local people, to make 
some decisions for themselves. And of course, my municipal 
background, I will say that we had hoped that this kind of 
legislation would come forward a long, long time ago and we’re 
glad to see that it’s finally here. Certainly 20 months is far too 
long for people who want to play games to be able to play 
games, and yet for those folks that do need a little extra time, 
that discretionary process being built into it. 
 
Sixteen months I think is adequate time. We always thought 
that that would be far sufficient to take care of the problems that 
we had back at our home town level. And so I think probably 
this is overdue and we are glad that you’re getting the job done. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 86  An Act to amend 
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, two different officials 
have joined us. Doug Morcom is behind me, manager of rural  

revenue sharing; and Grete Nybraten, manager of urban revenue 
sharing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to again welcome your officials here 
discussing this Bill. 
 
Just a few questions, Madam Minister. And I’m just trying to 
understand here, with revenue sharing for RMs, how this Bill 
will affect . . . and will it come into effect, when we’re talking 
about organized hamlets or equalization or unconditional 
grants, I guess, maybe for lack of a better word. 
 
Normally the first quarter is paid in April to June and I 
understand right now they haven’t been paid to date. Will this 
quarter be being paid out shortly? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
payments will be made on June 17. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay, 
now going into the changes in the amendments here. Will this 
in any way affect the way these payments are made throughout 
the year? I believe the second is in July to September and so on. 
It’s set out through the year  the fourth and final quarter is 
paid out in December. 
 
Will this in any way affect any of these grants that are paid out? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 
question of the member opposite is no. These amendments are 
simply to formalize the announcements that were made in the 
budget. 
 
And we said that the amount of the revenue-sharing pool for 
1996-97  the current year that we’re in  would remain 
exactly the same, at $79.8 million; that urban municipalities, 
having a different formula, would receive in effect exactly the 
same amount that they received last year. And in fact the same 
is true of northern municipalities. Letters did go out to northern 
municipalities right after the budget, advising them that their 
revenue-sharing grant would remain constant. 
 
As you know, in the rural revenue sharing it’s somewhat 
different. The funding will remain the same but the allocations 
to individual rural municipalities may shift somewhat as 
between the conditional and unconditional pools, as you know. 
It depends what they undertake. And I think the individual 
municipalities understand that, that there will be some variances 
but the size of the pool is the same. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 
touch on futures for a minute. Have futures for this year, for the 
‘96 year, been paid at this point? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, nothing has been paid 
out on futures as yet this year, but the work is being done on 
that. And as soon as . . . I can’t give you a date right now, but as 
soon as the budget is approved and we do have supply, then  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

cheques will be going out as subsequent to that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you 
maybe tell me what the amount is out there on futures. And I 
realize we’re straying a wee bit here, but I really would like to 
know what amount is left out on futures right now. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the total outstanding 
on futures, I’m advised, is $18.9 million, but as the member 
opposite will know how that system functions, that’s not an 
amount, a total, that would be paid out this year. But it is an 
account payable to municipalities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  I think that the part . . . I believe if we go 
back to ’92, Madam Minister, we could go what, four years into 
futures and that was cut back by your government to ’92, which 
by the way  or to two times  which by the way I 
vehemently opposed. I feel that cost is heavy out in rural 
Saskatchewan on our road construction programs. 
 
But I think what I’m trying to get here is, is the futures going 
down? Is there a trend here that they’re holding about the same? 
Are they going down? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, just roughly in figures, 
they’ll be paid down between 3 and 4 million this year, but they 
went up in excess of 5 million last year for two factors, I guess. 
One was the extensive damage to roads caused by flooding in 
the spring that needed emergent repairs. And the second factor 
would have been the wish of municipalities to participate in the 
infrastructure program and to access some additional funding 
through that program. So the futures had a slight increase over 
the normal pattern last year. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d just like 
to touch on a couple of the other grants that we receive out there 
and we rely very heavily on. And I know my own RM 
especially, the regravel grant that we found was a very valuable 
grant. Is there any changes coming to these grants, like the 
regravel grant or even the maintenance grant for that matter? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the regravelling and 
maintenance gravel grants will be paid out the same as last year. 
And they will be paid out at the same time of year, and they will 
not have to submit an account. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I think 
that’s a great improvement too over . . . it cuts down the 
paperwork. 
 
A side question to that, Madam Minister. I know in my own 
home RM, and there’s a good number of them in the province, 
are running out of gravel. Is there any consideration being taken 
or some type of a new set-up to assist these RMs? Because I 
know my home RM, and I know there’s others in the province 
and probably many of them now, it’s getting to be our biggest 
expense out there, is to bring gravel in from farther and farther 
and farther. In our case we’re hauling . . . we may end up 
hauling about 60 miles from Manitoba. Is there anything in the 
works to help these RMs out? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I can’t be specific and 
it wouldn’t be research . . . it would be done by Municipal 
Government. But I know that the Department of Highways, 
together with the SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) and 
other bodies, is trying to do some work on this and using 
various other forms of stabilization and so on to reduce the need 
for gravel. And as you know, it’s a problem province-wide, not 
only in supply but then in damage to roads as the hauls get 
longer and longer and longer. 
 
And so other technologies are being looked at, but I guess the 
supplies of gravel are finite so the problem is to find some kind 
of a substitute or an alternative technology for road building. 
And I do know that that research is going on, but I haven’t 
heard that there’s anything that will be available in the very 
near future — something that has to evolve. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just one more 
question, Madam Minister, and it’s been brought to my 
attention now, and I’ve been out of touch with it for a few 
months. But where we used to have the Department of 
Highways would come and do prelims for us and stuff and like 
that, that has been removed now and we have to go out and hire 
a private firm to do it. Can you give me the reason for that 
happening? Was this strictly financial or what was the reason 
for it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m aware of the 
situation that the member raises, but I really couldn’t comment 
on it. It would be a Highways’ decision. It would be a decision 
that’s made by the Department of Highways, and whether it was 
affected by the reduction in staff or whatever the reasons, I 
wouldn’t want to speculate. But it would be their decision. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
a couple of things come to mind as we listen to you discussing 
the changes that you’re making in this Bill. It seemed rather odd 
to me that we’re talking about running out of gravel in rural 
Saskatchewan, which is reality. I know of places where if you 
can get fine sand you call it gravel because that’s the best you 
got. I asked an engineer one day, what specifications do you use 
to determine what’s good gravel . . . and good gravel. And he 
says, whatever is available in your area is good. If you’ve got 
better, use it. 
 
But anyway the truth of the matter is that we are running out of 
this product in a lot of areas, and yet we heard a little while ago, 
a couple years back, the minister of Highways alluding to the 
fact that he was going to turn our paved highways back to 
gravel. And I was wondering now, I wonder where he’s going 
to get the gravel from if we’re running out. So maybe there’s 
some hope here. By running out of gravel, maybe we can get 
our roads paved again. You just never know. Things might 
work out after all. 
 
I just also thought that, because I live in an area of the province 
in south-west Saskatchewan where the great Cypress Hills has 
the unique feature of having had mother nature millions of 
years ago drop a whole parcel of rocks on us . . . in fact we have 
what are called cobblestones, and they’re little rocks that are 
rolled up and become round as a result of mother nature  
  



2398  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

rolling them along, I guess, or so the theory goes. Well it just so 
happens, Madam Minister, that we have probably a hundred 
million tonnes of these little round rocks out there, and we’d be 
quite happy to sell them at a very reasonable price if you want 
to spread them around the whole province and have a new 
gravel program. 
 
But getting off the lighter side, we want to get serious for a 
minute about the things that you alluded to in terms of the 
shifts, Madam Minister. And that would be the shifts that 
you’re going to be making between municipalities on the grant 
process. That worries me because we need to know from you 
specifically what triggers those shifts and what qualifies 
municipalities to get in on those shifts. 
 
Because quite frankly, when the futures were frozen and your 
government proceeded to go from the four-year plan down to 
the two-year plan, many municipalities believed that the 
councils that were better managers  not wanting to put 
anybody else down too much but it’s quite simply put — they 
felt that they had done a better job of administrating the 
available funds and the available programs. And all of a sudden 
in history they had capitalized on everything to the best of their 
ability, but now they were being penalized and being held back 
in order for others who hadn’t been so diligent to catch up. 
 
And that worried a lot of people because what really happened 
was an awful lot of contractors ended up not being hired. There 
was a program in place that was pretty steady and pretty costed. 
And so a lot of roads were being built on a very intelligent plan. 
Lots of municipalities, our own included, had basically 
five-year plans, and each year, one year dropped off. You added 
the next one on, and you started thinking about which roads 
you’re going to do in the future, kind of thing. And it was sort 
of well orchestrated. In fact I hope the Minister of Highways is 
listening because it might be a good approach to use in getting 
some of our provincial highway programs in place, a little 
forward planning. 
 
Madam Minister, this whole thing then threw everybody out of 
kilter as to their planning. And now we’re worried in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I’ve had people ask me, where are these 
shifts going to take place and how do you access these shifted 
monies? What would you have to do to match the criteria 
necessary to get in on these shifts in the programs? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first, before we get on 
to the sharing, I’d like to go back to the paving of roads. And 
the member opposite knows where the road leads to that’s 
paved with good intentions. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I’ve been there and back. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Welcome to the club. 
 
I know that the questions the member raises are really profound 
questions about future planning for rural municipalities. And I 
think it was seen  and I know the municipality that I was a 
reeve of as well as the member opposite’s references to his 
experience was  that it was really much more efficient in the 
long run to have a long-range plan to be able to construct a  

certain piece which exceeded your annual budget. But while the 
machinery was there and, you know, while the equipment was 
on the site, it’s much more efficient to do the whole piece rather 
than bring them back and do, you know, a mile a year and that 
sort of thing. 
 
But I think it was seen, and as time goes on we can see even 
more clearly, the need for municipal road planners to get 
together with highway planners and somehow to rationalize all 
of the planning for the system in Saskatchewan.  
 
Because as we’re going to see rail-line abandonments, elevator 
closures, it’s really important to make sure that we’re building 
for the future and not building roads that are going to become 
stranded investments because the elevators that it leads to are 
going to be closed or a branch line is going to be abandoned, 
and another place where it’s going to change the traffic patterns. 
 
So I think in that sense, while it was a bit of a shock to the 
system, it is a good thing to stand back and take a look and do 
some long-range planning to make sure that we’re getting the 
best future use out of the dollars we’re investing, be they the 
dollars raised at the local level or dollars from the 
revenue-sharing pool. 
 
And we will be talking extensively at the round table with the 
executives of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and with their membership about the future 
roles of revenue sharing and the future rationalization for 
building and maintaining the road network, the transportation 
network, in this province. And we look forward to their advice 
as we work through this process. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Only one thing 
that you missed in that, and that is where do you anticipate the 
shifts will occur that you alluded to earlier? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s . . . there are two 
parts to it, I guess. One is the future, what will happen in the 
future, and that’s what we’ll be talking about. Because as the 
size of the revenue-sharing pool shrinks, the factors that are 
used to distribute the money are . . . the process becomes very 
skewed. So we need to take a fundamental look at that for the 
future. 
 
If the member is talking about this year, well rural 
municipalities know that some of the grants reflect their costs; 
there’s caps on some. And it’s if they build a road for example 
and get gravel at a lower cost, for whatever reason, than they 
did the year before, then that’s reflected in the actuals. 
 
So basically the formula for this year hasn’t changed but it 
always delivers some shifts because some of it is conditional. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well I thought though that I had understood 
you, Madam Minister, just suggest that there were going to be 
shifts in the way the revenues would be shared for futures  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

grants, not just for this year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t referring 
to what we talk about as the “futures,” being the money that’s 
advanced for road construction that we’ve sort of coined the 
term that it’s “futures.” 
 
What I was talking about was where we go from here, from this 
fiscal year and onward, with the principle of revenue sharing, 
and how we change the size of the pools  whether the $20 
million cut for instance for next year that’s been announced  
whether that’s prorated between rural and urban; how that’s 
happening; how that will happen. That’s what we need to 
consult about. And that’s what I meant about that future as 
distinct from the road allocation futures. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 
clarification. The problem I see as we are developing this plan, 
and it seem to me that whether we admit it or not we’re 
developing a plan here, and the plan seems to be that we’re 
going to equalize everybody in the province and we’re going to 
equalize all of the municipalities one to the other. 
 
And the problem is that all of our wants are not the same out in 
rural Saskatchewan. And certainly not all of our needs are the 
same. For example, people who live in the oil patch have a lot 
more needs for roads to be built and reconstructed than people 
who don’t have them there. It’s a very simple fact of life that, 
where you have heavy trucks hauling oil  which is a live, 
liquid load  and a lot of machinery being moved around, 
obviously those roads take more of a beating. 
 
The 24 hour a day, 7 day a week, 12 month a year philosophy 
that goes with that industry dictates of course that they are on 
the move all the time  good weather; bad weather. Sometimes 
the farmer will haul grain when it rains, but most of the time he 
stays home until the road’s dry. The oil industry stops for 
nothing. They don’t know the word “weather.” They haven’t 
thought of it or heard of it, they just work all the time. I admire 
them. 
 
But the truth of the matter is that roads get beat up pretty bad 
and it does cost municipalities an awful lot more money to 
maintain their roads where this industry is presently working. 
 
So attempting to have equality throughout the system and 
throughout the province simply will not be fair, because those 
municipalities that are providing for those roads in order for 
that industry to be there certainly cannot afford to be  not 
fairly  should not be expecting to take taxes out of other 
industries, like agriculture for example, in order to pay for those 
roads. 
 
Because after all, all of society does prosper in Saskatchewan 
when the petroleum industry or some other related industry like 
that  or even a grain terminal  while they are there and 
producing some immediate benefits to the area, for the most 
part. There’s an awful lot of tax space that goes to the province 
and benefits all of the province, and yet we are seeing that all of 
the tax monies are going into general revenue and none of them 
are being targeted, dedicated, shared, brought back, or fairly  

used  whatever term you want to use  back in those areas 
where the roads are being beat up in order for these industries to 
exist. 
 
Right now we’ve got situations where people are out with their 
cameras taking pictures of these roads that they’re going to be 
sending to you  I happen to be aware of that  because the 
oil industry obviously has to keep working through these rainy, 
spring weather days that we’ve had. And just as spring seeding 
is as important to farmers, so too the petroleum industry has to 
keep on working in order to keep a bottom line that isn’t in the 
red. 
 
And so I don’t blame them for working and keeping on, but at 
the same time, they live in a billion dollar industry with lots of 
money around; we don’t think that you can have a philosophy 
of everybody shares equally. It can’t be that way because it’s 
not fair, because our wants are not the same and our needs are 
not the same. And I’m wondering if you have built that into 
your equation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we haven’t done that 
as yet, but that was what I referred to in the terms of the 
consultations about what we do in the future with revenue 
sharing. And I don’t believe that I did use the word equalization 
at all. The member opposite has brought that into the 
discussion. 
 
And I guess those are the kind of fundamental questions we’ll 
be wanting to ask, because I agree with you. There’s not only 
the oil patch; there’s all kinds of resource roads. Like in the 
North, some municipalities have a high pressure from 
timber-hauling roads. There’s . . . we referred to the gravel 
hauls getting longer and longer, the access to grain terminals, 
that kind of thing. And these are the principles that we seriously 
need to address. And will we continue to give a base grant for 
instance to a community that’s declining, or will we divert that 
revenue over to a community that’s growing? 
 
These are the fundamental questions that we need to address 
and there aren’t any foregone conclusions in what will be the 
result of this. We appreciate your viewpoint, and we’ll certainly 
be inviting the viewpoints of the public and ratepayers and 
SUMA and SARM as we move forward. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have one 
more question, Madam Minister, I missed before. My hon. 
colleague beside me touched on the $20 million cut-back for 
next year, and I think we’ve touched briefly on this in one of 
the previous sessions we’ve had. But some of the questions I 
get from RMs out there and towns, and for that matter, the 
cities: has your department, your officials, or for that matter the 
government itself, looked at ways of how they’re going to 
counteract out there the $20 million cut-back? 
 
In my estimation, they have two ways of going. They have to 
either cut services or raise taxes. Has this been looked into at 
all, of where they may either cut services or how to raise taxes 
out there, when we’ve been trying to keep the line and raising 
them as minimally as we could, seems to be . . . to me, not an 
avenue we can use. And yet we’re being unloaded on another  
  



2400  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

$20 million. 
 
Can you explain to us where you think some of these service 
cuts may come, or how we can raise taxes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this is what I 
referred to earlier in that we need to have the consultations with 
the local governments about how the reductions will be applied. 
We don’t know . . . we can’t make recommendations on how to 
deal with it when we don’t even know yet which kind of 
communities will be affected or how the cuts will be applied. 
 
But we want to work through it with them and what we suggest 
is that no matter what else happens or which communities get 
the money or in what form, whether it’s conditional or 
unconditional, one way that obviously savings can be achieved 
is by sharing services or by municipalities working together 
more closely to try and be efficient. 
 
And I know I’ve visited some parts of the province where there 
are models  the member from Cypress Hills will know  
where communities are working together. They have such a 
long history of providing services in a cooperative way that 
when you look at what they’re doing, you can’t even imagine 
how it can be improved upon. There’s such good 
inter-municipal cooperation. 
 
Now if we can move that kind of a model across the province to 
the point where all municipalities were doing that, the savings 
would be enormous. And the level of services that could be 
sustained, even in sparsely populated areas, would really 
surprise a lot of people, I think. 
 
So I think that’s the key, is work through it together, cooperate 
as much as possible in order to mitigate the damage done by the 
cuts or the need, on the other side, to increase municipal taxes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess we 
have come to a point where we would like to agree to disagree. 
I believe, Madam Minister, that the towns, the RMs, or the 
small towns especially, and the RMs are already sharing many 
services, as you well know as being a past reeve. 
 
Now to state that probably we can save $20 million, I think, is a 
pipe dream. Many of these RMs have been cut back. This isn’t 
the first cut-backs they’ve had, or the towns either, or the cities. 
So they’ve been trying to share services and whatever. I believe 
there’s possibly money to be saved out there, but I think it’s a 
myth to try and put across the perception that $20 million can 
be saved. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I didn’t ever say that 
$20 million could be saved. But I did say that by becoming 
more efficient and cooperating with each other that certainly 
savings could be achieved which would mitigate the effect of 
the cuts. 
 
But I think it’s important for the member opposite to recognize 
that we as a provincial government are right in the middle. I 
mean we don’t like to cut back revenue sharing to the local 
municipalities, but we have had substantial cut-backs from the  

federal government. 
 
And if you look at our four-year budget plan that the Finance 
minister presented on budget day, not just a one-year plan but a 
four-year plan, the surpluses this year and next year, while they 
are on the positive side, are very fragile. And so in order to 
achieve that balanced budget and eventually reduce the interest 
costs that we’re paying, to secure the future for our children and 
grandchildren, we have to take some hard decisions now. 
 
And the local governments have done a very good job of 
coping. And we know that we can count on their cooperation in 
the future as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 118  An Act to amend  
The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today 
Brent Prenevost, Crown solicitor; and Linda Zarzeczny, who is 
the deputy superintendent of insurance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and 
welcome to the minister’s officials. Mr. Minister, I just have a 
few brief questions this morning. Can you explain the major 
change that is brought about by this Bill and why it was 
necessary to make this change at this time? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, the amendments are proceeding at 
this time in anticipation of future developments in the revolving 
credit industry, driven in a large part by technological change. 
For example, their smart cards are a much anticipated 
innovation which provide consumers with access to money 
equivalents through electronic means. These products are being 
piloted in Canada, in Guelph, Ontario, over the next few 
months. 
 
These new services will present new challenges for regulators. 
Because of that, here in Saskatchewan we want to get this 
information available so that we can regulate it in our 
legislation so that possibly if they do a western Canada pilot we 
can do it in Saskatchewan. 
 
The regulator will also, because of the additional 
responsibilities, be in a position to request and receive 
information from these companies prior to and as a condition of 
licensing, so that we can get greater detail about the scheme 
through regulation, which would then assist us in being ready if 
there are further legislative changes that are needed. 
 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

So practically it’s an attempt to be right at the forefront of 
technology as it relates to primarily revolving credit companies 
and then this smart card business. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, is this similar legislation that 
was drafted perhaps in Ontario that already has the smart card? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We’re not aware of any amendments that 
have been made in Ontario. So this is our unique amendments 
here in Saskatchewan so that we are ready here for anything 
that’s done. 
 
And basically, as I had pointed out before, you know, the main 
purposes of the Act are consistent regulation of loan 
corporations by expanding this definition of loan corporation to 
include the revolving credit, and then also the appointment of 
the Superintendent of Insurance as the administrator of 
Saskatchewan-based loan companies which provide revolving 
credit in these circumstances. 
 
So we’re trying to be, I guess, in the industry and ready if in 
fact some of these things come to Saskatchewan, which we 
anticipate they may well do. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m wondering if consumer protection was one 
of the guiding forces you kept in mind when you were drafting 
this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s the main reason that we regulate, 
and so that’s . . . consumer protection is the main reason. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The change in the definition of the term “loan 
corporation” has changed quite significantly in this Bill. With 
the deletion with almost any reference to real estate, the 
companies that are covered by this legislation will increase 
significantly, I understand. 
 
Can the minister give us some examples of specific companies 
that will now be covered by legislation that weren’t covered 
before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The companies that will be regulated by 
this legislation won’t notice much change at all. But they move 
from being part III companies to part II companies, and it 
increases slightly the powers of the superintendent to regulate. 
And I guess we’re just concerned about the revolving credit 
business  that it’s very clear that they’re included in this part 
of the legislation. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Are you informing some of the companies that 
will actually have this change now, even though it is maybe not 
something that’s brought to their attention? Are you going to 
bring it to their attention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s one company that’s involved, and 
they have been notified and they know about this. And any 
other companies that would come to Saskatchewan would find 
out about this. And we’ve advised them. But we’ve had 
consultation with the industry, obviously. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. McPherson:  For leave for the introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 
like to introduce to the Assembly . . . through you and to you to 
the Assembly, in the Speaker’s gallery, a group from the 
Assiniboia Composite School. We have nine grade 12 students 
with teachers, Ms. Antosh, with them today. And I’m not sure 
who the chaperons are and my eyesight isn’t good enough to 
pick out . . . it could be relatives for all I know. I just can’t see 
good enough. 
 
But I want everyone here to welcome them to the legislature 
today. And we’ll be having drinks and photos and some 
discussion here within a few minutes. So please give them a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 118 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, this new legislation actually involves mostly the 
revolving credit which is usually credit cards, and I understand 
it affects companies with their head offices in Saskatchewan 
mostly. I’m not sure of any companies that have credit cards 
with their head offices in Saskatchewan. Are there a number of 
them? Can you give me an example of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The one company that is here now is the 
CUETS (Credit Union Electronic Transaction Services Inc.), 
the credit union electronic transfer system I think it’s called, 
something like that. And that’s for the credit union system. 
That’s the one that’s here now. But we’re in a situation where 
companies are looking at other jurisdictions where they might 
come, and so this is clearly open for business kind of 
legislation. We’re saying look, if you want to come here we 
have the regulatory structure that would allow for the regulation 
of your industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Are the companies that are being affected by 
it, for instance the credit unions and the new ones that would be 
considering coming into the province, are they happy with this 
new legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The consultations we’ve had basically are 
that they’re content with this legislation. They don’t see it as 
any threat to their business at all. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I just have one final question, Mr. Minister. 
Can you explain how the powers of the Superintendent of 
Insurance have been changed through this Act? 
 
  



2402  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The powers haven’t been changed. 
They’ve been allowed to expanded slightly to cover a little bit 
larger group of companies including these revolving credit 
ones. The one power that’s been specifically spelled out is the 
ability of the superintendent, when a company is in trouble, to 
step in and try to help the company get all of their financial 
affairs sorted out. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have no further 
questions. And thank you to your officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank my officials for their able 
work on this Bill, and I’d like to move that we report this Bill 
unamended. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 
1995 / Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur les services de l’état civil 
 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is Shelley 
Gibson who is the acting director of vital statistics. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to welcome 
the minister and his official, Ms. Gibson. 
 
I would like just to go right to clause 4, and I note that clause 4 
states that this repeals a section that outlines fees for 
registration of births and deaths. The reason for this being 
repealed is that fees are normally prescribed in regulations. As 
you know by now, Mr. Minister, we do prefer to see regulations 
before a Bill is passed. In this case, the Act does state important 
information that would otherwise be left to unseen regulations. 
 
Why would you remove a section that states very clearly what 
the fees are to be, only to then replace it in the regulations that 
are unseen and not easily available to the general public until 
they are passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the reason for the change, Mr. Chair, 
is that, as the member can see, there’s a fee of 25 cents for the 
registration of a birth, death, or a stillbirth under the 
circumstances prescribed in the present provision, section 40, 
which is outdated. And rather than take up the legislature’s time 
every time the fee is changed, we believe that it is more 
appropriate to set the fee by regulation. 
 
And I might say to the member that this is more or less the 
standard practice in legislation these days, is to do the fees by 
regulation so that you don’t take up the legislature’s time. And 
in fact if you didn’t do it that way, you might have to amend 
dozens and dozens of pieces of legislation each session just to  

go from 25 cents to 50 cents and so on and so on. So it really is 
much more practical to do it the way we’re proposing to do it. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Clause 6 permits the 
director to disclose information and records of change from 
vital statistics for using and providing . . . for use rather in 
providing post-adoption services. What kind of information 
would be provided by vital statistics that would be of value for 
post-adoption services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, to the member, Mr. Chair, the 
information would be things like a copy of the adoption order, a 
copy of the birth registration, information with respect to 
parentage and statutory declarations of the parents. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I omitted . . . just going 
to clause 5 if I could go back to that for a moment. Clause 5 
apparently changes the requirements for the release of 
confidential information. The reason that I have is that as of 
September 1, 1996 adult adoptees and birth parents, when 
agreed, will be able to obtain a copy of the adoptee’s birth 
registration which will release more information than is 
currently available. 
 
Now it’s my understanding that with an agreement . . . or up till 
now if there was agreement on the adult adoptee’s part and the 
birth parents, that they would be able to get information 
released to them already. So I’m wondering where the change is 
here, and what kind of an additional change there is to that 
information that’s already given  or not information but that 
allowance that it’s already given for information? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The information can be released by Social 
Services to the adult adoptee or the natural parent if they both 
consent. That change in the law was made. But if Social 
Services wants to get information from vital statistics to give to 
them, vital statistics is not entitled to release the information to 
Social Services. 
 
This is sort of a companion amendment to what should have 
been done when The Adoption Act was amended, but it wasn’t 
done. So this indeed would then conform to the situation you’re 
describing and that you also described when you spoke to the 
Bill in second reading  I thought quite accurately  in terms 
of the way the system is designed to operate. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, what are the time frames going to be 
for the release of information as is in the amendment here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Once the director of post-adoption services 
at Social Services makes a request to vital statistics, it would 
take about 24 hours for vital statistics to get the information to 
Social Services, and then their procedures would determine how 
long it took them to get the information from Social Services to 
the adult adoptee and/or natural parent. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, these are 
all the questions that I have at this time, and I thank you very 
much for your assistance in giving this information. Thank you. 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the 
member from Humboldt for her questions, and also I’d like to 
thank Ms. Gibson for her assistance today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Chair, I would like all members to join 
with me in welcoming . . . our Sergeant-at-Arms’ good spouse 
is in the Speaker’s gallery today. Wendy Shaw is sitting in the 
gallery there and I would like all members to join with me in 
welcoming her, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  With leave, Deputy Chair, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you. I would like to introduce a 
former member of the Legislative Assembly, sitting behind the 
bar, Mr. Allan Stevens. Mr. Stevens is from my home town of 
Harris and is actually a neighbour of my parents across the 
street. And at one point in time I financed the construction of 
his house by buying some farm land from him. 
 
I’d like the Chamber to welcome Mr. Stevens here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements 
and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce my deputy minister, Stuart Kramer; director of 
wildlife, Dennis Sherratt; and legislative analyst, Doug 
Kosloski. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome, 
Minister, and your officials. My first question is, my fear, is the 
word conservation easement, the differentiation between that  

and the regular easement. Can you define the difference 
between the two of them for me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes. I thank the member for the question. 
And this is basically a general, broad term, easement, which 
focuses particularly on conserving a particular piece of land in 
its natural state for the benefit of wildlife. So that it is a straight 
easement. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I guess I’m wondering if you have any fear, 
throughout the Act and especially when it comes to words like 
determination of it, if there’s any chance that you’re going to 
have confusion of easements, if there’s going to be an easement 
that was perhaps in the name of a conservation area, if there’s 
any chance that there’s going to be an easement terminated as a 
conservation easement but actually is an easement that was set 
out by somebody different without thinking of this Act at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Like other easements, like the conservation 
and development authority drainage ditch easement, it is 
registered on the land title. This conservation easement would 
also be registered on the land title, and the C & D (conservation 
and development) authority waterworks easement would take 
priority over a conservation easement because it’s already there. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll go to section 8 
first of all. Section 8 outlines who must be notified before a 
conservation easement may be submitted to land titles offices. 
This includes anyone who appears on a certificate of title as 
well as the municipality affected. However, there is little in this 
Bill that provides input for landowners and residents from the 
surrounding area. 
 
The creation of a new conservation easement or terminating an 
old easement could have far-reaching implications for 
surrounding landowners. What are the rights and obligations of 
a landowner compared to the rights and obligations of the 
holder of the conservation easement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The conservation easement will simply 
retain the existing habitat on a piece of land. For an example, if 
there was a 10-acre slough on a quarter section and the current 
landowner signed that up as an easement, that slough is there; it 
would not be expanded. So the effects on surrounding 
landowners theoretically wouldn’t change much because we 
would not be adding to the habitat; we’d simply be protecting 
what is there. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, is it possible to include a 
mechanism to allow for more input from the owners of the land 
neighbouring future conservation easements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I don’t believe that there would be a 
mechanism, although there is a six-day review period that 
somebody could register a complaint. 
 
But I guess if an individual had a piece of habitat on his farm 
and no family to pass it on to, and he’s going to put the land on 
the market and figuring that if the land was sold privately the 
bush would be cleared off, but he treasured that wildlife and 
that habitat and he wanted to see it left in its natural state, I  
  



2404  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

think it’s the landowner’s right to have that prerogative. He is 
simply maintaining what is already there. He would not be 
expanding the habitat. 
 
And so we like to think that as willing seller, a willing buyer, or 
if somebody wants to sell a piece of land to an organization or 
to a neighbour, he shouldn’t have to get clearance from 
surrounding neighbours to do so. He should be able to sell it to 
who he wants to. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, stakeholders have expressed a 
feeling that the government is imposing legislation that perhaps 
requires more input. They have expressed difficulty with the 
process this government has taken when introducing . . . 
without their input. 
 
As we’ve explained, they are concerned about the possible 
problems that occur to drainage systems. There’s also the 
potential impact of higher wildlife populations on conservation 
areas. The animals that cause the damage are under the 
jurisdiction of the provincial government. We realize that the 
minister has already stated in the House that there was no 
money for compensation to farmers this year. Farmers in the 
vicinity of new conservation easements may be subject to even 
more crop damage by wildlife attracted to this new easement 
area. Does the government have a plan in place to deal with this 
possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I appreciate the member’s concern. Again 
the easement will not expand the habitat; it’s just designed to 
preserve what is already there. So we do not anticipate a big 
increase in wildlife populations. 
 
And certainly what the trend is in fact, is that each year there’s 
more and more land being cleared and drained and broken up. 
We just look back in the five-year period from 1976 to 1981. 
We lost two million acres of habitat, which worked out to over 
1,000 acres a day or 44 acres an hour, day and night. So we 
don’t really see that there’s too much wildlife habitat. In fact 
what we would like to do is preserve some of what remains. 
 
You mentioned who we consulted with and who is aware of this 
legislation and who supports it. I would like to use this 
opportunity to list some of the organizations. We have 
consulted with these groups, and they’ve also indicated their 
support: Saskatchewan Livestock Association, Saskatchewan 
Stockgrowers Association, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, National 
Farmers Union, Farm Land Security Board, Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, Saskatchewan Association 
of Urban Municipalities, Ducks Unlimited, Saskatchewan 
Wetland Conservation Corporation, Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Nature Saskatchewan, Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, Farm Credit Corporation of 
Canada, Canadian Bankers’ Association, credit union, 
Municipal Government, Agriculture and Food, Justice, and 
Finance. 
 
And these groups have all indicated their support to this, after 
they’ve looked at it, and asked any concerns or questions that 
they had surrounding this legislation. 
 

Ms. Draude:  Specifically I didn’t notice that the 
Conservation and Development Association, the members of 
that board, were . . . if their input was required. And I guess 
they are the ones that I’m mainly concerned about. Did you 
have an opportunity to discuss this Act with them? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The conservation and development area 
authority Act does take precedent over this Act. For an 
example, if a community or RM was involved in a drainage 
project and it had to go through at a quarter section that was in 
an easement, conservation easement, the C&D Act would take 
precedent and would override the conservation easement so that 
could proceed. So that should alleviate that concern. 
 
Ms. Draude:  In section 10, the Bill outlines proposed 
changes that would enable a landowner to donate or to sell 
easements for a designated term or for perpetuity. Therefore the 
sale of the land may not end with the easement . . . may not end 
the easement. An easement may be lifted if the owner or holder 
of the land can convince the courts that the continuation of the 
easement will produce severe hardships for parties. 
 
Could you explain subsection 10(2) and how it interacts with 
sub-clause (1)(b)(ii). 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The section that you refer to does allow an 
individual who has land with an easement on it to apply through 
the courts saying this is creating undo hardship; I cannot make a 
living on this land. Or farming technology has changed, and the 
easement is standing in the way of me making more money, so 
to speak. So that option is there. There could be any number of 
scenarios. But basically when an individual signs up the 
easement, he’s with the understanding he will not be bulldozing 
these trees down or draining that wetland. And perhaps three 
generations from now, times will have changed. 
 
But there is that option to go through the court, and certainly if 
the current owner of the land has a case, he has an opportunity 
to present it. And perhaps also the organization or department 
that signed the easement with the landowner, they may agree 
voluntarily to change the aggrieved terms of the easement to 
make it more palatable too. So there’s a number of options 
there. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, could you explain subsection 
10(3)? What are the specific steps that would need to be taken 
in that section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That section simply says that if an 
individual was successful in going to court and the court ruled 
in the landowner’s favour that this easement was causing him 
hardship, on that basis of the court ruling, the landowner can 
take the court ruling to the Land Titles. And the Land Titles 
would remove the easement, and the easement would simply be 
gone at that time then. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, how would the community at 
large or the people surrounding know this had happened? 
Would they be notified in some way? 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  This is the individual’s own personal 
matter, and I guess certainly word would get out. But similarly, 
how do neighbours know when a mortgage on a piece of land is 
paid? I think the information would get out, but it’s the 
landowner’s individual, personal business really that he’s 
dealing with. So whether it got out or not, probably wouldn’t 
really matter. 
 
Ms. Draude:  If a conservation easement was put in place 
because, say for example, there was an area of lady’s slippers in 
there that people wanted to have protected, and then the 
easement area was removed. If people had been going in there 
to take pictures and all of a sudden they weren’t allowed to any 
more, is there any way that they’re going to be notified and 
realize that they can no longer go on to that property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  These easements would all be on private 
land  basically all would be anyway. So really if I wanted to 
come and take pictures on your land, I should get your 
permission to begin with. And probably if I was on that kind of 
a relationship to have access to your land, you would soon hear 
if I was planning on getting rid of the easement to destroy the 
habitat. And of course you could always check with Land Titles 
to see if an easement is still in place or not, as well. So we look 
forward to cooperating with landowners and the public with this 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, in section 10(1)(b), this section 
proposes that an easement may be terminated if the easement 
produces a severe hardship. In the Kelvington conservation and 
development area authority, there are 12 quarters of land owned 
by a reserve and possibly 7 quarters that will need easements on 
a proposed project. If termination of an easement were asked 
for and allowed, there would be no access to the drainage 
systems that would create possible flooding in the surrounding 
areas. 
 
I’m wondering what would be the impact on the environment if 
this Bill is enacted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  What we’re discussing here is two different 
kinds of easements. The conservation easement is to protect 
habitat. The conservation and development area authority 
easement is usually to drain wetlands or to drain water off farm 
land. And as I said earlier, the conservation and development 
authority easements do take precedent over this Bill we’re 
talking about now. 
 
And also with reference specifically to your comments about 
land which may be acquired for reserve status, before that 
happens, all third-party interests, including C&D area 
authorities, have to be addressed before we would allow the 
land to transfer over to reserve status. 
 
So again, it’s sort of cooperation to try to address everybody’s 
concerns. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, you’d said earlier that there 
really was no difference in the easements. A conservation 
easement was much the . . . was the same as a regular easement. 
So this is where my concern comes in is that they can be . . .  

can they overlap? Can you have a conservation easement that’s 
put in . . . an easement put in by a conservation development 
area authority, and then somebody put a conservation easement 
just about over top of the same area? Could that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, it could. If there was a C&D area 
authority easement and the individual decided he’d like to put 
in land which overlaps that easement . . . that can be done. But a 
C&D authority easement would take precedent over this 
conservation easement. 
 
Ms. Draude:  And you could terminate the conservation 
easement without terminating a C&D easement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That is correct. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Were going to have to find a different name 
for one of these, I think. 
 
Okay, I guess then basically if there was a C&D easement in 
place with a conservation easement around there and there was 
land that wanted to be taken into the treaty land entitlement 
area, if an Indian band could prove that by keeping the taxes on 
there it would provide undue hardship, so they could have it 
removed  the conservation easement removed  that doesn’t 
mean then it could remove the C&D easement. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I’m not sure exactly what terms and 
conditions are in place to remove a C&D easement, but it’s 
totally separate from this conservation easement. But there 
probably are conditions. 
 
And again with reference to your Indian land claim status, again 
the band may agree, with the C&D authority, that they would 
pay X number of dollars for indefinitely per year to allow that 
ditch to continue on that land. And if C&D authority was 
satisfied  in other words, all third-party interests were 
satisfied  then the land transaction would occur. But the C&D 
authority would have to be satisfied that their concerns were 
addressed in the deal to transfer the land to reserve status. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is there any chance that taking it to court, to 
have an easement removed, is there any chance that the court 
couldn’t see the difference between a conservation easement 
and a C&D easement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  No, the terms and conditions of both pieces 
of legislation would be very clear. I’m not a lawyer, but it’s 
there in legal terms, so there’d be no chance of confusion. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was my main 
concern . . . is that there is no way  inadvertently even  that 
an easement could be removed that would actually affect a 
regular easement. 
 
I just have a couple of other questions. In section 10 and section 
11, there’s been concern raised by conservation and 
development area authorities. And we have witnessed in the 
past two springs, flooding can be a major problem in our 
province. What impact will this section of the Act have on  
  



2406  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

surrounding landowners’ access to drainage systems which in 
turn could lead to possible flooding of their land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It should have no effect because the 
landowner still retains the right of access. For an example, if 
there is a beaver damming up water and flooding the 
neighbour’s land, access could still be made to come in and 
remove the beaver, whatever. So the current landowner would 
still be farming the cultivated acres, for an example, so we don’t 
see a problem there either. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, what benefit would accrue to the landowner to 
take out a conservation easement on his property or to allow an 
easement to be placed against his property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Very good question from the hon. member. 
For many years landowners have been retaining habitat on their 
land, and often it has cost them money. This Act will enable an 
individual to sell an easement to either the government or to a 
conservation organization. Or if the landowner is in a position, 
he can donate the land to an organization or government and 
receive a tax benefit. 
 
So certainly there is financial opportunities for landowners here, 
and it’s finally an opportunity to recognize landowners and 
reward them a little bit for protecting habitat on their land. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you say 
sell, what kind of monetary value will these easements have or 
how will a tax benefit accrue to the landowner if he was to 
allow for an easement? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The exact terms would have to be worked 
out between the landowner and the person or group buying the 
easement. But I think in general terms from other jurisdictions, 
uncultivated or unusable land such as a slough would be worth 
about half the value or 50 per cent of the cultivated land. So if 
the cultivated land was $200 an acre, the wetland or the bush, 
which is non-productive, may worth $100 an acre. 
 
And if you donated the land to the organization, you can get up 
to a 100 per cent tax deduction on your federal income tax. That 
legislation is in parliament right now and hopefully will be 
proclaimed very shortly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there 
any tax benefits accruing from municipal governments, i.e., the 
property taxes? Would they be lessened, or would there be 
some easement . . . not easement but relief given from 
municipalities because of the easements being in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  There would be no implication. The 
landowner would still pay the tax as per assessment, and the 
landowner still owns the land and property, and so there would 
be no change there. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
mechanisms are in place if a landowner has taken an easement, 
has benefited through either the tax system or from the sale of 
the easement, what mechanisms are in place then for the 
easement to be removed? Would they have to refund the sale 
price? Would they have to somehow give up their tax benefits? 
What would happen in those cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again if it was in a scenario where a 
landowner and the organization decided, okay, we can cancel 
this easement, the landowner would have to pay back any 
federal tax credits that he got. And also I guess if they went 
through the court system and the courts decided this was 
creating undue hardship to the current landowner, again if the 
easement was cancelled, removed from land titles, the current 
landowner would have to reimburse the federal government for 
the tax credits he got. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you had 
made reference to either a donation of land for a conservation 
easement or the sale of that land. Now in your reference to a 
donation of land, are you talking about donating it forever? It’s 
gone. You give it away. Or are you talking about someone 
saying that this land then can be used for conservation? I will 
give it up for conservation purposes, but I still retain the 
ownership of the land? 
 
So does a person have the ability or the right to retain 
ownership of the land but to donate only for conservation 
purposes? And if they’re looking into the future, they may want 
to notify the authorities that the so-called donation of the land is 
no longer in place because they may want to do something else 
with their own land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you for that question. Basically what 
the conservation organization would obtain from the landowner 
is an easement. So the individual would still own the whole 160 
acres. And if they were grazing cattle on it or cutting hay in the 
sloughs, the agreement would say that that would continue. So 
the landowner still has the full 160 acres on the quarter section. 
If the landowner sold it, he would sell 160 acres. The easement 
would be registered on the land titles. It would go with it, and 
that easement would simply say that this wetland or this prairie 
could not be drained or broken up. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, you mentioned livestock grazing. Is livestock grazing 
going to be allowed on these easements initially? Let’s say the 
easement has been issued, and no livestock was being grazed on 
it at the present time. The ownership changes. The new owner 
wishes to graze livestock on it which was actually a change 
from the original easement because nothing was stated on it. 
Would that then be allowed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  When the easement was signed and an 
individual was grazing cattle on the land and wanted to 
continue to do so, that would certainly be . . . could be part of 
the agreement. 
 
If there was no grazing on the particular land and the land 
changed hands, it would, I guess, be up to the new landowner  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

who certainly would be aware of the easement, and also he 
would have the opportunity to negotiate with the conservation 
organization to see if they could have limited grazing on this. 
And I’m sure there would be some flexibility unless there was 
endangered plants or something like that, and when the first 
easement was signed it was strictly pointed out that there would 
be no grazing to protect these endangered plants. But there 
would be some flexibility. And certainly from landowner to 
landowner, the requirements by the landowner does change, and 
there is opportunity to negotiate amendments to the easement. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  What if in the original easement, it’s 
silent in relationship to grazing  it says neither you can nor 
you can’t  it’s simply silent on it. I can understand if the 
easement said that there shall be no grazing. Well then when 
you purchase the land, you’re aware that that easement is on 
there, that restriction, and you may want to try and change that 
through negotiations. 
 
But if the original easement is silent on grazing, neither for nor 
against, what impact would that have? Would the new owner 
then be able to simply commence grazing without reaching 
negotiated agreements with the holder of the easement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That again would depend upon the purpose 
of the easement and what was being protected. Again it would 
have to be negotiated. 
 
Certainly the new purchaser of the land, before he acquired the 
land, would be aware of this easement and certainly could 
check this out prior to buying the property to see if grazing 
would not be allowed. We envision that most cases the current 
uses would continue on, but this can change from time to time 
as well through negotiations. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I think it’s an important point, Mr. 
Minister, that needs to be clarified. Under this Act, and under 
the regulations which will accompany the Act, will those 
regulations and Acts say that only those agricultural practices 
which are in place the day the easement is signed are permitted 
and all other agricultural practices are banned unless further 
negotiation is carried out with the holder to permit further 
agricultural practices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Probably this issue of grazing or haying or 
use or cutting wood on the conservation easement portion of the 
land would be dealt with specifically when the original 
agreement was signed up. But there would be opportunity to 
mend the easement as long as the new owner of the land and the 
conservation organization was in agreement. So we . . . and also 
the stipulations of what can and cannot be done would also 
affect the benefits the landowner would receive in the form of 
payments. If he was not allowed to graze on a particular piece 
of land, perhaps the value of the easement would go up. 
 
But it’s up to the current landowner who signs up to determine 
what conditions. And then when the land changes hands, if the 
new landowner would like to change the condition of the 
agreement to allow grazing or haying or not allow it, that would 
be on a mutually agreeable basis. 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Therefore are you saying that any time 
that the easement is silent on an issue that it would be permitted 
then without negotiation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  If it was silent in the original agreement, it 
would mean that it was certainly room for discussion. If grazing 
was not mentioned at all and the new owner wished to graze 
livestock, perhaps an agreement on rotational grazing or limited 
grazing could be reached. So there would be that opportunity 
certainly when it remains silent. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well if it is silent and it allows room for 
negotiation, it must mean then if it’s silent that it’s banned, 
unless you negotiate it into the easement then. Would that be 
true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The short answer is no. But again . . . the 
answer is no. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, this does present a 
quandary. It’s not banned if it’s . . . you’re not allowed to do it 
if it’s silent unless you negotiate, but it’s not banned if it’s silent 
about it. So either you can do it without negotiating if it’s silent 
on a particular issue, or you can’t do it unless you’ve negotiated 
it. So it’s got to be one of the two. Now which one is it? Is it if 
it’s silent, you can do it, or if it’s silent, you can’t do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I guess if you wish to operate outside the 
terms of the agreement, you have to renegotiate. Similarly, if 
something is silent, for an example if an individual had a piece 
of land and there was no grazing on it and the new owner 
wished to graze on it, that is changing the current situation. So 
you would have to renegotiate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. Any time 
it’s silent then you have to . . . you’re not allowed to do it unless 
you negotiate it. 
 
Okay, another particular issue, Mr. Minister. How long do these 
easements last for? What is the length of time that they’re in 
place for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That again is flexible. It can be negotiated. 
It can be a short term, 3 to 5 years, or it could be in perpetuity. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What length 
of time is perpetuity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It’s indefinitely. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, could you please respond 
again to that. I had some interference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Perpetuity means indefinitely. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have here 
the definition of a perpetuity from a legal dictionary, and I’d 
like to read the pertinent part. “A matter of perpetuity out of 
commerce for a period of greater than a life or lives in being, 
and 21 years thereafter plus the ordinary period of gestation.”  
  



2408  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

So perpetuity does not mean for ever and a day. It means for 
your life, if you signed the easement, plus 21 years plus a 
period of gestation; so plus another 9 months I assume. So is 
that what you meant, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I am advised that perpetuity does mean 
indefinitely until it is cancelled or deliberately terminated. But 
until such time it goes on and on. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, in this country we 
have an Act called the rule against perpetuities, and that says 
that after the 21 years it ceases to exist. 
 
Now you proposed making a change to that a year ago. And the 
fact is you brought in what was numbered Bill 42, An Act to 
abolish the Rules Against Perpetuities and The Accumulations 
Act. That Bill was never passed in this House. Therefore the 
rule against perpetuities and accumulations continues to stand 
as an Act of parliament, as an Act impacting on the legislation 
within Saskatchewan. And I see the minister is busily 
consulting with some of his lawyers in the background there. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, what happens in this particular case is going 
to be very interesting. The rule against perpetuities takes force; 
after a lifetime plus 21 years this easement ceases to exist. What 
tax implication does it have at that particular point in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well, Mr. Chair, I’m getting lots of advice 
what perpetuity means. I guess certainly the intent is that simply 
after an individual passes on doesn’t mean that his wishes 
would be absolved. And so there will certainly be technical and 
legal terms to define what perpetuity means. But the intent is 
for ever, or until the land titles ceases to exist, or the land base 
or whatever. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, you see, the parliament of 
Great Britain at one time believed that no one should be able to 
tie up a piece of land for ever and a day with the rules and 
bequests and bequeaths that they want to place on that land. So 
they passed the law called the rule against perpetuities. And I’d 
like to read you its definition: 
 

The principle that no interest in property is good unless it 
must vest, if at all, not later than 21 years plus a period of 
gestation after some life or lives in being at time of 
creation of interest. 
 

So that means that while each and every one of us and all the 
children alive today plus the gestation period of from the time 
this Act passes or the time the easement is put into place, 21 
years thereafter that easement ceases to exist. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this easement does not last for ever and a day. 
It lasts for 21 years plus nine months after everyone alive the 
day the easement is made, ceases to exist. 
 
So if you happen to have a friend who lives to be 150 years old, 
this easement could then last for 171 years and nine months. 
But it does end. At the point that it ends, there will be some tax  

implications, and what will those implications be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well I appreciate your comments and we 
will certainly look at that, but our intent is indefinitely. 
Similarly, a term can be put on a 150-year easement. 
 
So we realize that nothing is for ever, but at the same time the 
intent is that indefinitely the land would remain in its natural 
state as per the wishes of the people that signed it up. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I think, Mr. Minister, that the use 
of the words perpetuities in this Act does create some 
limitations on the Act and obviously some limitations on what 
your intentions are. Perhaps a different word would be more 
appropriate than the word perpetuities, because it does get into 
dealing with the rules against perpetuities. 
 
Now let’s say someone does start grazing on a piece of land, 
Mr. Minister. How will you force compliance if they have done 
so without gaining the permission from the holder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  There is no mechanism for fines for 
somebody who breaches the agreement  goes out and 
destroys the habitat. So that means it’s common law and the 
conservation organization has the opportunity to take the 
individual to court for breaking the terms of the agreement. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s only the 
holder of the easement who has the right to take the . . . the 
person who issued the easement, who are allowed the easement 
on their land, to take them and to try for some form of penalty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Simply the holder of the easement, as you 
stated, would have the opportunity to pursue this through the 
legal channels. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And this 
would only be through a civil suit process, would it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I didn’t want to let you guys get away 
that easily. Mr. Minister, under clause 6, I wonder if you can 
give some examples as to who are any persons, body, or group 
or class of persons who may hold an easement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Here in Saskatchewan, groups like the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Ducks Unlimited Canada, 
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, Nature Saskatchewan, the 
province, and municipalities can also hold easements. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Do the persons or bodies or classes of 
persons that hold these easements have to be registered entities 
within the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, they have to be registered as 
government agencies or non-profit corporations in order for the 
individual to obtain tax benefits for any donations to the 
easement program. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Does that registration have to be within 
the province of Saskatchewan or can that be a national 
registration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It’s a national registration program but 
identified in each province. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 46 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker:  Leave is required to move that the Bill be 
read a third time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
and to make a consequential amendment to  

The Provincial Mediation Board Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that the Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 86  An Act to amend  
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 86 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 118  An Act to amend  
The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 
1995 / Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 

 sur les services de l’état civil 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1245) 
 

Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements 
and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 54 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 





 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2411 
 June 11, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are such places as 
Balcarres, Lemberg, Abernethy, Dysart, Saltcoats, Yorkton, and 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Lumsden, and Lang, Pilot Butte, 
Assiniboia, and of course the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, but 
also from Lumsden, and Langbank. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition of names of concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many concerned citizens 
from my constituency of Arm River, from the communities of 
Tugaske, Eyebrow, Loreburn, Central Butte, and from Moose 
Jaw as well, which is not in the constituency of Arm River. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition are from communities 
such as Weyburn, Midale, Yellow Grass, Rocanville, and also 
the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today and people all throughout Saskatchewan 
in presenting petitions in the efforts of saving the Plains Health 
Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I looked through the names on the pages that I 
have and they are all from the Balcarres area of the province. I 
so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce to you 24 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from Smeaton 
School which is located about 85 kilometres north-east of 
Prince Albert. They are accompanied by their teacher, Miss 
Martina Cain; chaperons, Mrs. Lin Mulligan, Miss Vanessa 
Ferguson, and Miss Murota. She’s a Japanese intern visiting 
their school from Japan. 
 
I’d like you all to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 25 French-immersion students from W.S. Hawrylak 
School in the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
With my limited knowledge of French, I would like to say on 
behalf of everyone, bonjour, and let you know that they are 
accompanied by Mme. Joan Sabo, their teacher, and chaperons 
Tanya Weller, Debbie Novati, Donna Magnesson, and Elaine 
Jubenville. 
 
Now there are also students who have parents who are within  
  



2412  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

the Assembly today, and since one very special mom would not 
be recognized by yourself, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, on behalf of 
our Clerk, Ms. Gwenn Ronyk, also recognize that her son, 
Keith, is among the group today. 
 
I would ask all members to wish them bienvenue. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and all members of the legislature here, some 
guests that are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are 
representatives of the town of Kerrobert. 
 
And with us this afternoon  and I’d just ask them to stand and 
be recognized  are Mr. Angus Philips, a representative of the 
town council; Mr. Byron Parsons, a representative of town 
council; Doreen Zane, a representative of town council; Erhard 
Poggemiller, he’s a representative of the economic development 
committee; Peter Zerr is the mayor of Kerrobert; Anne Debert, 
a town councillor; Sharon Pope, the town administrator; and 
Richard Anderson, representing the chamber of commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are here today to have a meeting with the 
Minister of Justice to discuss the Kerrobert court-house. I’m 
hopeful that their discussions can result in a mutually beneficial 
agreement between themselves and the government. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the legislature to please welcome 
them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I’m very pleased to welcome the 
people from Kerrobert who I met with in April, and I look 
forward to a fruitful meeting this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to all 
members of the legislature, two guests seated in your gallery. 
 
I’d like to welcome to Canada and Saskatchewan, Faye 
Faichney, who is a resident of Glasgow, Scotland. And I know I 
didn’t quite get the accent down, but my grandmother, who was 
a citizen of Scotland before she immigrated to Canada, 
probably could have pronounced your name properly. So I’d 
like to welcome Faye to the legislature. And she’s accompanied 
by her nephew, Graham Mitchell, who is a resident of Regina. 
 
The two will soon be off to visit the rest of Canada. They leave 
tomorrow to British Columbia but they’ll be back to 
Saskatchewan. And Faye is here for approximately one month 
and I hope that she does enjoy her stay in Canada, 
Saskatchewan, and Regina. 
 
So I would ask her to stand, along with Mr. Mitchell, and 
welcome to the Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to add my words of welcome to those by the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains to the students from Mme. Sabo’s class 
at W.S. Hawrylak School. Some of these students come from 
the constituency of Regina Victoria and therefore are 
well-known to me. And through them I’ve been able to meet 
many of the other children in the class and to have met Mme. 
Sabo. 
 
I don’t know the grade 3 children very well, although I do see 
Alex and Stephan. But the grade 4 students I’ve known for 
some time, including Kate and Jodie and Becky and Amanda; 
Sandy, Rebecca, Sarah, Adam and Greg and Michael and 
Andrew and Tanner and Andres; and Keith Ronyk, and also my 
son Justin. 
 
And I wonder if you might again extend them a warm welcome, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It really is a great 
pleasure for me today to introduce to you and through you to 
my colleagues, a very special group of students seated in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. These are 21 students from Lumsden 
High School  Lumsden being that wonderful town in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley in my constituency. They are accompanied 
today by Mrs. Deanna Chernick who is their teacher, and their 
teacher-aide, Mrs. Luhning. 
 
Now it’s been my pleasure to have been invited on numerous 
occasions to Lumsden High School, so it’s very nice to have 
them come here and visit us. And it also was my pleasure to 
teach with Mrs. Chernick for a number of years. So I am very 
pleased to welcome them here today and I ask you to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Grain Handling Facility for Canora 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday many farmers in the Canora area witnessed the start 
of a long-awaited project. Construction is beginning on the new 
UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) grain handling and crop 
input facility at Canora. The $7.5 million facility will store over 
18,000 tonnes in grain storage, and will have the capacity to 
load 64 cars within 8 hours. The UGG plant will also have a 
modern warehouse, a full-service facility for fertilizer, and will 
also clean and dry grain. 
 
If construction remains on target, the new office and crop 
protection centre should be completed by next summer. It will 
employ up to 15 full-time and seasonal staff. 
 
I would like to congratulate the UGG officials from Canora 
who have worked hard to see this project come to fruition. It is  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

important that farmers in the area have access to a range of 
efficient and up-to-date grain handling services. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meewasin Valley Authority Wins National Award 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains spoke with justifiable pride of Wascana 
Park and its programs. Members will know not only is Wascana 
Centre Authority a model of urban park development, it is also 
the parent of two other authorities in Saskatchewan  the 
Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw and the Meewasin 
Valley Authority, part of which is in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
The Meewasin Valley Authority for some years has now been 
charged with overseeing and caring for the Saskatchewan River 
valley as it passes through Saskatoon and the immediately 
surrounding area. The river valley is one of the most remarkable 
geographic features in our province, a place for our enjoyment 
and natural heritage to pass on to future generations. 
 
The MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority), Mr. Speaker, takes its 
duties seriously, and I’m happy to report that it won national 
recognition for its partners for the Saskatchewan River basin 
program. The National Canadian Healthy Environment Award 
was recently awarded by Environment Canada. 
 
This three-year-old program is designed to raise public 
awareness of the basin, which stretches from the Rocky 
Mountains to Lake Winnipeg. An organization of over 100 
active members, chaired by the MVA, runs several projects. 
Among these is a 400 kilometre eco-canoe, guided tour of the 
basin, which we all could take once we finish our business here. 
 
It’s only fitting that the Meewasin Valley Authority be 
recognized for its very important work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Marilyn Armitage 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
today to pay tribute to an outstanding citizen of Saskatoon who 
passed away last week. Marilyn Armitage was known to so 
many people because of her long career in health care, in the 
media, and of course because of her exemplary work in 
community service. 
 
Some of her accomplishments included being director of public 
relations at the Saskatoon City Hospital, the communications 
coordinator of the Saskatchewan District Health Board, and an 
active member of the Festival of Trees, the Saskatoon Jazz 
Society, the Saskatoon United Way, Big Sisters, and 25th Street 
Theatre  just to name a few. 
 
Her family, particularly her husband George, her son Brett and 
daughter Joelle, and many of her friends, were very, very proud 
of Marilyn whose essence has been captured by the description, 
“quietly remarkable.” I would be most grateful if everyone in  

this Assembly would join with me in acknowledging the life 
and work of Marilyn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Indian Business Program Graduation Ceremony 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you. Last Friday, I had the pleasure of 
attending the graduation ceremonies for the Indian business 
management program of the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies. These students are graduating at a time when 
there is a rapidly growing first nations business community in 
our province. This of course means many opportunities for 
them to use their newly learned skills. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether it’s in agriculture, forestry, mining, or 
tourism; first nations participation in partnerships are evident all 
across Saskatchewan. As an example of this, the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council has demonstrated it is a leader in economic 
development in our province and is also establishing 
partnerships on an international basis, as I have mentioned 
earlier. 
 
There are many other examples too numerous to mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also was pleased to be able to present the 
outstanding student award to Karen Main. Besides graduating, 
Karen is a busy wife, and mother of three small children. She 
has completed an eight-week practicum placement at the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and will be 
working this summer with Indian and Northern Affairs Canada 
at the Fort Qu’Appelle branch. She also plans on attending the 
University of Regina this fall. 
 
I would like to congratulate all the graduates, teachers, and staff 
at the Saskatchewan Institute of Technologies, along with the 
Touchwood File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
Palliser campus in Moose Jaw, the chiefs, elders, and families 
who provided leadership and support. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that their theme was most appropriate 
and summed up the emotions of the evening: “Like Eagles With 
Wind Beneath Our Wings, We Soar To Success.” Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chief Poundmaker Historical Centre Opens 
 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
congratulate Chief Ted Antoine and the Poundmaker Cree 
Nation on the opening of Chief Poundmaker Historical Centre 
and Teepee Village. The new centre is very important to 
Saskatchewan. It reflects the rich culture and history of 
Poundmaker Cree Nation. Chief Poundmaker was one of the 
great chiefs  a warrior but also a peacemaker. 
 
Our written history is only now beginning to reflect the history 
and traditions of first nations people who have lived here for 
centuries and contributed a great deal to our province and 
nation. The Indian tradition is an oral one, passed on by the  
  



2414  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

elders, and a little is probably lost with each generation, so it’s 
important to learn as much as we can and to pass that 
knowledge on to others. 
 
The new historical centre will do that. It will teach tourists and 
Saskatchewan people alike about the past. But it is also an 
important step forward. This initiative blends tourism and 
aboriginal history and resulted in 40 to 50 jobs in construction 
and in the ongoing operations of the centre. 
 
Aboriginal tourism is a key element in our government’s 
economic development strategy. We know it has tremendous 
potential and that this centre will be one more great tourist spot 
for people who visit our province. 
 
This project also represents dedication, hard work, vision, and 
initiative. I’d like to congratulate the people of Poundmaker, 
Chief Antoine, and Chief Blaine Favel, who initiated the 
planning when he was chief of Poundmaker in 1992. 
 
Congratulations to everyone involved. I’m sure that this tourist 
season will bring lots of visitors to the new centre. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Beechy Primary Health Project 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, today I want to highlight an 
innovative, state-of-the-art health project which is being carried 
out by the Midwest Health District and is based in Beechy, 
Saskatchewan, an energetic community of 300 people in my 
constituency. 
 
This exciting project recently received high praise from 
participants in a federal-provincial round table on primary 
health care which took place in Saskatoon. The project was 
praised for its innovation and effectiveness and for the obvious 
commitment of the community and the individuals responsible. 
Health professionals at the round table acknowledge that this 
project represents the state of the art in primary health services. 
 
In Beechy, primary care nurse Joanne Perry and Dr. Tony 
Hamilton work side by side to guide the 1,500 residents of the 
area towards better health. Access to basic health services is 
assured because Nurse Perry, a graduate of the advanced 
clinical nursing program, is able to carry out many services 
normally handled by a physician. She and Dr. Hamilton work 
together to assess, treat, and dispense medication to residents. 
 
As a primary health nurse, Ms. Perry promotes the good health 
of residents and works to prevent health problems as well as 
caring for common illnesses. The primary health team connects 
residents to a wide range of health services through linkages 
with home care, mental health, public health, and other 
professionals in the district. 
 
The Beechy project is an important one. Innovations like this 
are leading to better ways to provide health services to people in 
both rural and urban areas. 
 
I want to commend the people in the Beechy area, the Midwest  

District Board and staff, as well as Dr. Hamilton and Ms. Perry, 
for working together to develop this innovative approach. 
Wellness is well on the way in Beechy, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Torch Run Week 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, as was mentioned 
yesterday, this week has been proclaimed law enforcement 
Torch Run Week, a week during which the province recognizes 
the contribution our law enforcement officers and the 
Saskatchewan Special Olympics make to our communities. 
 
Since the Torch Run started eight years ago, it has raised 
$450,000 for the Special Olympics. It has also raised public 
awareness of the event, its 1,500 volunteers, and the 500 
participating athletes. 
 
We have praised before the “police work of our police officers”. 
This week gives us the opportunity to mention one of their 
many initiatives to enrich our communities  and not only our 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since the first Torch Run in 1981, it has spread to over 20 
countries involving more than 50,000 law enforcement officers 
and has raised over $7 million worldwide. And in turn, the 
Special Olympics foster hope and encourage personal 
achievement and fairness in its participants. 
 
The oath of the Special Olympics  “Let me win, but if I can’t 
win, let me be brave in the attempt”  is one worthy of wide 
publicity. 
 
I congratulate the law enforcement officers of Saskatchewan for 
their participation in Torch Run Week which sponsors the 
Special Olympics. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
meeting took place yesterday at which the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and I discussed in some detail The 
Election Act. During this meeting the minister indicated that if 
new information came to light, he may be prepared to consider 
a judicial inquiry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new information has come to light. The Liberal 
opposition provided information today showing at least $7 
million in political donations to the New Democratic and 
Conservative parties was not disclosed and might rightfully 
belong to the provincial treasury. 
 
Does the minister not agree that this issue must be settled 
through a judicial inquiry? Or does the fact that the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) failed to disclose more than $1 million in 
loans cause him to stonewall? 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it’s not a question of 
stonewalling at all and my friend opposite would know that if 
he would ever listen to any of the answers or explanations that I 
give to him either in this House or privately. 
 
The question here, at the root of it, is some kind of a dispute 
about the interpretation of sections of the Act. That’s the 
question. There is a dispute between our legal advisers, clearly. 
That’s what’s at stake. You don’t appoint a judicial inquiry just 
for the purpose of finding out what is the proper interpretation 
of a law. We’ve got courts out there to do that. We’ve got a 
Chief Electoral Officer who has responsibilities in this area. 
We’ve got lots of mechanisms for doing it. We don’t need to 
launch ourself into a multimillion dollar judicial inquiry to find 
out something like that, and my friend should know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, New Democrat Party returns filed 
with the Chief Electoral Officer for the past six years do not 
disclose even one contribution from an individual or 
corporation doing business in Saskatchewan. This leads one to 
question, where does the NDP hide these donations? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier assure this House today that 
neither he nor any member of his cabinet or caucus or their 
constituency associations or secret trust fund on their behalf 
have received a political donation from any corporation doing 
business in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, our party, the New 
Democratic Party, has complied in all respects with The 
Election Act of this province and always have, always have, 
and will continue to do that. But in light of the issue that has 
been raised by the opposition, that they’ve been harping upon, 
we have said to them, we’ve got The Election Act in front of us 
right now. Let’s work together to toughen it up. Let’s work 
together to clarify it so that there can’t be this kind of dispute 
down the line. 
 
Now I see, Mr. Speaker, in their news release today, they reject 
these amendments. Well I’m really sorry about that. We have 
the opportunity here to clarify what the law is in this area, and 
they refuse to go along with it. They refuse to even discuss it, as 
I understand their amendment. That’s not acceptable. We’re 
going to have to go ahead without their consent. And we regret 
that because we had a good consultation process around this 
Act, and I’m sorry that that can’t continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with this 
House an ad titled: “Lifetime Membership” which appears in 
the latest edition of The Commonwealth, a New Democratic 
Party magazine. And this ad states, and I quote: 
 

The lifetime membership program’s goal is to establish a  

permanent election fund for the Saskatchewan New 
Democrats. Launched in 1988, all funds collected through 
the lifetime program are placed in a capital fund which is 
reserved exclusively for election purposes. 

 
Will the minister in charge of Post-Secondary Education 
explain how this fund differs from the secret fund established 
by the Conservative Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order! All members of the 
House will come to order on both sides of the House. Order. 
Now I was able to hear the question being put, and because of 
noise coming from government side I am unable to hear the 
minister begin his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, how little they know of 
what they’re talking. The fact of the matter is that all of those 
lifetime contributions have been reported. They’re all tax 
creditable. They’ve all been tax credited. They’re one of the 
donations clearly by law required to be disclosed and are 
disclosed. People get tax credits for them, the names are 
published in Ottawa, and all that information is available. So 
the member just simply doesn’t know what he is talking about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you’d think  you’d think — that their prize acquisition 
from Wood River would know something like that, considering 
he was once over on this side and should know that, but no 
doubt he’s simply forgotten that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, this controversy will continue until 
there is an independent body that does a total review. The crux 
of this controversial issue, the crux of this controversial issue 
involving The Election Act, revolves around disclosure and the 
fact that political parties, namely the New Democrats and 
Conservatives, have contravened the Act. They have clearly 
done so by not disclosing the names of individuals or 
corporations making political donations to private funds. 
 
In the case of The Commonwealth expansion fund, the ad 
clearly gives potential contributors the option of remaining 
anonymous. Does the minister agree that this is a clear and open 
contravention of The Election Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No, Mr. Speaker, I clearly do not agree. 
I mean that’s even more foolish than the question that preceded 
it. 
 
The Commonwealth is a newspaper which is published in 
Regina and circulated across Saskatchewan. The 
Commonwealth expansion fund is a fund that has to do with the 
expansion of The Commonwealth newspaper. It’s got beans all 
to do with elections, beans all to do with the funding of an 
election party. 
 
Wake up and smell the roses and work with us in revisions to 
the Bill 92, which is before the House, to make sure that these  
  



2416  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

rules are clear so that future generations aren’t subjected to the 
spectacle that we’re putting on for them this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to bring to 
the attention of this House today a copy of a letter that further 
demonstrates the state of Saskatchewan’s highway system. This 
letter, addressed to the Minister of Highways from Mike 
Boychuk, explains how on four separate occasions  four over 
the past year  the gas tank in his vehicle has either been 
punctured or ripped open while travelling on Highway 310 from 
Ituna to Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mike Boychuk feels that he should be reimbursed 
for the $270 in total damage to his vehicle. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to present the Minister of Highways with this 
bill on behalf of Mr. Boychuk and ask the minister if he plans to 
issue a cheque or pay by cash? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member opposite for 
the question, Mr. Speaker. And as I mentioned earlier to the 
media and to the member on several occasions, is that our 
highways in Saskatchewan have a difficulty in spring. There is 
no question about that. 
 
It’s a lot like the farmer’s field this spring. He couldn’t get on it 
when he wanted to. It was muddy. We had some problems with 
roads  breakups and that sort of thing. Of course the 
economic development in the province is increasing all the time 
in forestry, mining, and oil, and it certainly puts pressure on our 
roads. 
 
When a road is marked, Mr. Speaker, when it’s signed that 
there is a break in the road and somebody hits it, there is no 
compensation because the person can see that there is a hole 
there. 
 
If for some reason that the road was broken or there’s a hole 
there and it was not marked because it may have happened 
before the department could see it, then that person should 
certainly get a hold of the department and talk about the area 
where this happened and if in fact there were markings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  I guess then what becomes clear is that the 
minister may as well just take and put up a sign at the end of . . . 
each end of every road in this province because they’re all the 
same. They’re all full of holes; they’re all dangerous. 
 
It’s become abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that our highways 
are in this kind of shape and are in fact dangerous. And this 
issue today evidents that. Given the fact that our highways are 
soon going to be dominated by tourists, safety becomes even a 
greater concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Will the minister explain at what point his government intends 
to address this serious condition? We’ve got school buses 
travelling on these roads, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got tourists. 
We’ve got safety at stake here of our young folks. How many 
tragedies will it take, Mr. Minister, before your government will 
act on this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well the member opposite knows, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan has 25 per cent of all the roads in 
Canada. We have 3 per cent of the population to attempt to pay 
for them. The federal government gives us absolutely no help; 
in fact they pull money from education and they pull money 
from social programs and they pull money from health care, and 
then we have to try and back-fill those programs, Mr. Speaker. 
And they take no responsibility of that. 
 
They know that Saskatchewan has a large network, few dollars 
to operate, and we do a very good job with the circumstances 
that we’re in. But I wonder if the member would join with me 
in talking to his federal counterparts so that there are not any 
reductions in transfer payments to the province so in fact we 
could put that money to roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

McDowell Report 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier or the Premier’s 
designate. Mr. Premier, today is day 70 of the legislative 
session. That means that you and all the other NDP MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and Liberal MLAs have 
now taken full advantage of the $4,400 pay increase. Only PC 
(Progressive Conservative) MLAs have given up this hike by 
simply not claiming our per diems for the first 28 days of this 
session. At the same time, the NDP and Liberal MLAs have 
been more than happy to collect their 70 per diems and a salary 
increase that comes into effect July 1. 
 
Mr. Premier, or, Madam Minister, have you any second 
thoughts on this matter? Will you be following our example and 
giving up the pay hike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
Leader of the Third Party, it would be unlikely that we would 
follow the lead of the Conservative Party in any initiatives 
given the last 10 years of administration that we’ve all had 
ample opportunity to look at. 
 
We have worked with the Leader of the Third Party, with the 
member of the opposition, in the Board of Internal Economy. 
He supports the initiatives to use the implementation date of 
July 1; two minutes later he walks out and changes his mind. I 
say, Mr. Speaker, this is a man without credibility on this or any 
other issue. 
 
We have made our position clear. We are willing, all members 
on this side, to take a pay decrease over the period of this term 
of government, and we stand firmly by that commitment. 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, at the 
start of this session, your government said that spending cuts 
would start at the top. I think it’s pretty hard for people to 
accept that you’re getting a $4,400 increase at the same time 
that hospitals are closing down, seniors are being thrown out of 
nursing homes. What happened to the commitment to start at 
the top, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, at least the Liberals have made the commitment 
to pay back this money. On March 19, the member from Arm 
River told reporters as soon as the Liberals figure out what the 
difference is, they’ll be stroking a cheque. The Liberals have 
now had three months to figure out what the difference is, and it 
is 4,400. Mr. Minister, have you received their cheque yet or 
will the Liberals be paying in cash? And will NDP MLAs be 
stroking a cheque as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, my answer is 
consistent with what has been said from this side of the House 
previously, and unlike the member, the Leader of the Third 
Party, we know where our position is. That is that we have 
shown leadership; cabinet has taken a 5 per cent reduction in 
salaries, which have been froze. We are taking a reduction in 
annual salaries over the term of this government. And we accept 
the fact that the McDowell commission implemented what we 
believe to be some very positive initiatives which we have 
supported. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan, we 
will put our credibility on the line over his, and the opposition 
as well, any day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations Review 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation) or his designate. Mr. Minister, your 
Crown corporation review just began last night and already 
there is a great deal of misinformation being spread by at least 
one special interest group in our province, and that’s the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
Certainly unions and their members have every right to 
participate in this process, Mr. Minister, but I don’t think we 
need the process hijacked by any special interest group. And I 
certainly don’t think that the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour) should be spreading misinformation and factual errors 
denouncing privatization. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to correct the many 
inaccuracies contained in the brochure being distributed by the 
SFL? Don’t you think that this type of misinformation 
campaign may hurt your own process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member  

opposite for raising this issue, because last night was exactly the 
perfect kind of meeting we had intended to do in setting up this 
public discussion about Crown corporations. At that meeting, 
there were a variety of people from many, many places, and a 
number of people participated. 
 
I want to publicly thank the former candidate for the 
Conservative Party, Ansgar Tynning, the mayor of Kyle, who 
led one of the discussion groups. I want to thank one of the 
other candidates who ran in that nomination a number of years 
ago for also participating. It was a good, balanced discussion. 
 
My understanding at the end of the evening, that everybody was 
satisfied that the process provided a good avenue for expressing 
their views about the future of public investment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think maybe if you would take the time to congratulate the 
people who have been setting this process up and thanking the 
people who’ve come to help plan the future of Saskatchewan, 
your comments would be better taken. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for the same minister. Minister, we have no problem with the 
process. We didn’t start this debate to discuss that part of it. 
 
Because, Mr. Minister, the SFL claims that the Crowns will pay 
dividends of $645 million to the government this year. They 
failed to point out that over half of this amount  $350 million 
 is coming from the sale of Cameco shares, which is a very 
successful privatization that took place. 
 
Another $231 million is coming from the liquor and gaming 
revenues which have nothing to do whatsoever with this review. 
In fact the five Crown corporations under review paid only $50 
million a year in dividends on assets of 7.7 billion. 
 
The SFL is also saying that privatization would lead to head 
offices leaving the province when this is clearly not the case 
and has been proven in the past, Mr. Minister. Wascana Energy, 
for example, was privatized and its head office has been 
maintained through legislation of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps  or Mr. Minister, what steps are you 
taking to correct these inaccurate statements by the SFL? Are 
the people that are running the public meetings taking steps to 
ensure that misstatements and misinformation are corrected and 
that correct information is given to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the fact that the members 
opposite have a dislike for the labour movement is no surprise 
and it’s not new information today. The fact that they would 
publicly restrict the freedom of speech in print maybe shouldn’t 
be surprising either, but it is a bit surprising to me that the 
members opposite would take the time to challenge other 
organizations who have points of view at a public discussion  
  



2418  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

that the public is invited to participate in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason, the reason this discussion was set up in 
such a way that there were round table discussions where 
everybody could sit . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now as all hon. members in the 
House will recognize, the minister is not located all that far 
from the Speaker, but the Speaker is having difficulty hearing 
because there are members from both sides . . . Order. There are 
members from both sides of the House shouting across the 
floor. 
 
I’ll ask all members to come to order and allow the minister to 
finish his answer. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the reason that the meetings 
were set up in such a fashion, to avoid the kind of division that 
the member opposite would promote where people would take 
extreme points of view and shout at each other for seven days 
and seven nights. We set up discussion groups where people 
could rationally challenge each other on their points of view 
and at the end of the evening report to each other. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that all of the participants at 
that meeting did that with a discipline and a success that 
everybody that attended would attest to, and I thank the people 
there for their cooperation and I wish the members opposite 
would come onside. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital Funding 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 
the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, the sorry tale that’s taking 
place out in Fort Qu’Appelle because of this government’s 
neglect is growing more troublesome by the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of this government’s under-funding, the 
board of the Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital is now suing the local 
health district. Mr. Speaker, the health district was forced to 
break an agreement with the hospital board because of a lack of 
funding. 
 
Now the whole thing is headed to court and we see the Health 
minister refusing to take any responsibility. Can the minister 
tell us what he is now prepared to do to ensure adequate 
funding is restored to the Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital so this 
whole sorry mess can perhaps be cleared up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well as the Leader of the Opposition will 
appreciate, Mr. Speaker, it’s not appropriate for me or for this 
House to comment on legal action that has been initiated with 
respect to this matter. 
 
It had been my hope that the matter would be resolved between 
the two parties. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that indeed this 
would be the most beneficial and satisfying way to resolve the  

matter, would be for the two parties to do it. And I think that’s 
how you normally get the best solution to a problem, is for 
those two parties to sit down. And I’m satisfied and confident, 
Mr. Speaker, that these parties, acting reasonably and in good 
faith, will ultimately resolve their differences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, had the minister met with those 
people in good faith, perhaps they would not have had to go to 
court. 
 
For 70 days now, we’ve heard three lines from this government. 
Number one, it’s the federal government’s fault for their 
under-funding of the system. Answer number two, the health 
system isn’t under-funded because we’re back-filling. Answer 
number three, it’s not their fault the health care system is falling 
apart; talk to the district health boards. Those are the three 
answers we’ve gotten for 70 days now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the result is — this minister and his government abdicating 
its responsibility — is the trouble we see occurring in Fort 
Qu’Appelle and throughout much of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Minister, this government talks about local involvement in the 
process, yet we know these district boards have no say. The 
minister continues to pull all the strings. 
 
So I’ll ask again. When will the minister begin to live up to his 
responsibility and do something to clean up the situations he’s 
created, such as the one we see brewing in Fort Qu’Appelle? 
Will you accept the offer to meet with the hospital board to 
discuss the matter? Can you at least do that much? I realize that 
there is a court process perhaps in the offing, but perhaps it can 
be fended off by a meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition’s suggestion that a minister of the Crown would 
meet one of two parties to a court action in order to try to 
resolve it is indicative of really a lack of understanding on the 
part of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to remind the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, that although the district faces a tight financial 
circumstance, the district actually received a funding increase 
this year; whereas if the federal cut had been passed on to the 
district it would have received a very large decrease, Mr. 
Speaker, almost $200,000. 
 
But I also remind the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
that the district has three hospitals within its borders, and the 
district has to come up with a fair and rational way to allocate 
its funding between those three hospitals. The member wishes 
to favour one of those hospitals out of the three. 
 
This is a matter for the district and the community to resolve, 
Mr. Speaker. The member’s intervention will not be helpful in 
that process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

Health Information Computer Network 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By the end of this 
month, this NDP government is expected to sign a contract 
worth at least $70 million for the development of a health 
information computer network. Under questioning in this 
House, the Minister of Health has stated that this system will 
result in increased efficiencies, saving Saskatchewan taxpayers 
up to $50 million per year. Obviously some form of study 
would have had to have been done to come to this conclusion. 
 
Will the minister table the study or some documentation that 
shows how his government arrived at this $50 million figure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member says an agreement is 
going to be signed by a certain date, Mr. Speaker. The member 
might want to enlighten the House a little bit more about the 
nature of the agreement and exactly when it’s going to be 
signed, because I’m not familiar with the agreement that the 
member is talking about. 
 
But I can tell the member and the House, Mr. Speaker, that if 
there is any agreement arrived at in due course with respect to a 
computer network, it will not be a unilateral decision of the 
province. It will be a decision of the province and the district 
health boards, and it will also be a system that the district health 
boards will be willing to help finance, Mr. Speaker. It won’t be 
an expenditure by the government alone. 
 
So I say to the member, Mr. Speaker, if he is saying to the 
district health boards that they are not entitled to enter into an 
agreement to share information  which information, by the 
way, would include information pertaining to rural patients who 
want to get quicker access to specialists in the cities  then the 
member can say so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest concerns I’m 
hearing about this computer network is whether it’s worth 
developing a system that may well be outdated by the time it’s 
finally up and running. And we’re talking about at least $70 
million that will not be spent to provide care for our sick and 
our elderly, but rather to keep their records. As Judy Junor of 
the Saskatchewan nurses’ union states, and I quote, “In the end, 
it’s people that help people get well.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many questions that deserve answers, 
such as, how much will it cost districts to train personnel and 
operate this system on a full-time basis? If the minister has 
nothing to hide, will he table in this House today all documents 
relating to development of this system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member, there will be no unilateral decision made with respect 
to this issue, by the Department of Health or the Government of 
Saskatchewan. If there is some development with respect to 
computer technology and sharing information between the 
districts, the districts will be a party to that, Mr. Speaker. And if  

there is to be an announcement, an announcement will be made 
in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 17  Political Donations 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I have some remarks that I’d like 
to make with respect to the motion which I will be moving 
following the conclusion of my comments. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a debate that I wish we didn’t 
have to really have in this House. When I gave my first speech 
in this Assembly those many weeks ago, I spoke about the 
cynicism the public feels about politics and their elected 
officials. I spoke how that cynicism sometimes made me 
wonder why the heck I wanted to sit here as a member. Because 
of the actions of a few, we’re all painted with the same brush of 
mistrust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions of both the governing party and the 
third party have done nothing to lessen this mistrustful view. 
Mr. Speaker, for the last week we’ve been asking the members 
of this House to simply follow the law as it exists on the books. 
The government has tried to turn the argument into one of 
changing the present law to ensure there’s more disclosure, 
more accountability, when it comes to political donations and 
how parties disclose those donations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. If there are certain aspects of the 
present law that needed to be strengthened, then let’s do it. But 
what’s perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker, is that the current law 
exists. Both the NDP and Conservatives have broken the law. 
There’s no room for discussion here. They’ve broken the law  
the law that the current Premier himself drafted as attorney 
general back in the 1970s. This is not a matter of strengthening 
the law, Mr. Speaker, but simply one of following it. 
 
And the other two parties have not done so and they’re trying to 
hide that fact. It’s easy to see why, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking 
about millions and millions of dollars  money where there’s 
no disclosure. A secret stash the parties pull out when the need 
arises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Post-Secondary Education calls 
our interpretation of the Act bizarre. Mr. Speaker, he knows full 
well it’s not bizarre. If he reads the current Act, it’s spelled out 
for him in black and white. I’ll go through it slowly for him so 
he can understand it. Section 207 reads: 
 

all moneys provided by any person, for the use of a 
registered party, whether as a gift, contribution, loan, 
advance, deposit or otherwise, shall be paid on his own 
behalf, out of moneys to which he is beneficially entitled, 
to a registered agent of the party. 
 

Section (b) goes on to state and I’ll quote that section: 
  



2420  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

no payment shall be made by or on behalf of a registered 
party other than . . . through a registered agent of the party. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this section prohibits the payment of political 
contributions to a trust or any other agency created to receive 
them on behalf of a registered party. Only the registered agent 
can receive those funds, and only a registered agent can make 
payment by or on behalf of a registered party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the section further requires that donations be the 
donor’s own money. This prevents the real donor from hiding 
behind another. Section 219 permits a donor to use an agent for 
this purpose, but specifically requires that: 
 

. . . the agent shall disclose the identity of his principal to 
the business manager or to the registered agent to whom 
the gift, (or) contribution . . . is made . . . 
 

If this disclosure is not made, Mr. Speaker, the donation “is 
deemed to be received from an anonymous donor.” Therefore 
donations made to a trust for the use of a political party, 
whether for use now or later, are made contrary to section 
207(2) of The Election Act as it exists today. 
 
That section also states: 
 

Every person who provides any money in violation of 
clause (1)(a) or . . . makes any payment in violation of 
clause (1)(b) is guilty of an offence against this Act. 

 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, any person who knowingly is party 
to, or acquiesces in, or assents to a scheme to make donations 
contrary to these requirements would also be guilty as a party to 
this offence. That’s in section 226, and that seems very clear to 
me, and it should to the hon. members opposite. It’s right there 
on paper, and they can’t dispute that. 
 
To go on, Mr. Speaker, in section 210(2)(a) it states a return to 
the Chief Electoral Officer must set out: 

 
the amount of money and the commercial value of goods 
and services provided in the fiscal year for the use of the 
party, by way of loan, advance . . . contribution or gift. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the requirement is not that the disclosure be made 
in the year in which the funds are used but that it set out 
contributions provided in the fiscal year on the report, used or 
not. Obviously leaving parties with flexibility to disclose 
contributions only when it got around to using them would 
defeat the intention of the Act. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
precisely what our current Premier said parties must not do 
when he introduced this two decades ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are to take the arguments of the other parties 
at face value, we’d have to believe the reporting requirements 
under section 210 allow for schemes such as trust funds or 
similar fund-raising agencies to be used by political parties. 
Clearly this was not the intention of the Act. The Premier did 
not think so back in the 1970s, and we don’t think so now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only has the spirit of this Act been  

contravened through the secret trust funds set up by the other 
two parties, we continue to contend that the law itself has been 
broken. Having ignored these provisions of the Act, those 
parties now face the problem of what to do with this ill-gotten 
cash. We maintain that cash held in trust cannot be lawfully 
used until all donors have been fully disclosed as set out in the 
Act. 
 
As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, section 219 permits donations to 
be made by agents. Huge sums have been donated to trusts 
which are holding monies for the use of political parties in our 
province. Mr. Speaker, either the trusts are the political parties 
in questions and therefore the party is in breach of the Act for 
not disclosing the donations — either that, or the trusts are 
agents of the contributors, and if they are agents as such then 
upon turning the funds over to the registered party, and again I 
quote the Act, Mr. Speaker: 
 

the agent shall disclose the identity of his principal to the 
business manager or to the registered agent to whom the 
gift, (or) contribution . . . is made, and no business 
manager or registered agent shall accept the gift, (or) 
contribution . . . unless the identity of the principal is made 
known at the same time . . . the gift, (or) contribution . . . is 
given to the business manager or to the registered agent. 
 

That’s section . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  With leave, to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce an old friend, a colleague from my school 
board days, a mentor, and a former servant of this legislature, 
one member for the Rosetown constituency, Allan Stevens, 
who’s behind the bar here. And I want to welcome him to the 
Assembly and ask members to join me in thanking him for all 
the work he’s done for the province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 17  Political Donations 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won’t start all over 
again right from the beginning. I just finished quoting section 
219, clause 2, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s in black and white. I 
don’t see room for interpretation here. It’s very simply stated 
for the members opposite and for all to read. 
 
And as I pointed out, section 219 provides that if the contributor 
is not identified as required, the contribution is deemed to be 
received from an anonymous donor. That, in turn,  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

brings into play section 221 which states that any money not 
properly reported cannot be used and must immediately be 
reported to the Chief Electoral Officer “and forward the 
amount with the report to the Chief Electoral Officer”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously this is a serious situation for all political 
parties that have been using trust funds or other agencies as 
fund-raising vehicles. All the money that has been paid into the 
registered parties without identification of the contributors must 
now be turned over to the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we maintain that all money 
remaining in the trusts or agencies can only be used by the 
political parties in question at such time as there is a full 
disclosure of the donors, as required by the Act. Otherwise it 
too would have to be turned over to the Chief Electoral Officer, 
or else I presume these monies could be returned to the donors 
or turned over to charity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problems we are now facing are not the fault 
of The Election Act as it now stands. As I’ve stated to the 
minister, there’s absolutely nothing wrong with the law. The 
only thing wrong here is that we have a couple of political 
parties in Saskatchewan that don’t feel a need to follow the law. 
 
This might have worked well for both of them when they were 
the only parties on the scene, and both benefited from the 
other’s silence. However, Mr. Speaker, the jig is up. Those 
parties have broken the law very clearly, Mr. Speaker. This is 
not simply an interpretation, as the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education infers. No, this is a fact. Read the Act. 
 
But if members on the other side or in the third party disagree 
with this fact, I invite them to rise today and tell us how I’ve 
misread the Act. Tell me which of these clauses I’ve explained 
to members today does not point to the fact the secret funds set 
up by the other two parties does not contravene the law. Read 
those sections. Tell us how these secret funds don’t try to skirt 
the very clear intention of the Act, written by the current 
Premier when he was attorney general for Saskatchewan. 
 
I encourage them to get up and tell the people of Saskatchewan 
they’ve not only lived up to the Act in spirit, they followed the 
law to the letter. I want them to get up and give me, give our 
caucus, and give the people of Saskatchewan, a clear indication 
of their so-called interpretation of The Election Act. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I doubt very highly the members of those two 
parties will. We’re now treated to the unpleasant sight of those 
two parties, sworn enemies we’re supposed to believe, trying to 
cover each other’s tracks. Because members of those parties 
know they are wrong about this. They know they haven’t 
followed the law. For all their blustering, they know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as legislators, as members of this House, pass 
laws each and every day and we expect the citizens of the 
province to follow those laws. We may not always agree with 
the laws passed in this Assembly, but we do follow them none 
the less. Is it too much to ask that the parties who are 
represented in this House do the same? Is that asking too much? 
 

Is it too much to ask that instead of finding new and inventive 
ways to get around laws set out by this House, that those parties 
instead just follow the laws both in spirit and in fact? Is it too 
much to ask that we at least show the people of Saskatchewan 
that much respect? Because if that’s too much to ask from the 
members of the other parties in this House, I doubt very highly 
if they deserve their designation as hon. members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, laws have been broken here. We’re certain of that. 
Members of the other parties are unwilling or unable to admit 
this clear fact. That’s why we need an independent inquiry to 
look into this matter. We have to get to the bottom of this seedy 
and sordid mess that the other parties have created in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s incumbent on all of us to ensure we 
leave this institution higher in public opinion than when we got 
here. The reputation of this place has taken a real beating over 
the last few years. Let’s try to begin to reverse that by coming 
clean with this issue. Let’s refer the matter to an inquiry. Let’s 
get an independent interpretation of the law that’s on the books 
right now. Let’s not argue back and forth. Let’s get an 
independent opinion and an interpretation. Let’s find out if the 
parties broke that law. We feel they did. We’re certain of it in 
fact. Now let’s get to the bottom of this so the healing process 
between the people and their elected representatives can begin 
again from the beginning, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
I would now move: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government and 
particularly the Minister of Justice to recommend to the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council that an order in council be 
approved appointing a member of either the Saskatchewan 
Court of Appeal or Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench 
for Saskatchewan — such member to be selected by the 
Chief Justice of Saskatchewan — to act as commissioner 
for a commission of inquiry to inquire into and report on 
the fund-raising and closely related activities of the 
registered political parties of Saskatchewan, together with 
any informally connected or informally related 
organizations which have assisted the registered political 
parties in such activities during the years 1974 through to 
and including the present; and further, that the terms of 
reference for the commission of inquiry should be as 
follows: 
 

Terms of Reference 
 
The commission of inquiry will have responsibility and 
authority to inquire into and report on: 
 

(a) all aspects of the conduct of the registered political 
parties of Saskatchewan with respect to the raising of 
political contributions and the compliance, or otherwise, 
of such registered political parties with the provisions of 
The Election Act during the time frame commencing on 
January 1, 1974 and continuing until the conclusion of 
such inquiry; 
 
(b) without limiting the generality of (a), whether 
organizations such as non-profit corporations, directors  

  



2422  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

of trust funds, informal committees, or other entities, 
have been established and have operated during the said 
time frame with the effect of either: 
 

(i) raising funds by way of gift, donation, loan, 
advance, deposit, or otherwise for the ultimate use by 
the registered political parties, transferring such funds 
to the said registered political parties, their candidates, 
their officials, their elected members of the Legislative 
Assembly; or 
 
(ii) making payments by or on behalf of the said 
registered party other than by or through a registered 
agent of the party; 

 
(c) without limiting the generality of either (a) or (b) 
above, any findings that the commissioner considers 
appropriate with respect to any indebtedness of 
registered political parties to the Chief Electoral Officer 
by virtue of the provisions of The Election Act. 
 
(d) without limiting the generality of either (a), (b) or (c) 
above, any recommendations that the commissioner may 
consider appropriate concerning either the prosecution 
of individuals or organizations for statutory offences or 
civil proceedings for the recovery of funds which may 
be due and owing to the Chief Electoral Officer by 
virtue of the provisions of The Election Act or other 
civil proceedings as may be appropriate. 

 
And further, that the commissioner be authorized to 
engage the services of such counsel, accountants, clerks, 
reporters, assistants, technical advisers, and other experts 
as are necessary or advisable to aid the commission in 
carrying out its responsibilities; 

 
And further, that all political parties who have been 
registered under The Election Act during the period of 
the inquiry have standing at the commission of inquiry; 

 
And further, that authorization be given for the payment 
of reasonable travel and sustenance expenses in 
accordance with the tariff of travel and sustenance 
expenses approved for employees of the public service, 
and that authorization also be given for the payment of 
the costs of the inquiry, including the expenses of 
inquiry counsel and counsel to the registered political 
parties with standing at the inquiry; 

 
And further, that the Department of Justice be authorized 
to pay honoraria and expenses of the commission; 

 
And further, that the terms of reference as set forth in 
this resolution be subject to amendment upon the 
recommendation of the jurist appointed as 
commissioner. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Wood River. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
have but a few words today to add to what the Leader of the 
Official Opposition has already said on this particular subject. 
And of course, given how much has been in the news of late . . . 
and in fact more of what’s not in the news, I think, is really 
what we’re trying to highlight here. 
 
I think one has to ask yourself, why is there a concern to start 
with? And why back, Mr. Speaker, in 1974 did then attorney 
general of the day, now Premier, bring in amendments to this 
Act, 1974? And I have a Hansard, number 2678, and I think it 
really sums it all up as the government’s position when the 
amendments to the existing Act, the current Act, were brought 
forward. Let me quote to that Hansard, April 25, 1974: 
 

Mr. Speaker, a word about the corporations and others. 
Corporations and organizations or associations that are 
formed for the purposes of soliciting and obtaining moneys 
for political parties must maintain a record of the names 
and addresses of each person making a contribution and 
the amount thereof. Before any such body may make a 
contribution of any major amount to a political party, that 
party must reveal the names and addresses of each person 
making the contribution to the body and the amount 
thereof. No contributions may be solicited or received from 
any individual or corporation, association or trade union 
outside of Canada. 

 
Yes. The member across the way asks, am I quoting? I’m 
quoting from the now Premier, then attorney general in 1974, 
and why in fact these amendments were brought in to begin 
with. Well the person was the member from Riversdale. 
 
And what’s actually happening here, and why these 
amendments were needed back in 1974, we agree with them. 
We agreed with them back then; we agree with them today. 
And for the record, let me clearly state that we view nothing 
wrong with the existing Act in those sections. 
 
In fact it was only in the last few days that the government feels 
that they must bring forward, in a very hurried fashion . . . and 
when you see the proposed House amendments on Bill 92, you 
will see that it was indeed in a hurried fashion because it was 
probably one of the poorest drafted pieces of a legislation 
probably to ever come forward in this House. 
 
And what the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is all in the disclosure, 
not in who gets money from corporations or trade unions or 
individuals, but it’s how it’s disclosed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think an article that came out in today’s 
paper, by Dale Eisler, sort of set it all out as far as why we need 
disclosure. And there’s actually a few quotes in here that are 
quite interesting. I’m going to quote out of this newspaper 
clipping today: 
 

Like the Tories’ trust, the Tommy Douglas House fund 
collected money but never revealed its donors in the past 
five years and the fund has transferred $380,000 into party 
coffers and there is no public record of where one cent of 
that money had come from. In other words, the net effect  

  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

of the NDP’s private fund is identical to the Tories. 
 
So clearly the news media are at this point viewing this to be an 
improper way to have funds. 
 
I’ll quote on: “If people can make donations to political parties 
anonymously, especially when that party is in power (as the 
government is)” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m sure, 
you know, the heckling is just great, and I’m sure you’ll really 
want to join in and explain some of your actions. But for the 
meantime, why don’t you sit back and be quiet and listen and 
actually learn what your . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Hon. members will come to order and 
allow the hon. member for Wood River to participate in the 
debate. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
quote is: 
 

If people can make donations to political parties 
anonymously, especially when that party is in power then 
there is potential for all kinds of abuse. How do we not 
know, for example, that some large donor isn’t receiving 
preferential treatment from government? What about a 
company making a large donation after it has received a 
multi-million dollar contract from government? 
 

And we could go on and on and on about some of the concerns 
that we would maybe view. And without going into the Act, I 
do know that section 210 sets out some of the organizations . . . 
well, it’s individuals, corporations, societies, trade union, 
unincorporated organizations, associations, and other persons. 
 
So let’s just take one of these for an example, one that I just 
found rather interesting when I looked at the proposed House 
amendment and why this whole argument of disclosure in fact 
must go forward, must be dealt with in a judicial inquiry, 
because it’s not being dealt with in an upfront manner with the 
House here today. 
 
But when you look at the proposed House amendment, and I’m 
going to quote right from it  where are we?  5(a): in the 
case of contribution, (i) constituency association . . . and then 
they talk about the names of the officers. I don’t know why they 
have that in there  (ii) a corporation. Fine. Trust fund, fine. 
 
Actually these are all in the present Act and fall under section 
219 as agents, and we’ll get into that in a moment. 
 
But you would have to ask yourself why, if they really thought 
this amendment through and they thought that it really covered 
everything that needed to be covered here today, why were 
trade unions left out of the new, proposed amendment? And yet 
they’re in section 210. Is there something about trade unions 
that shouldn’t be disclosed? 
 
Take a look, Mr. Speaker, at some of the labour laws that have  

come through this House in the last couple of years. And this is 
the point that Dale Eisler makes in his column. If we don’t have 
full disclosure, if we don’t know who’s cutting the large, and 
I’m talking about large, cheques  we’re talking thousands and 
thousands of dollars  we then don’t know who owes what to 
whom. 
 
We don’t know if in fact some trade unions want certain pieces 
of legislation. I’m not saying it did; I’m saying it could have 
happened. It may well have happened. I don’t know that. But 
don’t you think a judicial inquiry would uncover some of these 
things? Of course it would. 
 
And when you see how other people in the media view this: 
“New PCs wrong in keeping a secret fund.” The Leader-Post of 
a few days ago: “NDP also has its fund.” Well then you can see 
where in fact the government, scrambling as they were, I don’t 
think they had time to really clearly think out what should the 
next step be, because when I sit back and think of how they’re 
responding, it’s not smart politically and it’s not upfront with 
the people of this province. 
 
The best thing they could do is deal with . . . have a judicial 
inquiry come forward and clear the air. If in fact they’re guilty, 
I expect the route that they would take is to try and ram through 
a piece of legislation such as Bill 92, The Election Act, and try 
and bring in some amendments whether the opposition were in 
favour of them or not, as the Premier has stated. 
 
If they’re innocent, what’s the hurry? We’re in the first year of 
this term. What’s the hurry? Why not do it next session? I mean 
if you’re innocent, do it next session. That’s as simple as that. 
You have two, three years before this has to be dealt with. 
Unless of course what you want to really do is cover some 
tracks or make it all seem like we’re all innocent or we’re all 
guilty; that there was some little problem here. 
 
There is no problem. There is no problem at all. In fact you can 
see what the Minister of Post-Secondary Education has been 
endeavouring to do, and that is to confuse the issue. And how 
are they confusing the issue? It says right here in a Star-Phoenix 
opinion piece: “Don’t dither on disclosure.” Should . . . I don’t 
know if I . . .  
 

Should Mitchell deliver on his promise, (It’s a quote, Mr. 
Speaker) it will end the questionable practice of provincial 
parties laundering direct individual and corporate 
donations through federal wings to skirt provincial law on 
disclosing the source of donations. 
 

And that’s been their argument for a few days. The fact of the 
matter is, that isn’t our position on this. They’re trying to 
confuse the issue. There has never, to our knowledge, been a 
problem with what they disclosed federally. When people make 
a donation and they give it to a party so that it will run through 
the system so that they could receive a tax credit, that falls 
under the Canada Elections Act. And that has full public 
disclosure through our federal laws. And in fact if our 
provincial Chief Electoral Officer had concern, he can access 
those lists. Those are the lists that they’re trying to confuse . . . 
that somebody’s got secret funds. There’s nothing secret about  
  



2424  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

it. Nothing at all. 
 
The fact of the matter is we all do it the same. The problem is 
what we do provincially. Provincially, the Liberal Party when 
they receive a donation, give that information. We follow the 
Act as set out in section 219 of the present Act, and we follow 
it, and we disclose the names and the amounts to the Chief 
Electoral Officer, and those show up on our returns. Those 
show up on the returns . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, they are anxious to get into the debate 
with the heckling. I can only hope they will. 
 
So the problem is when in fact they have secret trust funds or 
Tommy Douglas Incorporated funds, secret bank accounts, or 
flush funds. What else do they have? The Conservatives had 
some . . . oh, PC metro fund, but they had safety deposit boxes. 
We have seen so many things that the public are just . . . they’re 
sick and tired of it, Mr. Speaker. They want it cleared up, and 
there’s only one way it’s going to clear up. 
 
I can assure you that this issue is going to be coming forward to 
this House for a long time to come. They may think they can 
cover it up by ramming something through in the last few days 
of session. I’m telling the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education, as I told him in a meeting yesterday, bring it back in 
February. If everything is upfront, bring it back in February and 
we’ll deal with it. You try and cover it up and you’ll be here all 
throughout the next session. This isn’t going away. 
 
I’m just telling them once more, as I did yesterday: let this Act 
die on the order paper. And let the individuals who are in the 
position and the ability to deal with such things as party 
financing, whether or not the Act is being contravened, let them 
do their job. Call the judicial inquiry and let’s clear the air. We 
welcome that. We welcome that. The members opposite have 
accused us of secret funds. We say there isn’t, and we’re more 
than willing to make that point to a judge or through a judicial 
inquiry. 
 
The very fact, the very fact that on some occasions we have 
taken a rock and thrown it into the dark and heard some dogs 
barking, we knew full well that we were hitting the dogs. That’s 
what was happening. They’re guilty. They’re guilty of trying to 
contravene the Act, firstly. Section 219 clearly states  as the 
Leader of the Official Opposition stated earlier  it clearly 
states that any monies . . . 
 
In fact the entire Act . . . if you look at the entire Act, what is 
the purpose? If you want to talk in layman’s language, what 
does the Act really try and do? 
 
It’s basically saying that any person or persons or corporations, 
trade unions and on and on that want to give money to a 
registered political party either by themselves or through 
another group, an agent, as the Act sets it out  agent being a 
trust fund, Tommy Douglas Incorporated — any time you’re 
going to pass monies through to a registered political party, then 
we fall and it’s very simple  we fall under what the now 
Premier said when he was attorney general and brought in the 
Act in 1974: disclose it all. Disclose every bit of it. 
 

The parties  the other two parties  have found a way to 
circumvent this by accepting large donations from corporations 
or trade unions or whatever, and they run them through their 
constituency associations to avoid reporting. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Wrong. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well I’m afraid it is. If you got something 
to say then when you’re done . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  You’re wrong. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  When I’m done speaking, how about you 
get up and you explain it, because there’s a bunch of you that 
have a lot to explain for . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s not 
our party. It’s the people here. You and your secret funds. If 
you got something to say, get up and say it after this is over 
with. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I want to draw the attention of the hon. 
member to two items. One is the rule of this Assembly, rule 28, 
which requires that debate be directed through the Chair, and I 
want to remind the hon. member that it is fitting the respect 
required of debate in the House that all hon. members will 
direct their debate through the Chair. 
 
I also want to draw the attention of the hon. member to section 
481 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th 
Edition, which reads in part: 
 

. . . it has been sanctioned by usage that a Member, while 
speaking, must not: 
 

. . . impute bad motives or motives different from those 
acknowledged by a Member. 

 
Order. And section 484 of the same edition, which again says in 
part: 
 

. . . a member will not be permitted by the Speaker to 
indulge in any reflections on the House itself as a political 
institution; or to impute to any Member or Members 
unworthy motives for their actions in a particular case. 
 

And I will want to remind the hon. member that he will want to 
respect the traditions of respectful debate in the Assembly and 
to guide himself accordingly in his remarks to the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A very, very 
good point. Because what this really is doing on our part is 
asking that an independent body take a look at this. Not to say 
that you definitely are or aren’t guilty of whatever actions, but 
let somebody outside of this House determine whether it was 
done upfront or not. 
 
All we can do is look at the facts before us, and the facts say 
that there is some very questionable practices. The facts state 
that there are contraventions, in our view, contraventions of The 
Election Act. We can clearly state out where and what parts of 
the Act were contravened. And thus because of the amount of 
money we’re talking about, some $7 million  $7 million   
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

then we feel it is only right for the public good that this have the 
scrutiny and be moved to a judicial inquiry. 
 
I don’t believe the government has a way out of this. To say 
that what we’re going to do is bring in amendments, especially 
these such poorly written amendments that in fact add nothing 
to the Bill . . . The Bill doesn’t need anything. It’s very clear. It 
needs people to follow it. 
 
You can have speed limits all you want. If people refuse to 
follow them, what good are the speed limits? It won’t help to 
have a new law come in and say, well let’s adjust the speed 
limit. That won’t help . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but it 
won’t help. It does nothing. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to have an . . . outside of 
this Legislative Assembly, a judicial inquiry, an independent 
inquiry, to deal with some of the perceived problems. 
 
And with that, with that, I’ll close by saying later today, or at 
least it was going to be later today, Bill 92, The Election Act 
which we have been asking from the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education . . . And yesterday in a meeting he 
did relay to me that they would consider letting it die on the 
order paper. I see now in the last minutes the Government 
House Leader making some deals that we won’t be dealing with 
Bill No. 92. 
 
(1500) 
 
I don’t know if that signals that it’s gone all this session or in 
fact is it only gone for a few days while things cool down. I 
think you have a lot to answer for on this one. Also in 
agreement yesterday with the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education, he assured us in the meeting that in fact if there was 
new information come to light, that he would consider a judicial 
inquiry. Publicly he’s saying something yet different to 
everyone else. But that’s what he’s telling us in meetings. And 
I’m going to hold him to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As of today there’s $7 million that is questionable. And I think 
what has really come to light is the fact that it was the media 
that found these secret funds not so many days ago. Is that all? 
 
An Hon. Member:  What secret fund? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well the members across the way are 
saying, what secret funds, as though they’ve been out of the 
House and not following proceedings. 
 
So I would like to send a copy of this across so that they can 
follow along: “New PCs wrong in keeping fund secret.” That 
would be a secret fund. Just so you can slowly follow along. 
And “NDP also has its fund.” Can we send copies across? 
Because they are having a desperate time with this issue. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure others would like to get 
into the debate and explain their actions. 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Opposition is asking the government to appoint a commission  

of inquiry into fund-raising of political parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to be blunt today. It is obvious to me what the Liberal 
opposition is trying to do. This has nothing to do with their 
desire to be more accountable or more transparent. This has 
everything to do with trying to redeem themselves as an 
opposition. Actually the third-party Conservatives, with only 
five members, have clearly outperformed the official opposition 
this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  The Liberal opposition has been ineffective, 
unfocused, and have dipped to third place in the polls. And now 
they are trying to elevate their sagging performance by clearly a 
political move. Their concern is not for accountability or more 
transparency. If the Liberals had any knowledge of an illegal 
act, then there is an obligation on their part to go to the proper 
authorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have had two weeks to do this, but they have failed 
because they have produced no evidence. This tells me that they 
are on a witch-hunt for pure political reasons, Mr. Speaker. The 
Liberals are trying desperately to redeem their role of 
opposition. There is a proper, legal procedure which they have 
not activated because they have produced no facts. 
 
We as a political party have met all the legal requirements of 
the Act, and we have disclosed everything required by the Chief 
Electoral Officer. The Chief Electoral Officer has the power to 
conduct an investigation under the present Act. Any 
information that the Liberals may have should go to the Chief 
Electoral Officer. 
 
Traditionally, Mr. Speaker, any commission inquiry would only 
come after all legal avenues have been exhausted. Mr. Speaker, 
this motion completely ignores the Chief Electoral Officer and 
the judicial system that we are governed by. To implement this 
inquiry would cost the taxpayers hundreds of thousands of 
dollars  all of this, Mr. Speaker, in the name of political gain. 
 
I have a great deal more respect for the people of Saskatchewan 
and for this place where I sit as a representative. 
 
This is my opinion. It is my opinion that they will through this 
. . . that the people of Saskatchewan will see through this 
political ruse. The people in my constituency have a great deal 
of political acumen, and they will see what is going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not take up any more time of the Assembly 
because the motivations of this motion are so blatantly political. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

  



2426  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Motion No. 1  Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, just a few comments before we 
move on to debate other issues in the Assembly. The reason I’d 
like to make some comments to this motion that’s before us, 
item no. 1, that demanding the government repeal the unfair 
construction tendering agreement  this motion that we have in 
front of us  is because of the fact, Mr. Speaker, there are 
many businesses across this province . . . and certainly the 
construction association have come out and have taken a 
definite stand and a view that this agreement is not fair. 
 
This agreement, Mr. Speaker, does not treat the construction 
association fairly in the fact that you either have to be unionized 
or there’s no point in putting forward a bid, especially on 
Crown tendering projects. And we’ve raised this issue on a 
number of occasions. We’ve raised the concern. We’ve brought 
it to the attention of the government. I realize as well that the 
Minister of Labour has indicated that there is presently some 
negotiations with the construction association to see if they can 
come to a compromise. 
 
However, to date, Mr. Speaker, we have nothing to indicate that 
at the end of the day the construction association will be able to 
realize the fairness regarding tendering agreements entered into 
with Crown construction projects in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as well have asked the government if they 
would even consider giving second reading to our Bill No. 19, 
and I think it’s a Bill that would address some of the concerns 
that have been raised and certainly the concern that is raised by 
this motion. And our Bill is An Act to revoke the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
What we’ve said, Mr. Speaker, is this. That any contractor . . . 
or any tender that is let in this province should be let, and that 
every contractor should have the ability, or every construction 
company should have the ability, to tender on that project. And 
that a project . . . and a tender should be reviewed based on the 
lowest qualified bidder receiving the tender, whether or not they 
are unionized or non-unionized. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, you would find that people  even 
the average, ordinary person on the street  would say that’s 
fair. We’re not against unions. We’re not against construction 
companies that are unionized. But what we’re saying, Mr. 
Speaker, if indeed unionized contractors cannot compete, it 
must say something about the negotiations or the agreements 
they have with their unionized members. 
 
I would feel, Mr. Speaker, that any contractor or any union 
member in this province should be able to stand up and hold 
their head high, feeling that they can compete with any 
non-unionized contractor and they can do the same quality job 
and have the same quality of workmanship. 
 
So it would only be fair, Mr. Speaker, if we’re talking about 
quality and if we’re talking about equality in this province . . . 
We hear the word equality on many occasions used in terms of 
whether it’s male or female gender in the workplace or other  

working relationships, Mr. Speaker. Wouldn’t it also be fair that 
we have . . . that non-unionized contractors have the same 
ability to bid on a contract, realizing that their contract or their 
tender or their bid is not going to be reviewed based on whether 
they have unionized employees working for them. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that in view of the fact 
of what we have seen, and the government’s numbers even 
indicate, the fact that the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement process has cost this province, has cost the 
taxpayers of this province, some $118 million last year alone  
$118 million, Mr. Speaker, which could have gone towards 
services in this province such as health care, or education. . . 
which would have given hospitals the ability to provide the 
services; which would have given health districts that ability, or 
even educational districts, which would not have put Scenic 
Valley in the position that they were in today . . . in this year, 
where they had to come to the government and say, well if 
you’re going to cut our funding, then we’re going to review 
how we provide education, and we feel we have found a 
mechanism whereby we can provide even a higher quality of 
education in fewer days. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact that we see the 
government losing money on this, maybe it’s time the 
government really took a serious look at this Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement  took a serious look at it. 
And I trust, Mr. Speaker, that in the deliberations taking place 
right now with the trades across this province, that the 
government is indeed going there with an open mind. And with 
an open mind, they’re looking at this agreement and they are 
basically saying, okay, maybe we’ve made a mistake here. 
Maybe there is room to move, and maybe we need to look very 
closely at how we let tenders and the fact that if we’re going to 
create an equal working atmosphere in this province, that 
indeed the tenders are open to anyone and everyone. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find that this motion is certainly a 
motion worth debating. I would also feel we could establish 
more by indeed moving ahead and debating and entering into 
agreement to move second reading of An Act to revoke the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, Bill No. 19. And I 
would ask the government if they would give consideration, 
even later this day, to moving towards that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I’ve think I brought forward the points 
as to why we feel this is a good motion, why we feel Bill No. 19 
is a good motion. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, to allow anybody 
else to take the opportunity to speak on this issue, I will take my 
place. 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
adjournment of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 3  Wildlife Damage Compensation 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again I 
feel it’s imperative that I raise a few concerns regarding this 
motion and bring to the floor of this Assembly the fact that  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

there are many people across this province, and certainly a 
number of farmers in my constituency, in fact a large number of 
producers in the constituency of Moosomin, Souris-Cannington, 
certainly up into the Melville area, and the Yorkton-Kamsack 
area, who were hit very dramatically by weather conditions last 
fall that didn’t allow them to harvest all of their crops. And as a 
result, Mr. Speaker, and because of the heavy snow conditions, 
found themselves facing a very serious depredation problem 
with regard to wildlife damage in the crops. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to inform the Assembly . . . to 
realize that while the Minister of the Environment was 
suggesting about a month and a half ago that the government 
really didn’t have a program in place to address compensation 
loss, and while the government wasn’t prepared to really put 
one in place to address the loss, and while the minister was 
suggesting that that loss probably won’t be that large at the end 
of the day because the producers will eventually get out to 
harvest their crops, I want to relate, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 
yes, I’ve talked to many producers this spring who were able to 
get out onto their land, were able to harvest what was left of the 
crop. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this, that most producers 
found that the yield that they received on crop that had wintered 
over was substantially lower than what they had harvested last 
fall. 
 
(1515) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can say, well they had a crop and they 
got some crop off and certainly it’s some money in their 
pockets at the end of the day, and will go at least some distance 
to covering the expenses of putting that crop in the ground last 
year. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, with that even a 5 bushel yield loss 
in relation to where the prices of grains are today, to most 
producers, Mr. Speaker, who are struggling in many cases just 
to make ends meet and trying to keep themselves afloat after the 
difficulties of the 1980s with the dry years and the low grain 
prices, any loss, Mr. Speaker, that producers experience even 
this year, as we’ve seen this past spring, is a major set-back and 
a major burden to most producers. 
 
So I feel, and my caucus and my caucus colleagues feel, that it 
would be appropriate, most appropriate, for the government to 
have taken a serious look at the economic impact and the 
economic loss that has been incurred and that producers across 
the south-east area of the province have felt as a result of 
wildlife damage. 
 
And I realize, Mr. Speaker, this has been an issue that has been 
ongoing. And this is an issue that can vary from year to year. 
Maybe this fall will be an excellent fall. We trust that we will 
have a longer, extended fall compared to last year, and that 
indeed the crops will be harvested and will be in the bin. 
 
You have two things: with the high price of grain, producers 
would like to get a benefit; secondly, if the grain is in the bin, 
then the wildlife can’t damage it. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s not only imperative that we 
address the shortfall this year. And while I realize the 
government has basically said it won’t, I hope the government 
doesn’t just push this underneath the rug or underneath the back 
burner and say, well it’s gone away; we don’t have to worry 
about it because we’re into a new year and we’re hoping that we 
don’t have a problem. 
 
What if, Mr. Speaker, what if we have another problem next fall 
and next winter such as we’ve had this past winter. What if that 
happens, Mr. Speaker? What is being done? And that’s why I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly important that we raise this 
issue, this concern, and we continue to bring it to the 
government’s attention, that it is their responsibility to address 
the issue and to begin today to look at a long-term program that 
will put in place, compensation that producers could be . . . 
 
And what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is not something that just 
hands over funds to a producer, but basically a program that 
producers can be involved in; that they can involve themselves 
to the level of participation that they would like to be involved 
in to protect themselves. Like I’m saying an insurance policy 
that is over and above crop insurance as we know it today. 
 
And I suggest that, Mr. Speaker; I suggest it’s based on the idea 
of a spot-loss program, such as we have with hail. If you have 
hail damage and the crop insurance program  if you want to 
carry it along with crop insurance  crop insurance pays you 
for that hail damage. And the unfortunate part with crop 
insurance though, Mr. Speaker, is if that hail damage happens to 
drop the production level below your protected level, you don’t 
get any more if you’ve already been paid under the spot-loss 
hail. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at big game damage, 
those areas of loss  if you do a spot-loss program  would be 
addressed. And it wouldn’t mean that you have to address a 
whole quarter section. There may be a total of five acres that 
have been lost at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That producer, by getting involved, would receive the 
compensation that would be fair, for the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
he has been looking after, if you will, the Queen’s livestock, or 
the Crown livestock, the wildlife that everyone else enjoys. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly important that members 
of this Assembly continue to raise these concerns, as they are 
raised with us, so that people out in rural Saskatchewan do not 
feel that they have been forgotten about and that they have been 
left alone. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that I am in full 
agreement with this motion and I would ask the Minister of the 
Environment, the Environment and Resource Management, to 
work with his cabinet colleagues and work with the minister 
responsible for the Crop Insurance, to indeed put in place, or 
begin putting in place, a program that would address wildlife 
damage problems that may incur in the future, as we’ve seen 
them in the past. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am fully in support of this motion. 
  



2428  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
adjournment of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To move yet another motion. With 
leave, I move we proceed to government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, 
Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 

911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 
is Diana Milenkovic, with SaskTel; and on my right is Jim 
Brickwell, a policy analyst from the Department of Municipal 
Government. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Welcome, Minister and officials. Minister, I know we’ve had 
some conversations about this issue, and I think you know some 
of the concerns that we certainly have. 
 
Minister, we certainly approve of and appreciate the efforts that 
your department is making in terms of enhancing the safety that 
people feel throughout Saskatchewan and particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan. I guess what our concern is, is the . . . not only 
the short-term and the immediate implementation of this Bill, 
but also exactly where it’s going. As we understand the system 
that’s going to be implemented with the proposal under this 
legislation . . . is that what we’re going to end up with is a 
number of components. 
 
First of all, Madam Minister, would you mind putting on the 
record again, to bring us up to speed, is in terms of how you’re 
going to implement this. And what I’m thinking of in particular 
is the steps that you would envisage taking from the 
proclamation of this legislation. Take us through until where 
you envisage the process to be fully implemented. And I’m 
thinking in particular of what you need to put call centres 
together, what you need for mapping, and things of that nature. 
What’s the process in implementing this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first of all, upon the 
passage of the legislation, we would put in place two advisory 
committees: the advisory committee on the development of the 
system and a technical advisory committee. There would be two 
levels. With their assistance and input and the input from other 
stakeholders, we would develop the regulations that would be  

pursuant to the legislation. And relying on the advice of the 
advisory committees, we would continue to build on the 911 
system as it’s already established, fully enhanced, in several 
centres in Saskatchewan. And we would just work our way 
through the rolling out of the system as different communities 
and regions become ready at their end. And we would rely on 
the advice of the advisory committees in the design of the 
system and how it’s eventually completed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, you mentioned that you would go 
through this advisory process, the regulations, and then you 
would be staging or expanding, as I understood you to say, the 
911 system that’s currently in three major communities. Is that 
correct, that it would be an expansion of the existing 911 
systems in our major centres? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, not exactly. That isn’t 
quite what I said. I said we’ve set up the advisory committees, 
and of course we would rely on the experience and expertise of 
those people who operate the fully enhanced systems that we 
have already, being Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and the 
regional area in the south-west where municipalities have gone 
together to organize their response system and fund the 
enhancement to the level that they feel they can afford. And 
then we also have North Battleford, Moose Jaw, Estevan, and 
Weyburn that have basic systems that are in place now. 
 
So what we would do is look at the organization of those, and 
relying on their advice and paying attention to some of the other 
organizations which have gone on at the local level. They’re not 
fully up to the status yet of the centres that I’ve mentioned, but 
there are some other regional initiatives. There are some other 
initiatives that have been spearheaded by health districts that are 
meant to operate within the boundaries of a particular health 
region. And we would, using the advice of the advisory 
committee, try to put all of these together in the best possible 
design for a comprehensive system for the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I don’t want to put words in your 
mouth, although I probably will attempt to do that in terms of 
seeing where we’re heading. As you’re aware and you’ve 
mentioned, that some communities are operating with a basic 
system right now which I’m not sure the definition is, and I 
assume it’s sort of just the fundamental call forwarding system 
that has 911 capability to bring it to a dispatcher that would do 
that without the mapping and the location display and things of 
that nature. Then we sort of get to enhanced and fully enhanced 
as we move up the ladder of sophistication that seems to be in 
place. 
 
The fully enhanced system, as I understand it  using Prince 
Albert as the example; that’s I think the example, only for 
example purposes, in the area that I’m from  would have the 
full enhanced service that would have not only the mapping that 
would be completed, that when an emergency call came 
forward there would be a trained technician answering that call, 
that individual would have the capability of staying on the line 
with the caller from which the emergency was located, and then 
trigger the appropriate responses from whatever segments of the  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

emergency response professionals that would be in place. 
That’s a fully enhanced system. Are we agreeing on that basic 
definition? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well with an enhanced 911, the 
location of the caller’s phone is displayed along with the phone 
number at the 911 centre. With basic 911, the location is not 
sent. Only the call line identification is sent, which may not be 
exactly the telephone . . . the actual phone number. Also the 
province-wide 911 service offers a single-button transfer to the 
appropriate emergency response agency, so the choice of three 
buttons versus the choice of 600 combinations or speed call 
numbers. And that is important in any wide-area 911 system 
that has many emergency responses. 
 
And then there are the other factors. The degree of enhancement 
to which a community can move does rely on other factors, and 
we certainly don’t deny that there is a cost of these. There are 
things like mapping, like street signing, like the kind of work 
and investment that’s required to put together a fully enhanced 
response. 
 
Now I hope that makes it clear. There definitely is a difference. 
There’s a difference now in the level of the various systems that 
are in place, but our goal is to move to as fully an enhanced 
system as possible throughout the province in every centre. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, it seems to me in your description 
of the steps to the fully enhanced system  that the things that 
would be done at any level moving from basic to enhanced, 
which may not have the full EMT (emergency medical 
technician) technicians, to the fully enhanced that has all the 
rest of it  all of those things would build on previous steps; 
that there really would be very little wasted effort because 
mapping and identification of houses and streets and locations 
would be something that is a requirement further down the 
ladder, and it wouldn’t be wasted effort. 
 
So the costing of this thing, is that becoming the important . . . 
and time line to get to the fully enhanced system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s always been 
. . . finances are always a factor of course, but that’s the reason 
that we have made an investment in the mapping. And I’ve 
outlined these steps that would be necessary for a completely 
enhanced response, you know, being the street numbers, the 
mapping, those factors to which there is a cost. 
 
But I think that’s why we would rely on the advice of the 
advisory committee in the experience that they already have, 
and that’s why I used the terms in the beginning, building on 
that. And of course there will be  and we have to face this  
some parts of the province that are more remote and that are 
very sparsely populated where as, for instance, road signing and 
house numbering is simply not practical. And so we’re aiming 
to find the best possible solution. There are many centres in the 
province that with the organization and investment at their level 
in the identification programs and so forth, would have the 
ability to fairly quickly move to a fully enhanced system. 
 
Then there are others where there may have to be compromises.  

So we hope to not waste any money. That’s why we would, you 
know, use the advisory committee to build on the current 
experience and expand the system incrementally in that way. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, one of the things that we want to 
propose today as an amendment  and I don’t know if you 
have a copy of it. It’ll either be moved under my name or under 
my colleague’s from Saltcoats  is a concern about the 
definition in the Act under the public safety answering point. It 
strikes me that the way you’ve defined that is pretty limiting in 
terms of really following through with the vision that I hear you 
articulating today in terms of where  I think we’re in 
agreement  we all want to head. 
 
And our concern is — very, very much so — is that if we do 
not articulate the true vision of where we’re heading, is that we 
somehow will settle for something that isn’t fully a 911 system 
in terms of where the people understand 911 to be, either 
because they’ve been watching television or they have 
experience with 911 in the major urban centres in Saskatchewan 
or elsewhere  911 certainly comes to mean clearly something 
more than the basic system. And even to many, in many 
extents, the enhanced system, 911 in people’s minds is pretty 
synonymous with the fully enhanced system. And if we’re 
going to have that as an objective, I would hope that you would 
see your way clear to support that kind of amendment that 
clearly defines where we’re heading in this regard. 
 
Do you have any comments in terms of the direction, because I 
think I heard you saying that that’s clearly where you want to 
arrive at? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important 
to know that there are two parts to it. One is the computer 
system and the fully digitalized service that SaskTel now has 
which makes a 911 possible. With or without street addresses, 
there can be a provincial response. 
 
But I think the purpose of the legislation is to provide a 
framework; then looking at the systems that are in place already 
and where we want to move to, which is as fully enhanced a 
service as possible to every individual line in the province, but 
knowing that to try to replicate the enhanced service in 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert, for instance, in very 
remote parts of the province, because of the difficulty in 
organizing the local response, is not realistic. That we would 
move out incrementally, with the cooperation of those 
communities who want to provide that service for themselves, 
to provide within that framework the most fully enhanced 
system, response system, that’s possible. 
 
And the number of . . . they’re known as PSAPs, public safety 
answering points, that will exist once the system is complete, 
there’s not a definition of that yet. We need to work our way 
through that with the help of the advisory committees. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I certainly understand that with 
the digital network that’s now part of SaskTel’s system, that the 
number of public safety answering points is pretty much 
academic because they would be transparent to an emergency  
  



2430  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

call. People wouldn’t know if that answering point was in their 
own community or in Saskatoon or Regina or any other 
location. It would be virtually transparent. 
 
And so the number of answering points probably has practical 
considerations over time that I’m sure  from your comments 
about the consultative committee that you are indicating that 
you will strike, or committees  that an appropriate design of 
the system in terms of how many answering points there are 
would be established both in consultation with SaskTel and 
with your committee that would establish what’s the 
appropriate number. 
 
My concern is much more of when we talk about a framework. 
And I realize this doesn’t snap your fingers or wiggle your nose 
and instantly you have a 911 system. My concern is much more, 
is what kind of a system are we going to settle for and where 
are we . . . if we’re building a framework, as you indicate, what 
is that framework going to look like? And I recognize that 
you’re going to dress it up as you go through that consultative 
and planning process. 
 
And it strikes me that it’s critically important to the people of 
Saskatchewan so that they understand of where we’re going 
very clearly; that to articulate that those answering points, 
whatever number there would be into the future, are clearly 
destined to be the fully enhanced answering points set out . . . 
that have all the services of the fully enhanced system. And I 
fail to understand why we can’t make that objective clear in the 
legislation so that all the people of this province realize what 
we’re all in agreement, of saying that everyone should have as 
much access to it as possible. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think the key in the 
consideration of this proposed legislation, or the legislation 
that’s before us, is that it is not limiting in any way. And there 
will be various levels of costs associated with providing a 
coordinated emergency response service in various centres. 
 
Obviously in a larger city, where you can spread the costs, 
where a large municipality, for instance, has self-funded and 
can spread the costs of manning a 24-hour-a-day emergency 
centre  of putting in the hardware in the response centre and 
keeping that up to date and so forth  can be spread over a 
large number of people, this can be done. 
 
But if we put in legislation, or incorporate into legislation, the 
premiss that no one will receive a response when they dial 911 
until they can provide that level of sophistication in a response 
centre, we would be limiting the ability of a number of people 
in rural Saskatchewan and remotely . . . or sparsely populated 
and remote areas of the province from participating at all. 
 
So we don’t . . . we want to make as few compromises as 
possible but we don’t want to limit the access of a response on 
911 to places that are, communities that are, able to provide the 
absolutely fully enhanced service as we know it today. We need 
to move incrementally. 
 
But within the framework that we have, what we anticipate is 
that everyone in the province will be able to get  whether  

they’re a resident in the province or passing through on a 
highway or wherever they are in the province  that they will 
get a response on 911. And from that we will work to have the 
highest level of emergency response in every single place that is 
practical and possible and that is affordable, because some of 
the costs are at the local level. 
 
For the province to man . . . to pass a piece of legislation that 
would bind someone, I assume the province, into providing a 
fully enhanced response to every single individual line in the 
province no matter whether it’s remote, northern, sparse, rural 
 whatever  is simply not practical for financial reasons. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I think we have to separate a little 
bit about what we mean here in terms of the response and what 
the 911 system offers in terms of the communication linkage. 
 
For example, I understand that the response time for example, if 
we had the fully-enhanced 911 telephone digital system that’s 
networked through SaskTel’s system  and it indeed maps 
where that telephone call, emergency call, is coming from  
that’s part of your plan, to do the mapping, and even the 
enhanced system, without the fully enhanced  and as I 
understand it  then the screen opens up and then the three 
different calls that are appropriate to that community can be 
activated by a telephone operator, virtually. 
 
So all of that work that you’re proposing, I fully support. I think 
that that’s all wonderful. What I’m saying is, is that can you tell 
me how much more it’s going to take, once you do all of that 
technology and all of the mapping and all that stuff is going to 
be in SaskTel’s network anyway? 
 
(1545) 
 
So that instead of it being simply a telephone operator who’s 
trained to push one of three button choices that come up on the 
screen, that instead of that being the individual that sits on the 
answering part of that call, if you like, what is the difference in 
cost  surely it can’t be very much  to have a fully trained 
emergency measures technician who can maintain a verbal 
contact with the individual at the other end of the line? 
 
And so I want to separate that part, because the second part of it 
where I think maybe we’re getting hung up on — I don’t 
assume that the response coming from the village of Zenon 
Park, for example, would be exactly the same and as 
instantaneous as if the call came from College Avenue in 
Saskatoon. I understand that there is a whole difference in terms 
of what the physical limitations of what responses would be. 
 
But I don’t think it would make a whole lot of difference if the 
person on the other end of the line, when that screen came up 
and it said this is in Zenon Park and the nearest ambulance is in 
Tisdale or Nipawin, for example, and that the response time for 
that physical thing is 30 minutes . . . Maybe there’s a response 
. . . a first responder in Zenon Park with a beeper that would be 
able to respond in 10 minutes. 
 
I’m not suggesting that the helicopters and everything all 
descend at the same speed on College Avenue in Saskatoon as  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

on Main Street in Zenon Park, but surely the SaskTel 
component  the emergency measures technician and the 
online counselling  is even more important in my example of 
Zenon Park, because it’s quite likely that the response time is 
going to be longer and that that verbal linkage between the 
person in the emergency and a trained person who could talk 
that person to some level of support would be even more 
important than if it is that instant response. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re not at 
odds on this at all. There seems to be some impression by the 
members opposite, because of SaskTel’s involvement in 
providing the software and the mechanics for the system, that 
emergency response calls are going to be taken by long-distance 
operators or someone who’s not qualified. That’s not the case. 
 
The legislation provides a framework for emergency responses 
of the type that you describe and the type that is our vision to 
happen on a regional level. We don’t know yet what the 
districts will be like. There’s health districts right now that are 
organizing using the 310-5000 number. And in this case 
perhaps . . . Well I won’t name a place, but there are several of 
them. So the health district is organized. When a person dials in 
these particular regions to which it applies, 310-5000, the 
person who answers is actually an EMT at the ambulance 
company. It isn’t fully enhanced now to the extent that the 
location of the caller comes up on the line, but there is a facility 
in that system to maintain the connection and talk and give 
instructions, while perhaps it’s not an ambulance response, 
maybe it’s a fire response or first responder, or whatever is 
required. 
 
And they’re organizing the district; mapping out; locating 
where the EMT technicians are located; where there are trained 
first responders and how close they would be to the origin of 
the call. And these systems are being organized right now on a 
regional basis, on a health board basis. 
 
And at first when I heard about it, I thought, oh, this sounds like 
it’s going to complicate the 911 initiative. But the way it’s 
being done, when they’re ready, when the whole area is ready 
and organized, all they’ll have to do, they won’t have to change 
a thing except flip the 310-5000 number over to 911 and they 
will then be part of the provincial system that you could say is 
being added to the systems that are fully enhanced right now. 
And that’s the way we see, as regions, municipalities, parts of 
the province, get their local response organized like they have 
in the south-west, a huge area there, as I’m sure you’re aware, 
has organized themselves. And their system is now up and 
running and the initial reports are that they’re very happy with 
it. 
 
And then using the example I gave you of the health board, 
that’s how we will incrementally increase the number of people 
and the sizes of the area that will be able to access a qualified 
response. What you’re calling, I think, an enhanced response 
but a qualified response will not have, like, information 
operators working for SaskTel responding to the 911; they’ll be 
trained people. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I think that in large part we’re 
very much agreeing on both the direction and what we want to 
see happen. And I hope that . . . and I want to just read the 
motion that we’re going to propose, or the amendments that 
we’re going to propose. And I think that what we’ve been 
saying all along is that we’re very much in agreement and what 
we would like to have happen is that defined in the legislation, 
the public safety answering point definition changes to read as 
follows: 
 

The ‘public safety answering point’ means a telephone 
answering point that receives emergency 911 telephone 
calls and provides an enhanced emergency response 
service that co-ordinates fire, police, and/or ambulance 
emergency calls with responses at the call centre by 
qualified professional personnel who will activate and 
direct the emergency response teams while maintaining 
on-line contact and counseling with the emergency caller 
to the conclusion of the emergency. 

 
I think from your comments, you’re very much in support of the 
concept of what we’re trying to do here. We certainly believe 
that this is a step in the right direction and we think it’s 
critically important that this amendment clearly defines where 
we’re heading, and then everyone will work together very 
expeditiously from the very mechanisms that you outline to 
achieve the ends that I think we’re all in agreement with. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m looking at the 
amendment, and of course this is our goal, to have as fully 
enhanced service as possible. But the province is not 
undertaking to provide that service to every citizen of the 
province. The province can’t afford it. What we need is . . . the 
province is undertaking, through SaskTel, to provide the 
hardware and software to make a response when someone dials 
911 practical, possible. Then, as has always been the case up 
until now, municipalities, health regions, geographic regions 
like in the south-west, consider the situation, consider what 
level of response they can provide within a reasonable time 
frame for responding and given the geographics of the area and 
so on. And then they make their contributions. They build their 
end of it, and then it gets all put together. 
 
But if you said . . . if we agree to the amendment, we would 
then be . . . well one of two things would happen. We would be 
precluding a number of people in the province in sparsely 
populated, remote areas that just are not able to organize this 
level of response in their local area. We would be precluding 
them from being part of the system at all, or else we would be 
binding the province to provide it all, which we can’t afford to 
do. 
 
Or else we may look at one of the other alternatives, where the 
public safety answering point might be, as we’ve talked about, 
the RCMP through their radio enhancement. But we wouldn’t 
want to include this as . . . 
 
We wouldn’t be able to support the amendment because we feel 
that it is then limiting by prescribing that definition. We need to 
have the system evolve so that people, communities, health 
districts, regions, can move up the level of their response as  
  



2432  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

they’re able to organize it and afford it and as they watch 
examples of what other people are able to do. And we have to 
build the system that way. We don’t want to have the legislation 
be other than a framework because it may limit the participation 
of some areas, and our vision is for it eventually to be 
province-wide to the highest possible standard. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, using your analogy of the 
framework, I guess what we’re saying is, let’s make sure the 
framework is for the completed building that we want to create. 
And let’s not just settle for a framework of a basement when 
what we really wanted was a three-storey bungalow or 
something of that nature. 
 
And I would remind the minister  and I’m sure you know  
it strikes me that in the wording of your definition under section 
8(5) for example, of an advisory committee, this is to advise the 
minister to advise and recommend on the development, 
implementation, and operation of a 911 system. 
 
Surely having that clause in there, and the advisory committee 
that you mention quite often, and we think is quite appropriate 
to advise on the implementation, certainly in my mind would 
also include the staging of it and how much of the 
implementation of the fully enhanced 911 system would be 
appropriate to be implemented at any time or place. But I think 
it’s really important that we’re talking as if we’re in agreement 
with the fully enhanced system as we define it, that it’s 
important to have that as the framework. 
 
That’s the goal of where we’re heading. That’s the framework 
that you allude to all along. I understand that it can’t be 
implemented instantaneously all across the province both for 
logistical and cost reasons. But surely we shouldn’t be settling 
for shooting for anything less than that. And the advisory 
committee and the people that you work with, including 
SaskTel, would obviously have to work through the whole 
process of, at what stage and what level of implementation 
would happen at each different location as its situation would 
develop and evolve. 
 
So I guess what I’m asking for is let’s make sure that we’re 
shooting for the whole building that we want. And I recognize 
that the committee and the minister and the planning process 
will have to reconcile the obvious limitations of cost and 
logistics. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we certainly . . . I 
agree with the member opposite. And in terms of the 
amendment that the official opposition has put forward with 
respect to the wording of the clause on the advisory committee, 
we would be able to support that change. And I’d like to go 
back to your . . . because we do intend to set up an advisory 
committee and that . . . well the two levels of advisory 
committees. We intend to solicit their advice and to listen to it, 
take it into account very seriously, because we need to use their 
expertise to build the system. 
 
And so in coming back to the member’s analogy of what the 
framework and what kind of a finished house you’re going to 
have, if you’re building your dream home, you may do the  

framing, you know, put the roof on, put the siding on. But you 
may not finish the basement. You may not . . . you know you 
may compromise in some of the finishes in some of the rooms, 
hoping that later on when your ship comes in you’ll put in the 
oak panelling that you’re dreaming about. 
 
But you start with the best framework that you possibly can, 
and then you build on it incrementally. And the expertise of the 
people on the advisory committee will help us to do that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a few more 
questions, Madam Minister. I’d like to go into the cost and the 
funding a wee bit on the 911 system. I believe  and I hope 
this number is right  that you’ve been quoted as saying that 
it’s 11.3 million will be the cost of the basic 911 system. Is that 
right? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that’s not quite 
accurate. I wouldn’t want any of my comments on the 
economics of it to be misunderstood. We’ve estimated that 
SaskTel’s cost of putting into place the communications 
hardware and software will be, over the life of the project, $5.6 
million. We’ve alluded to an amount of $2.4 million that was 
set aside which has been partially used for developing the GIS, 
the geographic information system, which is the mapping. 
 
And then we have referred as a possible . . . well not a possible 
option, a possible option for the 911. But we have committed $3 
million to the enhancement for the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) fleet net radios which they’re upgrading too. 
And that would be useful in the event that the RCMP is seen to 
be one of the answering points as the framework evolves. 
 
Then of course the other costs . . . and there are other costs. It’s 
not cheap, and it’s not free. And you can see by the analysis in 
the cities where they already have a fully enhanced system that 
there is a substantial municipal cost in developing their own 
local software, their own mapping system, and in manning 
those response centres with qualified people 24 hours a day. 
 
So I wouldn’t have a figure for, you know, really an aggregate 
of what the whole thing would cost if we had fully enhanced 
from border to border. And that’s why it needs to be 
incremental, so we can work our way through it. But those are 
the costs, the upfront costs that we’ve identified as a 
government and as a Crown corporation service provider to this 
point. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like 
to touch on, then go on one step further. And I think you maybe 
possibly just answered this. But municipalities, now your 
expectations of what they are expected to fund or what portion 
of this you would hope that they would pick up, did I 
understand you right that you’re saying that only out in the 
areas is the part that the municipalities would pick up? The 
basic set-up would be set up by the funds you have explained 
already, originally. 
 
Now are you expecting the municipalities themselves to pick up 
100 per cent of whatever it costs out in their own areas? Is that 
what you were saying? 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

(1600) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, not exactly. 
What I mean to say is that we are not, as a province . . . I 
haven’t made any promises and are not obligated to pick up the 
costs for organizing locally. And there’s no suggestion that 
there will ever be any kind of an involuntary levy. 
 
For example, in the Swift Current . . . in the south-west area 
where a number of municipalities . . . I don’t remember how 
many; I think it’s 80-some. Yes, about 80 municipalities, rural 
and urban, forming a fairly large geographic area have gone 
together cooperatively. And they have agreed to levy 
themselves or their subscribers a certain amount on each phone 
bill. And I think votes were conducted, and the potential 
subscribers to this new service agreed with this. They wanted it. 
 
But there’s no suggestion that there will be anything mandatory. 
And it’s our vision that this system will evolve on a voluntary 
basis at the local level as different communities in parts of the 
province reach appropriate levels of readiness. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And you 
talked about the Swift Current model, and we’ve looked at that 
too. And I think those people are to be commended. They not 
only, I believe, levy an amount on the phone bill, but they’ve 
also gone out and they raised a lot of money. They didn’t use 
taxpayers’ money, but they actually went out, and organizations 
raised money. So I feel that area is really to be commended, and 
they’ve ended up with a very good program out there. 
 
I think the only thing I was trying to get a feel for, and I guess 
maybe it’s a hard question for you to answer, but I know 
municipalities, most that I’ve talked to, are very interested in 
this. But I think they would like to get a better feel about what it 
would cost them or what is expected of them. So I think that’s 
what we’re asking here. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think that as the 
advisory committee is established and as the . . . and of course 
we did rely heavily on the advice of an advisory committee of 
current users and stakeholders in the development of this 
legislation. It certainly didn’t come out of a vacuum. And once 
it’s passed and we re-establish the two advisory committees 
again, then they will be able to give advice and they will be able 
to clarify, looking at the examples that are already in place for 
municipalities who are interested, what the procedure might be, 
and give them some assistance in developing the system that 
would be the most practical and appropriate for their situation. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I just have a couple of quick 
questions. Just to summarize, am I to understand that . . . again 
thank you for taking the time, and welcome to your officials. 
But am I to understand that if there was an emergency, say a 
house fire in Ile-a-la-Crosse, that if some young child were to 
pick up the telephone and dial 911, that he would be 
automatically connected to a central answering service, and this 
central answering service would have the data information or 
the data bank to determine which people to call, which numbers 
to call, and therefore this would really help in terms of getting a  

quick response? Is that a fair assessment of what’s being 
proposed here? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, what the member 
describes is an accurate reflection of what it would do and there 
would be a response then at any time that there is someone 
available. If they have 24-hour service at the ambulance, the fire 
department, and they would have . . . they would be responsible 
 those communities, those municipalities  for organizing 
who would be responsible for the response and how it would be 
coordinated. 
 
And in the North, some communities that have land lines 
already, like La Ronge, Pinehouse, Ile-a-la-Crosse, they can be 
served in the same way that southern communities can right 
now. Then there are Uranium City, Fond-du-Lac, Black Lake, 
Stony Rapids, and others that use satellite or operate radio 
systems, like Key Lake or Collins Bay. That will require some 
further study as to how exactly they would fit into the system. 
But those communities that are served with land lines would be 
equivalent to the systems in the South right now. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And that’s just exactly my . . . 
you know, kind of leads to the next point. When you look at all 
the exploration that’s happening in northern Saskatchewan, and 
some of the industry involved with forestry and natural gas, and 
the tourism possibilities that you’ll see a lot of people in 
different areas that are out in the middle of nowhere that would 
want to have some kind of access to some kind of emergency 
support, so I’m certainly pleased to see that you are making an 
effort to address these deficiencies. 
 
And the second part of the question, I guess, is there any dollars 
that you’ve set aside to try and get some of these northern 
communities who really lack a lot of infrastructure, to try and 
upgrade some of their system in terms of some of the 
emergency response teams that are needed to be in place to 
make sure that this 911 system is indeed effective and that they 
are able to respond to an emergency? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 
the member opposite for his question and comments. I’d like to 
point out that SaskTel has in very recent years, within the last 
five years, spent over $30 million in northern Saskatchewan to 
bring the individual line service to as many communities as 
possible. And I submit that’s probably an expenditure  an 
investment, I would say  that would not have been made by a 
company that was motivated strictly by the bottom line. So 
certainly we have those objectives. 
 
I’m glad to hear the member’s observations about all the 
economic activity that’s happening in the North in terms of 
forestry and tourism and mining and all the activity that’s there 
that creates the requirement for a good modern 
telecommunications system and emergency response system. 
 
And I want to assure the member that there is work going on 
right now. It’s expected that these technicalities will be worked 
out within the limit, if not before, of the five-year time frame 
that we’re talking about to develop the whole system. So the 
system is designed to be inclusive of the North. 
  



2434  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

But as the member knows, the technology is changing so 
quickly. For instance, now with the satellite mobility, it’s still 
quite expensive on an individual basis for the receiver and so 
on, but this is probably a wave of the future for the North 
where, as the technology gets better developed and as there are 
more subscribers, that the price will come down. So the 
possibilities for the North are really very exciting and we look 
forward to being part of those developments. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. And I’ll just take the 
quick time here to thank you for your time. 
 
Just a final point in essence that we are aware of the tremendous 
risks involved in northern Saskatchewan, being isolated and 
certainly a long ways from help. And I would just encourage 
you, Madam Minister, to look at the situation when we look on 
this coverage, is to really do a thorough assessment of some of 
the emergency response teams that you have in the fire 
department or health care. Because there are many communities 
that have a lot of deficiencies, and that a 911 system would not 
be of much value if you haven’t got a response team. So it’s 
really a two-way street in northern Saskatchewan. So I thank 
you once again. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to move 
an amendment to: 
 

Amend clause 2 of the Printed Bill by deleting clause (i) as 
being enacted therein and substituting the following: 
 
“(i) ‘public safety answering point’ means a telephone 
answering point that receives emergency 911 telephone 
calls and provides an enhanced emergency response 
service that co-ordinates fire, police and/or ambulance 
emergency calls with responses at the call centre by 
qualified professional personnel who will activate and 
direct the emergency response teams while maintaining 
on-line contact and counseling with the emergency caller 
to the conclusion of the emergency;”. 
 

Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to: 
 

Amend clause 8 of the Printed Bill by deleting subsection 
(5) as being enacted therein and substituting the following: 
 
“(5) The minister shall establish an advisory committee, 
which will include representatives from any organization 
or government requested to participate pursuant to 
subsection (2), to advise and recommend on the  

development, implementation and operation of the Sask 
911 system.”. 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have, 
as indicated in the exchange earlier, we have considered the 
merits of the amendment that the members, the official 
opposition, has put forward. And while we don’t believe that it 
adds a great deal because we have already taken some steps to 
make sure that the two advisory committees are in place, but on 
the other hand, we certainly don’t object, and it reflects our 
intent. So we would be prepared to support this particular 
amendment to clause 8 that the official opposition has put 
forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1615) 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Chairman, as I indicated in our 
discussion earlier on that there are two other places where we 
would like to have the public safety answering point defined as 
we propose. 
 
However in the interest in time, and facing the practical realities 
of what the response is going to be, I would just like to state for 
the record that we do object to the definition of the public safety 
answering point as defined in the legislation, and let that stand 
on the record. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 and 15 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, 
Implementation and Operating of an Emergency 

911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move that the Bill, Bill No. 43, be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce her officials 
first. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 
is Janice Stamatinos and Marilyn Turanich who serve the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. And should I introduce 
everyone at this point? 
 
On my right is Bill Reader, the deputy minister. Behind Mr. 
Reader is Ron Davis, assistant deputy minister. Behind me is 
Ron Styles, assistant deputy minister for housing. Larry 
Chaykowski is sitting on my left and one back. He is the 
director of finance and administration. And behind Larry is Ken 
Alecxe, who is the associate deputy minister of culture and 
recreation. I think that’s got everybody. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister and her officials. Just a couple of questions in 
reference to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. In northern 
Saskatchewan the mandate of the board, it says the board 
approves municipal capital debt financing and local 
improvement initiatives. 
 
Just a quick guestimate as to what have been some of the 
projects or some of the loans that northern Saskatchewan 
communities have applied to the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board for and what have their amounts been. Is it a significant 
amount and how does that process work? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we wouldn’t have that 
sort of detail here today. The Saskatchewan Municipal Board 
operates in a somewhat autonomous, arm’s length fashion and 
the provincial government sets the mandate. And then 
individual municipalities will refer matters like debentures, 
long-term loans, that sort of issue that comes before them in 
organizing their financial affairs and doing their long-range 
planning, building infrastructure and so forth . . . they will deal 
with the Municipal Board on an individual basis, municipality 
by municipality. And so what we would see in the annual 
report, for instance, would be an aggregate of those but not 
individual cases. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So I guess, quickly to understand, and correct 
me if I’m wrong, suppose a small northern village wanted to 
borrow $100,000 for the construction of an outdoor rink, that 
they would then go through the appropriate motions locally and 
then they would advise the Municipal Board that they wished to 
do so, and the Municipal Board themselves can determine 
whether they’re able to pay this money back, based on not only 
the income that they have but certainly their tax collections and 
also their ability to pay. Is that the correct assumption? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, yes, that’s more or less 
correct. As a reeve of a local government myself, we had not a 
lot of relationship with the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, but 
on a couple of major, long-term projects, like the building of a 
new office building, for example, where the financing was 
spread over 10 years and perhaps some larger capital 
acquisitions for road construction and so forth. We would 
submit those for approval to the Municipal Board, and they 
would look at those factors that you describe to approve or not 
approve. 
 
There is one thing I could add to the answer I gave before is 
that when the annual report of the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board was tabled here in the legislature fairly recently, during 
this session, there is a schedule appended as part of the annual 
report which will give you, I believe, the detail for the sizes of 
the projects and the communities that had made application. 
That’s contained in that report so that would be a source of 
information for you if you wanted details on certain, individual 
projects. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Have you got just basically a rate in terms of 
how many applications or how many grants or how many times 
that northern municipal governments, excluding Lac La Ronge 
and Creighton, may have come to the Municipal Board and 
requested financing of a long-term project? Which were 
approved, and which ones were not approved, and the basis of 
the non-approval projects as well, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
total, whether it’s . . . but it’s broken down into different 
categories, for example, loans and debentures. There are totals 
for separate categories, so we wouldn’t have a total for the 
North per se, but there would be just in the hundreds of 
applications from the whole province in an average year. And 
I’m told that the average number of applications originating 
from the North on an annual basis wouldn’t be more than about 
five. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Am I to also assume correctly that these 
projects are simply for capital construction projects, that these 
aren’t meant for any social development projects nor for 
economic development ideas? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
correct. And obviously in his experience as a mayor of one of 
the major northern communities, he would know that this 
process is designed to apply only to capital projects. There’s 
quite a range there. Like it would include such things . . . there 
would be infrastructure, different kinds of infrastructure, 
different kinds of equipment  could be buildings, could be 
equipment, could be community facilities like recreation 
facilities, that sort of thing. So there is a fairly wide range of 
infrastructure projects. 
 
But the short answer is it is limited to capital, dollars that are 
used for capital of various kinds, not operating. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  And my final question, in reference to the  
  



2436  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Municipal Board, is in essence the issue about the board of 
examiners. Is that part of their responsibility to determine the 
classification of different administrators in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no, the answer to the 
question is that these are different people. The people who hear 
assessment appeals, for example, or review applications for 
capital financing requirements would be different than the 
people that form the board of examiners for qualifications for 
administrators which, I think, is the question. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I apologize 
for directing that question to you. I just want to jump into the 
housing a bit here, and contrary to popular belief, I haven’t got 
that many questions on housing for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I just noticed an article here in reference to . . . a local article in 
reference to FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) 
signing a housing deal between the Indian Affairs minister, Ron 
Irwin, and Diane Marleau, who’s the minister responsible for 
CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation), and it 
says that they are looking at a national on-reserve housing plan 
worth more than $2.4 billion. 
 
And I was just wondering, have you had much negotiations 
with FSIN on this type of initiative in terms of meeting or 
suggesting that perhaps on the Metis . . . or many of the 
northern communities and other communities throughout 
Saskatchewan that a similar effort should be made to try and 
address the severe chronic shortage of affordable, low-income 
housing for people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
question as to whether we’ve had negotiations with the federal 
government on the FSIN with reference to the newspaper article 
of today, the member will know that this is an on-reserve 
project, and that housing on-reserve is 100 per cent a federal 
responsibility and always has been. That’s been the tradition. So 
the short answer of whether we’ve had negotiations on that 
particular initiative is no. As a province, we wouldn’t have a 
responsibility. We wouldn’t be invited to the table, and we’ve 
not taken part in that. 
 
With respect to the balance of your question about the needs for 
housing in the North and the role of the Metis, we have done 
the best we can in the face of the abdication by the federal 
government. They’re basically vacating their role since 1993 in 
any kind of social housing except for some . . . one short-term 
initiatives. 
 
We have done the best we can to develop some projects that 
will meet needs in the North, and that some of them have been 
in federal-provincial sharing programs that are being phased out 
now or are extended on an ad hoc basis which makes it very 
difficult to plan. Like even now on the extension of the RAP 
(regional assistance program) and the ERP (emergency repair 
program) and the remote housing initiative, they’re telling us 
that it’s for one year. So we’re trying to maximize whatever 
sharing there can be or any development that we can do within 
that one-year time frame. 

But when they do it on a . . . and when the federal government 
is in and out of it on an ad hoc basis, it makes it very difficult 
for us to plan ahead. And we certainly can’t afford to back-fill 
the money that the federal government has taken out. 
 
But the member opposite will be aware of some of the very 
interesting remote housing projects that fell under that category 
and got some federal assistance last year where we went . . . 
There was Cumberland and La Loche, where there were some 
self-built houses, and these were just excellent examples of the 
people in the community and the municipality itself working 
together. 
 
Where in some cases the municipality, for instance, supplied the 
service land, the people who were going to be the future owners 
of the new homes helped each other. In Cumberland there were 
11. I think in La Loche there were four, four or five. And the 
families worked together, provided the sweat equity, and so it 
was . . . And the province and the federal government both 
contributed capital. So it was a very cooperative effort, and the 
results were really fine, high quality dwellings. And we will 
continue to do whatever we can to meet the housing needs that 
we know are acute in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
position I take on this whole matter is that while I’m certainly 
happy, I guess, that there is some effort being made to repair 
some of the existing housing stock in northern Saskatchewan, 
and certainly also pleased to see some of the self-build 
programs that you spoke about . . . have been put in place for 
Cumberland House and La Loche, I also know, as well as 
probably most of the officials, that there is still a chronic 
shortage of housing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
By your guestimates, are you able to indicate to me today the 
exact number of units that you may be short of when it comes to 
northern Saskatchewan communities? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we recognize that there 
is a need in the North. In addition to what I mentioned before 
about some of the housing that’s been built in a cooperative 
way, there is an extensive repair program. 
 
We have also adopted in recent years of moving some of our 
Sask Housing rental units from southern communities where 
there are vacancies, chronic vacancies, and we moved a number 
of homes into the North, recently up to La Loche. It seemed to 
be more . . . well it’s been proven to be more economical to 
move an existing house than it is to build a new one. So if the 
house is in good shape and is vacant somewhere else, we’ve 
been doing that. 
 
I’m not sure how many . . . Yes, the moving program is not 
really extensive yet, but we have moved about 80 units. And in 
response to the other question about the need, the waiting list in 
the North for the existing Sask Housing units is about 600. 
That’s across all the communities in the North, so that is 
substantial, and we will continue to work to try and develop 
plans to meet those needs. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

And I must also commend your department officials for coming 
up with the amount of 600. And that certainly coincides with 
some of our studies and some of our findings as well in talking 
with various northern mayors and some local housing 
authorities. 
 
I guess the tough part of this situation with the shortage of 
housing, it has a drastic social cost to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, and more so the children and some of the 
families. What we’re seeing is the overcrowding is certainly 
causing a great amount of health concern. The overcrowding is 
certainly causing a great amount of grief for many families and 
for many people. 
 
And time and time again in recognizing some of the limitations 
that governments have, we find that the response from 
provincial departments is that your federal cousins and . . . had 
the federal government not cut back on housing, we would not 
be in this particular situation. And that really doesn’t do a 
whole heck of lot for the people that are in drastic need of 
housing. La Loche is one good example of how the housing 
situation has just really negatively impacted not only the 
attitude of people but actually the challenge of raising a family 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you somehow commit to us today, Madam Minister, that 
you will undertake as minister responsible for housing in 
northern Saskatchewan some long-term plan to not only address 
the current needs, so they can address these moral issues that I 
think that we have to really get a handle on as government to try 
and come up with some process, some plan, some hope to try 
and give these people that need housing in northern 
Saskatchewan so that we can finally address this shortage of 
housing in many communities in the North? 
 
And the second part of the equation of that is to also look at the 
situation of some of the working families where people do 
occupy housing. As you’re probably aware, the banks don’t 
deal in northern Saskatchewan. The banks don’t look at 
northern Saskatchewan as a safe housing market. And on the 
few occasions when I actually did apply for a mortgage, the 
banks indicated to me that you would have to have at least 50 
per cent down of the value of the mortgage. And even then you 
must be making a fair bit of change for the banks to look at 
dealing in northern Saskatchewan communities. 
 
So I know that the banking industry really doesn’t want to go 
into northern Saskatchewan. There’s obviously something that 
we could also do in that regard as government. 
 
And the third part of the problem is with accommodation . . . 
I’m sorry, with renovations to existing housing stock, 
particularly for the elders. There are some elders in many 
northern communities that are living in housing that you and I 
wouldn’t live in. It’s a shame to see that type of effort. And I’m 
certainly not trying to condemn the staff of Sask Housing. I 
think they’re doing an admirable job in light of the fact that 
they’ve had limited income. 
 
So I would encourage you through your own sources as 
minister to strongly lobby and to strongly persist in coming up  

with solutions to these three particular problems. 
 
And what you could do to even begin the process of 
understanding more completely some of the dynamics facing 
the housing problems in northern Saskatchewan is to consult at 
local housing authorities on more of a regular basis and giving 
them more control and more flexibility and more authority. 
 
So in making that statement, Madam Minister, I would offer to 
you that we should propose a steady system of consultation 
with the mayors, consultation with the local housing authorities, 
and perhaps even a joint effort of travelling to Ottawa to try to 
impress the government and try to get the government to 
support some of the Saskatchewan initiatives. I feel that if the 
Saskatchewan government takes the initiative to address these 
problems in housing that indeed we could come up with a 
Saskatchewan way and a Saskatchewan solution. 
 
So in reference to these points, I was just wondering if I can get 
some of your responses to them. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first of all, with respect 
to the references the member makes especially to seniors living 
in substandard housing, if it is Sask Housing, if it is one of our 
rental units, and if he is aware of a unit that needs repairs or is 
substandard, then he should let us know immediately because 
we have spent . . . There is an extension of the RAP program. 
We have targeted I believe  I don’t have the numbers here  
but I believe it was about 40 per cent of the available money 
that is in the RAP program to the North. So that is a 
disproportionate share really, in terms of the number of people 
and the number of houses there, in recognition of that need 
because we know that houses do deteriorate more quickly in 
that environment. So we would invite you, if there is any 
substandard Sask Housing rental units that are existing, then 
please do make us aware of them. 
 
Usually we are made aware because, as you know, one of the 
things that we have done there is we have devolved 
responsibility for the maintenance of the housing portfolio in 
the North to the local housing authorities. We’ve given them 
. . . they’ve taken that responsibility, and they’ve done it very 
well. So that’s an improvement too, I think. 
 
And we recognize that the situation is entirely different in the 
North. And believe me; we are meeting. We are working on 
trying to develop, you know, a policy framework for the North. 
Even if you don’t have a lot of money to throw at it, it’s 
certainly timely to try to plan for what you’d do if you had the 
resources  you know, what is the right thing to do and what 
are the priorities. 
 
(1645) 
 
And one of the priorities is that there are, because of the 
economic development in mining, in forestry, in tourism, in all 
of the areas that the member from Athabasca mentioned earlier, 
there is activity. And there are a number of people, families, and 
single people living in social housing units that actually could 
afford to build their own. And if we could create the 
atmosphere where there was a real housing market there . . . 
  



2438  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

And I understand what the member from Athabasca says 
because in order to have a housing market, you not only need to 
have a need for housing. You’ve got to have buyers. You’ve got 
to have sellers. You’ve got to have a way to provide 
infrastructure and service the land. You’ve got to have banks. 
You’ve got to have suppliers of building material. You’ve got 
to have access to insurance, and all of those things that 
constitute the elements of a housing market. 
 
And if we could do something to create that kind of 
environment, where people who can afford to move out of 
rental housing and build their own, would then provide 
vacancies for some of those people, those 600 families that we 
talked about, that are on the waiting-lists. 
 
So we certainly do recognize the importance of housing. We 
recognize that decent housing is a factor in health, in the general 
well-being, and that for every dollar that you don’t spend on 
housing there are costs in social services and health and the 
justice system, and all of the other stresses that living in 
substandard and crowded conditions, such as family violence 
and alcoholism and all of those issues . . . we know and 
recognize that housing is a factor in all of those situations. 
 
And certainly we heard it loud and clear when we established 
the Municipal Round Table and had our first meeting in La 
Ronge, about the end of January, I guess it was. And the 
northern leaders had done some very positive and good 
preparatory work for that meeting and left us with papers and 
presented their briefs. And certainly housing and all of the 
issues that we’re exchanging some views on at this moment 
were very high on their agenda, and we will work hard to try 
and meet some of those needs. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I certainly 
appreciate again the effort that you’re taking and certainly your 
department, in reference to the housing situation in northern 
Saskatchewan. And as we all know, I’ll certainly never be 
happy as an MLA unless we have those housing needs met. 
 
And specifically, I will look at . . . again going back to some of 
these senior citizens in northern Saskatchewan. And I can’t 
today provide you with a list of the people that may need 
renovations to their homes. And many of these are elders. 
 
And taking an example . . . I do have a few examples for you 
today. One of them in particular is Patel Morin, who is a Metis 
veteran from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And Mr. Morin of course lives on 
a very limited income from, I think it’s his pension. And he 
says he barely makes . . . and I quote: 
 

I barely make ends meet with my old age pension. The 
bills I have every month are power bill, water bill, phone 
bill, cable bill, loan payments (for renovations that he had 
from 10 years ago), a truck payment. 
 

He also has some grandchildren that he looks after as well. And 
what he wants to do, and I quote: 
 

. . . is remove the siding, add a 2-inch wall, insulate it with 
styrofoam insulation, put new siding to make my house a  

lot warmer. That will lower my heating costs. And the 
approximate cost of materials is 5,000 plus some for 
labour. 
 

I guess what he’s asking here is there any way that we, as a 
Saskatchewan community, can help out veterans to try and 
make their homes warmer, to reduce their costs for heating 
these homes, because they live on a limited, fixed income. 
 
And this is the exact point, Madam Minister, that many people 
like Mr. Morin are trying to make. When you have elders living 
in a region that has severe housing shortages, what happens in 
essence is many of the grandchildren and the children live with 
their grandparents and this result creates a tremendous strain on 
many older people. And this is the reason why we’re making 
such an awful case about this fact that many elders live in poor 
housing conditions. 
 
So we must make an effort to try and address that particular 
group, because this group many times can’t afford to build their 
own, they can’t afford to repair some of their existing units. 
And this is where the crux of the problem is. 
 
I can, Madam Minister, if you wish, I could get a list of all the 
people in northern Saskatchewan that have required some 
renovations to their homes and I can get that list from you and 
the applications from the Provincial Metis Housing 
Corporation. I know they have a whole pile of applications from 
a whole pile of people, and I sincerely commend your 
department for keeping their units somewhat in decent shape. 
 
But really the big area that we’re having a constant problem is 
the fact that we’ve got to get this northern housing system under 
control when it comes to senior citizens. These people have 
built our communities. Mr. Morin is one of maybe 50 or 60 in 
each community that really want some support from 
government. 
 
They’re not asking for $50,000, they’re not asking for freebies, 
they’re asking for some kind of assistance to help them get their 
house in decent condition. So that makes the point that senior 
citizens should be the heart and soul of any policy that we make 
when it comes to northern communities because they’re the 
ones that are doing actually 90 per cent of the building for the 
future. 
 
So I would encourage you, Madam Minister, to come up with a 
very aggressive and very innovative approach to fixing seniors’ 
housing in northern Saskatchewan so they can live in their 
golden years in peace and certainly in decent facilities. That’s 
the very least that we owe these people. 
 
And secondly, Madam Minister, again when I mentioned 
bringing that list of the RAP applications for northern 
Saskatchewan . . . and these are people that can’t afford to fix 
their homes. They would if they could, but they simply can’t 
because the social and economic climate in northern 
Saskatchewan isn’t to a point where we’re able to go out and 
borrow and create an economy. Housing, of course, is the 
biggest area that really hurts. 
 
  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

So can I get your comments on the fact that the RAP 
applications are quite significant and what do you plan to do if 
we’re able to prove the need is there, especially for seniors? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, actually as the member 
opposite may know, the federal government had given an 
indication last year that RAP would be wound down at the end 
of March 1996 and that it would not be continued. And in fact 
we were organizing internally to reduce some positions, in fact 
lay some people off, because if there was going to be not that 
program to administer or to monitor then there were some 
people that we wouldn’t need. 
 
Then very suddenly without any notice, I believe it was in 
December, the federal government held a press conference and 
said, well for a one-year time period, just on an ad hoc basis, 
this program is going to be extended. So there was some 
funding that became available. And this is shared funding; we 
have to contribute a portion and it’s pretty well been allocated. I 
think letters are in the process now of going out to people who 
will not be able to receive funding because there just wasn’t 
enough money to satisfy the needs of all the applicants. 
 
So we still have the emergency repair program. We have for 
this year, the RAP, and some people will be able to access that. 
And then we have our own program, the home modification 
program, which is meant to allow, primarily, to allow 
handicapped or senior people to stay in their homes longer by 
perhaps putting in ramps, wheelchair ramps, lowering towel 
bars, you know, modifying houses for handicaps or seniors. 
 
So there are those programs, and we certainly . . . we recognize 
the need and we will do whatever we can to keep in place 
programs that will give those people a hand up. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess some of the responses I wish to 
make, Madam Minister, in reference to the situation, is that we 
must be persistent in terms of recognizing these particular 
needs. And I go back to the earlier statements I made in this 
House in essence of the fact that in northern Saskatchewan the 
entire population of the North only consists of 3 per cent of the 
provincial population, yet we occupy half the land mass of the 
province. And my perspective on that is that there’s got to be 
some ways and means that we can find the revenues — or 
we’ve got to find the money — to address this situation. And I 
urge your department and your officials to find ways and means 
in which we can, for the final time, offer some kind of support 
and assistance to people that need their houses fixed. 
 
There are some people out there that work for a living, and they 
can’t apply for social housing. So as a result the high costs of 
having a family and building their own home and doing all of 
that, they feel that they’re being penalized. The housing system 
in northern Saskatchewan does penalize the working people, so 
we got to address that particular situation. 
 
And some of the innovative ideas that come out of some of the 
northern leaders in their efforts to try and resolve the issues, 
they have very limited funds. They can’t do very much. So most 
of that responsibility lies with senior governments. 
 

So in some way, shape or form, Madam Minister, I would 
encourage you to today announce that you will undertake a very 
serious effort at trying to address, not only the shortage of 
housing for northern Saskatchewan, but really the poor housing 
stock in terms of fixing up some of the houses, and particularly 
the senior citizens of northern Saskatchewan, and finally some 
ways and means to encourage working people to start looking at 
buying a home or even building their own home by establishing 
a market for houses to determine the actual value of a house in 
Deschambault Lake or an actual value of a house in Stony 
Rapids or the actual value of a house in Beauval. 
 
It’s certainly different in northern Saskatchewan. A house in 
Beauval is not worth the same house in Saskatoon. So there are 
significant differences. So if I can get your response to some of 
these points I’m making. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the North is not unlike 
the contrast, I guess, between rural and urban Saskatchewan as 
well, where as the demographics are changing, that the very 
same house built in a district in Regina has a different market 
value than that same house built on a farm that’s 75 miles away 
and 4 or 5 miles away from the nearest neighbour. 
 
So the North, while it has some unique . . . it certainly has, and 
we recognize the unique needs and some of the unique features, 
they’re not entirely alone in their situation, because there are 
contrasts as well in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just say that we know that it costs more to build a house in 
the North. A very modest bungalow, exclusive of land price, 
will cost $70,000 on average  I’m sure the member knows  
in the North. Because of the distances involved in bringing 
materials and the other services that are absent in the North, it 
just costs more. 
 
And of course the utilities, because of the weather, there is a 
deterioration factor. And because of the shortage of choices of 
fuel, fuel costs are very high. So we recognize all the features 
and all the deficits, if you like, in the housing portfolio in the 
North. And as I say, with or without the cooperation of the 
federal government, we would do the best we can. 
 
But I would urge the member opposite to keep reminding his 
colleagues in Ottawa that perhaps they should rethink their 
decision made in 1993 to abdicate the responsibility for social 
housing in Canada. They still have some limited ad hoc 
programs and some limited involvement for on-reserve housing. 
 
But as for the rest of the social housing needs in Canada, since 
1993 we’re very much left out to dry. And they have . . . and 
Paul Martin in his last budget has announced severe reductions 
to the role of Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation and 
perhaps the member opposite would have more clout than I in 
speaking to their federal counterparts about their responsibility. 
 
But as I say, in the absence of their cooperation we will do 
whatever we can to meet the needs that we understand and 
appreciate are there and need to be met. 
 
  



2440  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much, Madam Minister. For 
the past 10, 15 years, the senior citizens, the families that are in 
need of housing, and the working people of the North, have 
been asking themselves the question of why, if you’re aware of 
all these problems in terms of housing for northern 
Saskatchewan, why haven’t these issues been resolved? Why 
isn’t there innovation, why isn’t there excitement, why isn’t 
there new planning being done to meet the housing demands 
and housing problems of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
In the same token of suggesting that I have more clout than you 
when it comes to Ottawa, I can assure you that I know more 
people in Sask Housing than I do in the entire CMHC 
department. 
 
So in essence the message I have there is that it’s time for a 
Saskatchewan solution. And I can offer all the time you need to 
travel to Ottawa to lobby and to do my part as MLA for 
Athabasca. But sincerely, Madam Minister, I think it’s 
incumbent upon your department and specifically you as 
minister of Sask. Housing to come up with these solutions. 
 
Because we can’t let this thing fester any longer. The people of 
northern Saskatchewan are frustrated, they’re upset, they’re 
angry, and who wouldn’t be, looking at the living conditions 
that many of them are suffering from. 
 
So the offer I have to you is that I most certainly will do my 
share in terms of trying to convince people. And part of that 
situation is trying to have a deadlock resolved between the 
province and the federal government when it comes to housing 
responsibilities. You say it’s a federal responsibility and then 
they turn around and say, well it’s a provincial responsibility. 
 
So will somebody please stand up and take leadership on this 
matter, become a leader, become excited, become innovative, 
and become a government to try and come up with a long-term 
solution to these problems. 
 
I guess the point I’m trying to raise on this matter is that, can 
you assure me that within a specified time frame, and you can 
specify that this evening, that Saskatchewan itself will come up 
with a solution to some of these problems that I’ve addressed 
here today. 
 
The Chair:  It now being past 5 o’clock, the committee will 
recess until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murray ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2391, 2412 
  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2401 
  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2403 
  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2411 
  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2411 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2412 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2412 
  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2412 
  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2412 
  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2420 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2389 
  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2389, 2392 
  Goohsen ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2389, 2393 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2392 
  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2394 
 Bill No. 45  An act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a consequential amendment to The Provincial 

Mediation Board Act 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2394 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2394 
  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2396 
 Bill No. 86  An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2396 
  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2396, 2399 
  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 
 Bill No. 118  An Act to amend The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 
 Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 1995 / Loi modifiant La Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2402 
  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2402 
 Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2406 
  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2406 
 Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 
  Gantefoer ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2428, 2434 
  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2432, 2434 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2433 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a consequential amendment to The Provincial 

Mediation Board Act 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Bill No. 86  An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Bill No. 118  An Act to amend The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 1995 / Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operating of an Emergency 911 System and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2434 
 



 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2411 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2411 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2411 
  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2411 
  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2411 
  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2411 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2411 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Grain Handling Facility for Canora 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2412 
 Meewasin Valley Authority Wins National Award 
  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2413 
 Tribute to Marilyn Armitage 
  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2413 
 Indian Business Program Graduation Ceremony 
  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2413 
 Chief Poundmaker Historical Centre Opens 
  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2413 
 Beechy Primary Health Project 
  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2414 
 Torch Run Week 
  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2414 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Political Donations 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2414 
  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2415 
 Highway Maintenance 
  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2416 
  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2416 
 McDowell Report 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2416 
  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2416 
 Crown Corporations Review 
  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2417 
  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2417 
 Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital Funding 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2418 
  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2418 
 Health Information Computer Network 
  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2419 
  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2419 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 17  Political Donations 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2419 
  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2422 
  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 Motion No. 1  Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 
  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 
 Motion No. 3  Wildlife Damage Compensation 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 
  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Saskatchewan Municipal Board  Vote 22 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 


