













































April 25, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1145 

 April 25, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 

respect to closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the names on this petition appears from Regina; Meota, 

Saskatchewan; from Lestock; primarily from many small 

communities throughout Saskatchewan as well as the city of 

Regina. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

presenting petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition are from places of 

Indian Head, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and numerous ones from the 

city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Carnduff, Manor, Carlyle, Estevan, and from other 

communities throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Weyburn, Midale, Carlyle, Radville, Pangman, Yellow Grass, 

and Regina. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of concerned citizens about the impending closure of the  

Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from, 

primarily, from Rocanville, but also some from Regina and 

other small communities in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina; 

they’re from White City, Yellow Grass, Brownlee, Moose Jaw, 

and Carievale. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Manor, Arcola, Kisbey, and the vast majority of the remaining 

signatures are from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today to also present petitions on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan regarding saving the Plains Health 

Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are almost 

solely from the Weyburn area. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

pass legislation to protect the rights of firearms owners. 

 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for the Public Service 

Commission, with regards to the department of human 

resources: (1) could you provide for us a copy of PSC’s 

(Public Service Commission) internal organizational chart; 

(2) how many people does the Public Service Commission 

have employed in their human relations department; (3) 

which government agencies, departments or other groups 

responsible to the government have human resources 

departments; (4) what is the relationship between the 

Public Service Commission and the human resources 

offices for other government departments; and (5) what are 

the different functions and roles of each human resources 

department throughout government? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It is my privilege to inform you that two groups of special 

guests are seated in your gallery. And in a moment I will ask the 

members of the Assembly to introduce them individually. 

 

The first group are some of the members of the 90th 

Anniversary Council. These people are acting in a volunteer 

capacity, and provided advice for the observance of 

Saskatchewan 90th anniversary last year. The success of the 

anniversary is due in large part to their guidance. 

 

The co-chairs of the council were two well-known 

Saskatchewan citizens, Dr. John Archer and Sandra Peterson. 

 

I will now ask my colleagues in the Assembly to introduce them 

individually by name. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

today to welcome Dr. John Archer to the Assembly, both in this 

role and his role throughout the many years in dedicated service 

to this province. And I ask the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the member for the constituency of Watrous, I’d like to 

introduce a member of the 90th anniversary council from 

Forum 95, “a vision for Saskatchewan”, which was held in 

October of 1995 in Prince Albert. The person I want to 

introduce is from Allan, Saskatchewan  and if you’d stand 

up, please  Noreen Johns. Please welcome her to the 

Assembly. And I see, Noreen, that your son is also in the gallery 

today and a fine young individual who works in this building 

and you should be very proud of him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you and 

through you, one of the members of this committee, a  

gentleman who has worked very hard in the cooperative 

movement through the years, and probably needs no 

introduction to anyone who has been involved in the 

cooperative movement, but I would like to introduce Mr. Vern 

Pusch from Kipling. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. As part of this 

first group, I want to introduce someone whom I don’t know 

well, I know more by reputation than personally; it’s George 

Watson. Mr. Watson is a past president of Sask Sport. He is, I 

am told, a teacher who has worked in sport and with youth and 

done so very effectively over a long period of time, and I’d ask 

the members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. Watson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And while I’m on my feet, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce in the second group, some youth 

delegates from Forum 95, “looking towards 2005.” This 

gathering of 90 representatives of young people from across the 

province met in Prince Albert last October to discuss the future 

of Saskatchewan. They proposed a vision for Saskatchewan 

which will help us prepare for our centennial of the province in 

the year 2005. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask my colleagues in the Assembly to 

introduce these youth delegates by name. 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, April Dahnke of Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  And also to introduce to you, Christine 

Hildebrand, also of Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  When I looked at the name Hildebrand, I 

know as my life as a member of city council I ran across that 

name as a very active woman who serves in our community 

association, and also met a member of the Hildebrand family 

who’s very active in international development and 

cooperation. So I’m sure that Christine is carrying on this fine 

family tradition and the values of community in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure as well to introduce 

to you and through you to this Assembly, Michael Perras from 

Glenavon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 

the opportunity to introduce to you and through you to 

everybody here in the Assembly today, one Ryan Wood from  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

Caronport in my constituency. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, thank you again. I take great 

pleasure in introducing Amanda Strohan who is a constituent of 

mine. And I want to congratulate her and all other delegates 

who participated in this forum for their excellent work. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going 

to quickly bump back to the 90th Anniversary Advisory 

Council, and I have no way of confirming whether in fact my 

guest is in the gallery here, so I’ll ask merely, if he is, to stand, 

if not, to be recognized — Mr. John Huschi from the 

Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters who was also part. 

And I don’t see him standing so he’s not here today, but I’ll 

acknowledge him anyway. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce a constituent of mine today who’s seated in the west 

gallery. He’s a member of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation) provincial executive, and he’s attending in Regina 

for a meeting of the Canadian Association of Principals 

national conference. He’s a well-respected educator within our 

own area and certainly within the province. I’d like Joe Meehan 

to please stand, and please welcome Joe to the Assembly here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 18 grade 

6’s seated in the east gallery. These are from the Redvers 

School and their teacher is Diane Dubé, and their two 

chaperons are Debbie Rekken and Wendy Frecon. I would ask 

everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the whole Assembly, 22 grade 7 and 8 

students from Davin School, and their teacher Mrs. Wynn 

Edwards. They’re in the west gallery. They are here to watch 

the proceedings and then learn a little bit more about how the 

legislature works. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a popular day 

for our folks from Regina South to be joining us in the gallery, 

and I want to take this opportunity to introduce two young 

women who I believe are seated in your gallery, although I 

don’t see them offhand, Sarah Goddard and Stacey Hamer. 

 

Sarah’s father is chief of staff to the Minister of Labour, and as 

you would know, today is international 

bring-your-daughter-to-work day. And so I want to recognize  

Sarah and Stacey if you just stand and be recognized. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If other members have completed 

introductions, the Speaker would like to introduce to you 52 

grade 7 and 8 students from Sunningdale School in my 

constituency who are visiting us and are seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. 

 

These students are accompanied by their teachers, Shayne 

Hogeboom and Brent Bachiu, as well chaperons Mrs. Barry, 

Mr. Schwabe, Mr. Suprowich, and Mrs. Anderson. 

 

They’ll be with us until about 2 o’clock, at which time they’ll 

take a tour of the Assembly, of the building. And I look forward 

to, with the help of the Deputy Speaker, being able to meet with 

them for refreshments and photos later on. 

 

And I would ask all members of the Assembly to extend a warm 

welcome to these students from Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a couple of 

guests I would like to introduce to you. In your gallery is my 

aunt and uncle from Wadena, Ken and Vi Braaten. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  And in the east gallery is my son and a couple 

of the people I work with, in my business, from Watson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Melfort Mustangs Win Anavet Cup 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And today instead 

of the sports report from Humboldt, it’s the sports report from 

Melfort. 

 

What can I say? The Melfort Mustangs have done it again. Last 

night at the civic arena in St. James, Manitoba, the Melfort 

Mustangs defeated the St. James Canadians 5 to 1 to wrap up 

the series four games straight, bringing the Anavet Cup home to 

Melfort and to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  This secures the Mustangs a berth right 

through the front door to the Royal Bank Cup. And there’s even 

an opportunity now for the Yorkton Terriers who gives them 

also a shot at the cup. 

 

Game one begins in Melfort May 4 with the Mustangs facing 

none other than the Yorkton Terriers. We are 80 per cent sold 

out so get your tickets now. 

 

Please join me in congratulating the Melfort Mustangs once  



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

again and wish them a safe trip home today from Winnipeg. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Municipalities Share Services 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

once again have good news reflecting solid local leadership for 

Saskatchewan from my constituency. Three rural municipalities 

and a town are setting an excellent example of how to save 

money by sharing services. 

 

In the first case of cooperation, the RMs (rural municipalities) 

of Marriott and Pleasant Valley, the one I live in, will now 

operate out of the same building, and administrator Jim Reiter 

will act as administrator for both RMs. The RMs have agreed to 

try this out for a year to test its success. The RMs will remain 

separate while both being under one roof. 

 

One advantage of sharing services is that there are now two 

staff members in the building, allowing the office to be staffed 

all day. As a result of sharing the office this year, the RM of 

Pleasant Valley expects to save $15,000. With approximately 

300 municipalities in Saskatchewan, simple math tells you that 

if every RM found a similar economy through local creativity, 

this alone would save Saskatchewan taxpayers about $5 million. 

 

In the second instance, the RM of St. Andrews and the town of 

Rosetown are in joint discussions over the possibility of sharing 

administrative services. According to the Rosetown Eagle, they 

are negotiating an agreement that will see them under one roof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all of these municipalities. They 

have taken another initiative at reducing their costs at the local 

level and demonstrated for others that the sharing of services 

will benefit local communities and taxpayers. They deserve 

high marks for leadership. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Let the Sun Shine 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on a matter of utmost importance to myself, my caucus, 

and to all residents in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, since my 

good friend the member from Indian Head-Milestone was 

appointed Environment minister, I’ve noticed a constant 

deterioration in the weather. Soon after the minister’s 

appointment the temperature took an almost immediate dip to 

the point where I’m sure it was comparable to the surface of 

Pluto. And it really hasn’t improved since. 

 

I was willing to let this pass at first since the minister is new to 

his portfolio. But, Mr. Speaker, today was the last straw as our 

latest April showers again turned to April flurries. Mr. Speaker, 

we can’t let this go on. 

 

As one of my colleagues pointed out, we’ve only got eight  

more weeks until the days start getting shorter again. It’s time to 

park the ski-doos and pull out the golf clubs, if only the 

minister would let us. 

 

I beg and I implore the minister on behalf of all the sun 

worshippers out there in Saskatchewan and on behalf of all 

those who simply want to put their winter parkas in storage for 

a couple of weeks to begin to do his job and make the sun shine 

on our beautiful province again. And, Mr. Speaker, I have 

checked with the federal Minister of the Environment. This is 

indeed a provincial issue and cannot, I repeat cannot, be blamed 

on federal transfer payment cut-backs. Please, Mr. Minister, let 

the sun shine again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert Business Awards 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Prince Albert is a great place to do business, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s not just my opinion but also the 

opinion of Bob Casey, the Prince Albert businessperson who 

last night was given the special legacy award at the Samuel 

McLeod Business Awards ceremony. 

 

I was happy to attend this ceremony which presented a number 

of awards to local business people in a variety of categories. 

Seven patron businesses sponsored the awards, a coordinating 

committee of 11 business representatives planned it, and Craig 

Mitchell was an excellent chairperson. There were nine separate 

awards given with several notable nominees in each category  

more evidence that Prince Albert business is thriving indeed. 

 

Among the winners were Industrial Automated Systems, Inc.. 

with its 53 employees, which won the new business award and 

the new products award. The Prince Albert Credit Union was 

recognized for its community involvement, AODBT Architects 

Ltd. for exceptional performance in providing services, and 

Econo Lumber for capital investment in the community. The 

award for exceptional performance in marketing went to Mann 

Pontiac Buick. 

 

Ashley Cabinets and Windows won the job creation award and 

Leon’s Furniture was named Prince Albert Business of the 

Year. I want to congratulate each winner, the finalists, and each 

nominee, for the contribution they make to Prince Albert and to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Iconography Exhibition 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

inform members of this House of a unique art exhibit in my 

constituency. Starting on April 30 to the end of May, the Morris 

Art Gallery will be holding an exhibit on iconography. Despite 

its unusual name, the exhibit is about a subject quite familiar to 

many people in this province. 

 

It concerns the use of icons in religious art. For centuries,  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

people in many cultures and religions have used symbols to 

convey spiritual beliefs. This exhibition will try to bring some 

further understanding to this topic. The constituency of Thunder 

Creek encompasses communities that act as centres for many 

different faiths. In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate 

the Morris Art Gallery, and curator Marla Gerein, for their hard 

work and wish them success with this unique exhibit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Cooperation 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to hear that government members are finally 

acknowledging that cooperation can work at the municipal and 

local level. And as we’ve informed government members 

before, even my communities of Glenavon and the RM (rural 

municipality) of Chester have worked together, and other 

communities are beginning to work together. 

 

So I trust that the Minister of Municipal Government and the 

Premier were listening to the member for Biggar-Rosetown and 

that they will allow the process of local people . . . as I noted 

last night at the Scenic Valley School Division, where they are 

putting forth a proposal to try and address the cut-backs that 

have been forced on them by the province. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker. what this shows is that people in rural Saskatchewan 

can find means and ways of addressing problems that are placed 

upon them. We trust, though, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t have 

to do all the work, that they will indeed receive their fair share 

of the tax dollar of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Book Day 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, today is Canada Book 

Day, a day during which the Canadian book industry, the 

writers’ development trust, and Canadian authors promote their 

product. There is no government involvement of any kind in 

this promotion, but I think we in this Assembly can give a small 

boost to an industry that is economically important and 

intellectually crucial to our nation. That books are fundamental 

to a civilized society is self-evident. That Canadian books are 

vital to our national identity is undeniable. 

 

That books are an important part of our economy is not so 

well-known perhaps. In 1993-94, for instance, Canadian 

publishers reported total revenues of $1.7 billion, provided 

6,862 full-time jobs, and paid salaries, benefits, and fees of 

$278 million. The government spent a further $1.9 billion on 

libraries. 

 

Let me backtrack just a bit, Mr. Speaker. I said there is no 

government involvement in Canada Book Day. In 

Saskatchewan there is certainly no involvement because, unlike 

the federal Liberal government, we collect no provincial sales 

tax on books as they collect the GST (goods and services tax). 

 

I remember with pleasure removing the Tory tax on books in  

December of 1991. Goodbye, harmonization. We removed the 

tax on all books, Mr. Speaker  fiction, non-fiction, Canadian, 

non-Canadian. We even removed the tax on those pop-up 

colouring books the opposition is so fond of. 

 

On this day, do yourself a favour  buy a tax-free 

Saskatchewan book. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Edition of Saskatchewan Food Industry Directory 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many livelihoods 

depend on access and availability of information. This is 

especially true for our farmers and people involved in the 

agriculture and food industry. The information age is no 

stranger to the Saskatchewan food industry. 

 

In March the 1996 Saskatchewan food industry directory was 

released after being published by the Saskatchewan Food 

Processors Association. This directory includes 

cross-referencing by company and products, and the summary 

of each company includes address, contact name, telephone and 

fax number, products, number of employees, and export status. 

 

It includes all food processors in the province and you don’t 

have to worry about the demand for this publication. Two 

editions of last year’s directory were sold out and copies were 

taken around the world. It is useful in promoting these 

companies in the market-place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1996 Saskatchewan food industry directory 

sells for $10 including the GST, unless the federal Liberals 

change their mind about taxing this kind of useful information. 

 

Congratulations to the Saskatchewan Food Processors 

Association for keeping us up to date on this important 

industry. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Providence Place Funding 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are to 

the Acting Minister of Health. Yesterday I visited the geriatric 

unit at Providence Place in Moose Jaw. The occasion, however, 

was not a happy one. Thanks to cuts from this government, 

patients and care-givers now fear that they will lose this unit. In 

a November ’92 agreement signed by the Minister of Health, it 

states and I quote: 

 

It is intended that Providence Place will offer a range of 

programing to include geriatric assessment and 

rehabilitation. 

 

It goes on to say that any intention to withdraw from this 

agreement requires a minimum three years’ written notice. Last 

fall this government gave the district just one month’s notice 

before ending funding for the geriatric unit, far short of the  



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

required three years. 

 

Will the minister honour this agreement or is a contract signed 

by this government worth nothing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as a resident of the city of 

Regina, the member from Thunder Creek may be forgiven if 

he’s not understood the history of a project in Moose Jaw. I 

would remind him then of the actual history of this project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project was promised by the Tory 

government. Promised  we had news releases in Moose Jaw 

— but of course there wasn’t a thin dime, not one thin dime in 

any budget, to back that promise up. When we came to office, 

Mr. Speaker, in the most desperate of circumstances financially 

in this province, we began to move to complete that project in 

the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, as I stand in this House, over $20 million 

of taxpayers’ money has been provided to provide the facility in 

Moose Jaw, the largest health capital project in the province 

over the last number of years. Mr. Speaker, this government and 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have provided ongoing funding, 

transitional funding, to establish the geriatric assessment unit. 

 

It was made very clear, Mr. Speaker, as early as 1994, that the 

ongoing funding would be coming through the needs-based 

support of the funding pool. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to make members 

of the Assembly aware of a resolution from Moose Jaw City 

Council. Seeing as the Minister of Social Services does not 

support the will of his community, I will raise this concern for 

the city council. 

 

And the resolution says that with regard to the people of 

Providence Place, and I quote: 

 

We at city council support their position. 

 

They also say: 

 

We must all rally behind Providence Place to ensure that 

the geriatric assessment and rehabilitation unit continues as 

part of the health care facilities of southern Saskatchewan 

and the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Given this, will the acting minister admit that this government 

erred in breaking a contract with the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek 

district, or will he continue following the lead of the member 

from Regina South, who is failing to stand up for health care in 

his community? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the  

member from Thunder Creek that no amount of rhetoric from 

that member or that caucus, no amount of harassment, no 

amount of political pressure or motions being passed, will 

re-create the $50 million in health care funding that your 

Liberal Party has taken from this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when that member stands up and other 

members from their seats holler about the need to stand up for 

one’s constituents, I ask, Mr. Speaker, where has that caucus 

been  where has that caucus been when this government has 

stood up in the interests of all Saskatchewan people in pointing 

out to their federal counterparts what they’re doing to the social 

programing across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, this government promised to 

reform the health system by giving us wellness. They said they 

would save money by keeping people well and keeping them 

out of acute care hospital beds. According to this government’s 

own reports, it costs over $13,000 a month to keep a patient in a 

hospital bed. In contrast, the geriatric unit costs just over 

$5,000 a month. 

 

So far the geriatric unit served 409 seniors, and it’s helped 67 

per cent of them return to the dignity of independent living in 

their own homes. Thanks to your decision to break a contract 

and a promise of separate funding, hundreds of seniors in 

southern Saskatchewan will now be forced into those more 

expensive hospital beds. Will the minister admit that wellness 

isn’t about saving money, it’s about destroying quality health 

care in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, point number one, in 

response to the member, the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District 

Board has within its ability, and has indicated to the board of 

Providence Place, a funding option for this year which is over 

$5 million. Now with that $5 million of tax dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, the Providence Place board will have to provide the 

programing. Will they be able to continue providing geriatric 

assessment with that budget? They are working on that issue as 

we speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they are not able to, or not able to complete the 

full geriatric assessment program, Mr. Speaker, they will be 

able to use each and every one of those beds to add 28 more 

long-term care beds for the citizens and people of Moose Jaw 

and district, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we’ve had some discussion today about commitments 

made, commitments made. Well let’s think about some 

commitments made by the Liberal Party. Was it not that party, 

Mr. Speaker, in their red book in the last federal election, that 

told Canadians coast to coast, in my constituency and 

everywhere, they were going to scrap the GST? Was that a 

commitment, Mr. Speaker? And the member from Thunder 

Creek talks about standing . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

District Health Board Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Assinboine 

District Health Board, which includes much of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, recently received word that it is one 

of 19 districts which will receive less funding this year than last 

year. In fact this district has discovered that funds for acute care 

services alone have decreased by 6.5 per cent, or $436,000. 

While monies for acute care can be used in other health-related 

services, funds in other areas may not be used for acute care 

services. 

 

Given the horror stories we are hearing about people being 

turned away at hospital doors due to bed shortages, how can the 

Acting Minister of Health justify such a substantial cut in 

funding for front-line acute care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 

member who, I think, knows this, but I would remind him again 

that we have moved in this province to a needs-based funding 

formula that takes the pool of taxpayers’ dollars that we have 

available to us to provide health services and allocates those 

funds on the basis of population and need. 

 

The member will talk about some districts who, on the basis of 

that formula, have lost funding this year. There are other 

districts of course, Mr. Speaker, who have in fact gained 

funding. And that’s to provide a fair and equitable distribution 

of the health care dollars in Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, again I repeat: we would have more 

dollars to allocate if it were not for decisions made in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, the biggest single concern that 

Saskatchewan residents have about their health care system is 

the fact that it is no longer reliable in meeting the acute care 

needs of the sick and elderly. Clearly, if district boards are to be 

autonomous and to meet the needs of their local communities, 

they should have the freedom to determine how the total pool of 

health district care funding is to be divided. 

 

Will the Acting Minister of Health make a commitment in this 

House today to make the appropriate changes and provide 

boards with a greater say in the spending of district health care 

dollars so they can provide safe, reliable health care for our sick 

and elderly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, to the member’s question, 

it has always been, and I assume it always will be, a 

responsibility of a provincial government to establish standards 

for health care provision. Obviously, obviously, no provincial 

government will stand by and let all of the funding go into one 

particular area of health care provision or another. 

 

Again, the distribution of funding must be equitable and  

according to the needs of our people as best as we are able to 

meet those needs. 

 

Now he talks about the district health boards, the member from 

Thunder Creek has talked about the Moose Jaw board today; 

well here’s a quote, here’s a quote, from a letter sent by the 

Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District Board to the Hon. 

Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, and I quote: 

 

Dear Mr. Martin: As representatives for the residents of the 

Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District, the district 

health board is writing to express its concerns regarding 

the impact of impending cuts in federal transfer payments 

on health care funding in Saskatchewan. 

 

If the district boards have done that, I ask the members, have 

you done that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Court-house Closures 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government recently announced the 

closure of the Kerrobert court-house. Just last year the province 

spent $58,000 to renovate this beautiful old building, and now 

it’s being closed. Just doesn’t seem to make any sense. A 

couple years ago, the former minister of Justice promised not to 

close any more court-houses  just one more in a long list of 

broken NDP promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Sunday the people of Kerrobert and the area 

will hold a public rally to protest the closure of the Kerrobert 

court-house. I’ve been invited, and I will be there. I know the 

Premier and the Minister of Justice have been invited as well, 

but the town has heard no reply as of yet. So I’ve been asked to 

extend the invitation again here today. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you be attending this rally, you or your 

Minister of Justice, or will both of you make time to be at this 

important event? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 

of the Conservative Party for that question, and I’m pleased to 

receive a personal invitation to this event. 

 

Now practically, what’s happening in Kerrobert is that we have 

been very carefully reviewing all of the justice services in 

Saskatchewan. I have looked at many recommendations, and we 

are recognizing that there are changes that need to be made. 

And the changes that have been made here in Kerrobert will not 

mean any diminishment in the services provided to the people 

of that area, but they will mean that we can look at some 

positive changes in the whole system because we do not have 

enough money to keep court-houses throughout the province. 

 

I think in many ways the member from Kindersley should be 

pleased that he lives in an area where they don’t require as 

many court services as some other places. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

SaskPower Crow Rate Compensation Revenues 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister responsible for SaskPower. SaskPower 

purchases land for future projects and usually doesn’t use this 

land for a number of years. And in the meantime they rent the 

land out to local farmers. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have spoken to farmers who rent land owned by 

SaskPower in the Estevan area, and they have informed me that 

SaskPower is not passing along any of the one-time Crow 

pay-out to producers. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you justify keeping the entire Crow 

benefit when you are gouging those same producers with huge 

power rate increases, when SaskPower has a net income of $80 

million this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

say, beginning my comments, that discussions between the 

tenant and the landlord, SaskPower, a matter for them to 

discuss in terms of developing the rates. What I want to say 

though, Mr. Speaker, I find this interesting coming from an 

opposition member who represents a political party who for 

years has been trying to destroy orderly marketing in this 

province, taking money out of the farmers’ pockets. 

 

Destroying the Crow rate subsidy for years has been not 

defending farmers. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

SaskPower continues and will continue to treat their tenants 

fairly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gather the 

minister’s a little concerned about this issue . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Speaker’s having an 

increasingly difficult time hearing the answer being put and also 

the question being put. Order. And I’ll ask all members to 

cooperate and allow the member for Cannington to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

minister is sensitive about this issue because he quickly tried to 

divert the question. Well the NDP have always been 

condemning the big bad banks and the private corporations and 

tell us how we need government to protect the little guy. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, SaskPower should follow the example of 

one of those big bad private corporations that you and your 

colleagues are so quick to condemn. Prairie Coal, a private 

company which rents land to producers in the same area, under 

the same circumstances, is returning every penny of the Crow 

pay-out to farmers. 

 

Meanwhile it’s Jack Messer and your money-grubbing 

corporation that posted a net income of $80 million and is still 

taking the Crow pay-out right out of farmers' hands. Will you 

do the right thing and change your policy, or will you at least 

share a portion of the Crow pay-out with the farmers and give  

some to the producers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me begin 

answering this by saying to the member that things have 

changed in Saskatchewan since the 1980s when the 

Conservative Party that he represents, represents this province. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite, that we will maintain 

the fiscal integrity of these corporations. One day he stands in 

here and he doesn’t support a rate restructure. The next day he 

comes in here and says the corporation’s making too much 

money. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower has been and 

will continue to be a good corporate citizen. This government 

will continue to support farmers and the agriculture community 

rather than standing up and supporting federal initiatives to 

destroy the backbone of orderly marketing and the support for 

freight subsidies in this province, as that minister refused to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teachers’ Collective Agreement 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions today 

are for the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, the details 

of the new teachers’ agreement are now public, and school 

boards, local ratepayers, and parents with children in school, 

have reason to be concerned. While you’ve apparently covered 

the cost of the pay increase to the end of 1996, but not the 

increments, there is no additional money in your budget to 

cover additional benefits. Besides, this agreement only lasts 

until the end of the current year when a new contract will have 

to be negotiated. And school boards are staring at a $7 million 

funding cut in ’98 and ’99. 

 

Madam Minister, how are the school boards going to afford this 

contract in the long run? Won’t it simply result in fewer 

teachers, larger classrooms, and higher education taxes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation has 

announced the ratification of the new collective agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I understand that over 81 

per cent of the teachers that voted voted in favour of this 

collective agreement which indicates a zero per cent increase in 

1995, zero for half of 1996, with a 1 per cent increase coming 

in July of 1996, and a 1 per cent increase coming at the end of 

1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, teachers in this province work extremely hard on 

behalf of our young people in Saskatchewan, on behalf of our 

ratepayers. And we know that teachers have sacrificed, Mr. 

Speaker. They have sacrificed because of the incompetence that 

we experienced in this province in the 1980s because of those 

members. 



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, the teachers may have got 

an increase, and that’s not the question. The question is what 

are the boards going to get to cover that increase from you; that 

was what the question was. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. I’m going to ask all 

members . . . I’m having a great deal of difficulty being able to 

hear the hon. member for Rosthern put his question. Order, 

order. And I recognize that the enthusiasm is coming from both 

sides of the House. I’ll ask for the cooperation of all members 

of the House and allow the hon. member from Rosthern to put 

his question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. Order! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  You know the NDP is always complaining 

about the federal Liberals making decisions that you have to 

pay for; this is exactly the same thing. You made a spending 

decision that school boards and local taxpayers are going to 

have to pay for at the same that you are cutting funding. 

 

And worst of all, all the people that have to pay for it weren’t 

included in the decision making. That’s a goofy way to do 

things, Madam Minister. If you don’t accept it from others, you 

shouldn’t be doing it. 

 

Madam Minister, why did you agree to this contract without the 

signatures of all the participants? How are they supposed to pay 

for this contract with your $7 million funding cut? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well as I said earlier, I’m extremely pleased on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan and all of the people of 

Saskatchewan that teachers have ratified this minimal collective 

agreement with over 81 per cent ratification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this collective agreement is consistent with other 

public sector agreements that have been bargained between the 

government and our unions, Mr. Speaker. The costs of this 

salary increase are covered by a $2 million increase in the 

operating grants to school boards, Mr. Speaker. We have 

indicated that we will cover the incremental costs of salary 

increases in 1997. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously we are going to experience 

challenges in the years ahead. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

working with our partners in education, we will be working 

with our partners in education  trustees, teachers, directors of 

education, and parents  as we always have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Minimum Wage Board 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Labour. We have recently told the minister that 

small business is our greatest employer in this province. These 

businesses have been awaiting a decision determining what 

Saskatchewan’s minimum wage should be. The chairman of the  

board, in a Leader-Post article from April 3, acknowledges that 

he is unable to bring the board to a consensus decision about a 

fair and equitable minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, the minister 

personally appointed the members of the board. 

 

Will the minister confirm that his appointed board is hopelessly 

deadlocked, and does he realize this uncertainty is having a 

detrimental effect on business decisions to hire new employees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 

business people in this province, as well as the working men 

and women that make the businesses operate within the 

province, are optimistic about the future, contrary to what the 

doom and gloom that’s preached from across the Assembly. I 

would say that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I do have 

some thoughts on the question actually, and I’d like an 

opportunity to respond to that. 

 

In my opinion, the Minimum Wage Board is not hopelessly 

deadlocked. They did come to a bit of an impasse. They will be 

holding a further meeting. 

 

There’s been some discussions between the various 

organizations that are represented on the Minimum Wage 

Board. And I believe that they will be making a 

recommendation when they’ve done their due diligence in the 

work of the Minimum Wage Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has 

taken political patronage to record levels. They have appointed 

their political friends to very pivotable positions over and over 

and over again. 

 

The chairman of this board, Murray Cheyne, has been 

completely ineffective in having the Minimum Wage Board 

come to a decision about a fair and equitable wage. This comes 

as no surprise because sources in North Battleford have told us 

that the same Murray Cheyne was the Minister of Labour’s 

campaign manager in the last election. 

 

Will the minister confirm that this appointment has been made 

on the basis of patronage rather than competence, and will he 

get rid of his political cronies and appoint people to this board 

who are actually up to the task? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The member opposite should be 

absolutely ashamed of himself. His information is inaccurate 

and untruthful, and you should withdraw your comment. You 

should be ashamed of yourself. 

 

The person who chairs the Minimum Wage Board was not my 

campaign manager. He is not a political crony. He was put 

forward, his name, by nomination through the hotels 

association. He’s a respected businessman in the Battlefords 

area. He chairs that board. The two other people on the business  



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

side were nominated by various business organizations. The 

two people on the labour side were nominated by labour 

organizations. 

 

And the member making accusations like that in this legislature 

shows the dismal state of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. 

You can’t keep your own organization together. You cut the 

throat of your leader. You can’t get your own act together in 

this legislature, and you make false accusations about people 

who should be well respected in the Saskatchewan business 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order! Order. 

 

Sales Tax Harmonization 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is 

for the Minister of Finance. Yesterday the minister proved 

without a doubt that she is in no way capable of handling the 

finances of our province. Once again the minister’s figures were 

completely inaccurate. When asked about the offer to 

harmonize the PST (provincial sales tax) and GST, she rejected 

the offer. Basic . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order! Order. Now I’m hearing hollering 

coming from the government side of the Assembly . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  He’s hollering the loudest. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. And I’m going to ask for the 

cooperation of all members on both sides of the House to allow 

the Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When asked about the 

offer to harmonize the PST and the GST, she rejected the offer, 

basing her argument on a harmonized tax rate of 15 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the offer from Ottawa is a tax rate of 14 per cent. 

Her department officials knew it is 14 per cent, yet the minister 

can’t stop playing games with the people of Saskatchewan. I 

sympathize with them when they don’t know when to believe 

her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand up, admit she made a 

mistake, correct herself, and apologize to the taxpayers of this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. First of all, the 14 per cent story was a very well-kept 

secret. It was the headline story in The Globe and Mail about 

five or six days ago. So I mean I know the members opposite 

may not read The Globe and Mail. There have been a variety of 

proposals  that one was from Ontario  and there are a 

variety of numbers. 

 

But the reality is a simple one. We are opposing harmonization 

because it means more taxes for the average family in this  

province. And we made a commitment that we will not agree to 

a new tax regime that means more taxes for the average family. 

 

But the gall of the members opposite to stand up and raise this 

issue, supporting the federal Liberals that have done more to 

damage the political credibility of politicians in this country by 

taking a promise  a clear promise to get rid of the tax  and 

to now say that they’re breaking their promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if anyone 

has toured north of Regina to the town of Wynyard, you’ll find 

one of the most progressive little towns in the middle of 

Saskatchewan or southern Saskatchewan. And I’m delighted 

today to . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order! The Assembly has 

just granted leave to an hon. member to introduce guests and 

I’m unable to hear him make that introduction. And I ask for 

the cooperation of all members of the Assembly to allow the 

hon. member from Last Mountain-Touchwood to introduce his 

guest. 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

introduce someone that’s sitting in the west gallery today, the 

mayor of the town of Wynyard, which is one of the most 

progressive little towns in Saskatchewan  or not a little town 

anymore. But she has been at the helm of it for many years and 

developed it into a very progressive, a very large town, and a 

very beautiful town to visit. And so I want to introduce the 

mayor, Sharon Armstrong, that’s sitting in the west gallery and 

ask all members to make her welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In keeping with an open, accessible 

government, I table the answer. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 76 is provided. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In keeping with our policy of being 

open and accessible, I table the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 77 is provided. Order, 

order. 



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

(1430) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair:  I will ask the Minister of Finance to introduce 

her officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I 

would move: 

 

That a sum not exceeding $678,091,000 be granted to Her 

Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 

1997. 

 

The Chair:  Would the minister also introduce her officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, I will do that, Mr. Chair. 

 

On my left is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Behind 

Bill is Kirk McGregor, executive director, taxation and 

intergovernmental affairs branch. To my right is Brian Smith, 

executive director of public employees benefit agency. Behind 

Brian is Joanne Brockman, director, economic and fiscal policy 

branch. And behind me is Larry Spannier, executive director, 

treasury board branch. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I’d like to 

welcome the minister’s officials here today to answer a few 

questions regarding the interim supply. 

 

My first question to the minister is with regard to the monies 

here requested. Earlier in the year the minister and her 

government had special warrants issued by His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor, and those warrants helped to cover the 

unforeseen expenses of cuts to the public service. And in 

particular, they made up for a bridging program as well as early 

retirement. 

 

In recent weeks, Madam Minister, I’ve heard from others in a 

number of communities that your cuts to the public service 

were merely the beginning, and that more could be expected 

next year. In fact we know that Ag Credit in Saskatchewan will 

be phased out over a four-year period. 

 

As a result, there will be more severance over the coming years. 

And given this, can the minister assure us that these monies will 

be used for cutting more people, or are you asking for more 

special warrants in January or February of this year? Of next 

year, sorry. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I would remind the 

member opposite what we’re doing here. The purpose of 

interim supply is that, although we have the budget before the 

legislature, the opposition has not yet agreed to pass the budget. 

There are agencies out there, such as social agencies, health 

care agencies, education agencies, that require money in order 

to continue to operate until the budget’s passed. And the  

purpose of interim supply is to just get the money into their 

hands so that they can continue to operate. 

 

There’s another process whereby departments will appear 

before the legislature. The estimates of the departments will be 

available, and this is the time at which we can scrutinize in a 

very minute, in minute detail the expenditures of the different 

departments. That’s the appropriate time to ask your question. 

 

If you want to ask those questions of the Department of 

Finance, I’d be more than willing to provide the answers. And 

if you would like to pass interim supply right now, we would 

call in the Department of Finance and go through our estimates 

and give you all the detail that you would like. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, we 

do have some time here that we can afford to take the 

opportunity to ask a few questions here, so I would beg your 

tolerance here in this matter. 

 

And I noticed, you know, one of the cuts made in the budget 

that seems to be of a concern to a number of people is the cut 

that was made for fighting the Dutch elm disease here in the 

province. And this, as we know, is a fairly deadly virus, and it’s 

transmitted by the Dutch elm bark beetles. And by making that 

cut, it’s just another example of offloading responsibilities onto 

the municipalities in the province. If you want to protect the 

urban elms and those in wooded areas of these RMs, they’re 

going to have to carry more of this load. 

 

And I’m sure the minister will recall that we had one tree 

quickly cut down near Estevan, at Cowessess, and at Sherwood 

forest. And the forests that we do have in the southern part of 

this province are rather rare ones and elms being a major 

species. In Regina alone, they account for at least a third of all 

of the 175,000 trees in the city. And trees are valuable for 

wildlife habitat as well. They improve the value of our 

properties. They provide shelter. They provide some of the 

aesthetic features we need to attract tourism in the province. 

 

And as well, Madam Minister, the elm beetles, I don’t need to 

point out to you — I’m sure you’re aware — they are active 

now, and at a time that they could cause a major outbreak, and 

it would require government assistance in removing affected 

trees and controlling this disease. And I wonder if any of the 

monies that the minister is calculating here today might be used 

in the event of some major outbreak. 

 

And secondly, the cuts announced in the budget not meets . . . 

why didn’t you allow for such an unforeseen possibility? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. As I said before, the funding that is here is funding to 

allow the departments to carry on their normal activities for the 

period of time until the budget’s passed. But as I said to the 

member opposite when we were doing interim supply the first 

time around, in politics you really have one thing that you have 

to guard preciously, and that’s credibility. 

 

And I’m saying to the member opposite, what they have to 

consider is the role they’re taking as Her Majesty’s Official  



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

Opposition in this House. To stand up and say, why would you 

ever think of cutting X, how could you possibly cut Y. To say 

as the member opposite has said consistently in this House, we 

wouldn’t have cut X; we’d keep the funding for X. We would 

lower taxes by the way, and balance the budget, and pay down 

the debt. 

 

And probably most important of all, to believe that the members 

opposite can get away with being silent or even lending 

approval to the federal government when it cuts a quarter of 

billion dollars over four years to the province’s funding for 

health, education, social programs, forcing the province to find 

240 million new provincial dollars to back-fill the federal cuts 

meaning there has to be reductions elsewhere; to be absolutely 

silent on that point or even to support that point, this isn’t 

credible. The picture doesn’t fit together. 

 

And, Mr. Member, the problem is the voters are beginning to 

understand this picture can’t fit together. Now the members of 

the third party don’t take positions that I support or even 

respect, but at least there is a basic consistency to what they’re 

saying. 

 

So I’m saying to the member opposite, first of all we’re here to 

address not the details  the big picture. And saying to the 

member opposite, it is your obligation as the official opposition 

to present a credible alternative. Saying we’re going to lower 

taxes, we’re going to spend more, we’re going to balance the 

books, we’re going to pay down the debt, and we’re going to let 

the federal government offload whatever they want onto us 

because we’re Liberals and we just sing the Liberal song, can’t 

work in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Perhaps, Mr. Minister, 

then the next question that I’ll have will address a concern that 

you may share with the rest of the people. Obviously the Dutch 

elm disease isn’t one that we would consider significant in the 

province but, you know, in the House even, we’ve heard several 

members from the north-west and the north-central areas of the 

province alert us to the dry conditions, and these are affecting 

farms in those areas. You know, in fact for the last seven years 

there’s been a severe drought in some of these areas and 

agrologists have been informing the public that some hay stands 

in those areas are under so much stress that unless rains fall 

soon to replenish them, they will be unproductive. 

 

I wonder if the minister could tell us that, within the monies 

you’re requesting here, is there any contemplation for the 

possible need to provide, like, emergency feed assistance for the 

cattle producers in the areas who might discover there’s an 

insufficient hay crop available from their fields for another 

year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, again I want to return to the issue of credibility 

because the member opposite is playing, in his last comment, a 

game that the member from Wood River plays all the time and 

the old Tories used to play. That is, because I say to you, 

address the issue of Dutch elm disease when you have the 

Department of Environment here, because they’re the ones who 

can tell you in detail what’s happening there, he twists my  

comments and said really what the minister said is she doesn’t 

care about Dutch elm disease at all. And you know that I didn’t 

say that. 

 

Please, Mr. Member, don’t follow the member from Wood 

River into that kind of low-level politics. The people of the 

province understand that because that’s what the Tories used to 

do. Please don’t do that. 

 

Now again when you talk about the dry conditions in the 

province, when you have the appropriate department here, ask 

them the details of what their funding is. 

 

Again what I return to is this is merely interim supply allowing 

funding to proceed so that agencies can continue to operate. We 

are quite prepared to give you as much detail as possible. All 

you have to do is allow us to call the appropriate department 

that can give you all the detailed answers to your question. And 

we’d be more than pleased to do that as soon as you pass 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, if 

we might switch to the bond rating agencies here for a moment. 

The bond rating agencies are likely to come out with their new 

ratings in the near future for the province. A month has passed 

since the budget and it’s usually the amount of time that’s taken 

for the new ratings to be out. And I wonder if the minister could 

tell us what sort of reading she is expecting, and from which 

agency? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I would say, Mr. Chairman, to 

the member opposite we will wait to see what they say. 

Certainly our budget was very well received in both Toronto 

and New York. 

 

And some of the financial agencies have already made 

comment on the budget. For example Nesbitt Burns’ 

commentary was to the effect, on balance, the budget gets a 

thumbs up. They talked about the fact that there are no tax 

increases in the budget; the debt service costs in the province 

are on the way down, that is our interest costs are on the way 

down; the provincial debt will be sliced by 12 per cent over the 

next four years to twelve and a half billion dollars. The 

economic growth for the province for 1996 is 2.6 per cent, well 

above the Canadian average. And they said the province has cut 

spending by a whopping 4.4 per cent in our budget. So what 

they’ve said is that the budget gets a clear thumbs up, and we 

expect similar responses from other agencies as they come in. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, I recall in the press when the 

minister and the Premier arrived back, I do recall some mention 

of another credit rating agency  I believe it was Standard and 

Poor’s  and they had had something also to say. I know 

you’ve just expressed that they will be coming out with 

something soon. But could you just make an additional 

comment about what they may have had to have said with 

respect to the budget. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You’re going to have to wait for 

their report, member opposite, but I will say this. They say to us 

that the financial record of this province under this Premier, in  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

terms of its consistency, its goal orientation, and its success, is 

unparalleled in any other part of Canada. 

 

(1445) 

 

An Hon. Member:  Promises made, promises kept. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  They said, as the Premier has added 

 promises made, promises kept. Which may not be something 

the Liberals would like to get into today  promises made, 

promises kept. But the reaction by all of the financial agencies 

has been extremely positive and they see us as setting an 

example for other provinces in Canada. And behind closed 

doors will say, they only wish the federal government would 

follow the example of Saskatchewan in terms of getting its 

deficit under control and balancing its books. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister. 

At the present time we, as everyone’s well aware, have the 

SaskTel strike that’s gone on for about two weeks now. And it 

means that there’s some 3,600 employees in the province who 

are off work. And the strike obviously means that there’s a 

significant part of our provincial workforce that is not working. 

And there have been some projects that may be delayed because 

phones cannot be installed, and I’ve heard the corporation 

suggest it may result in a loss of revenue to the company. 

 

And given these things, I wonder if the minister could tell us 

whether she would expect a significant loss of revenue that is 

needed to support the interim supply that she’s asking for here 

today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, Mr. 

Chairman, I would remind the member opposite of the process. 

This is funding for government departments. This is not 

funding for Crown agencies. There is a separate place where 

one can go, members can go, to talk about Crown corporation 

issues  that’s the Crown Corporations Committee. And I 

know that the Chair and the other government members of the 

Crown Corporations Committee would like to see the 

appearance of the opposition at these committees because we’re 

having difficulties with the functioning of the committees 

because we’re not getting the level of participation. 

 

So the member opposite may want to talk to some of your 

colleagues who are on the Crown Corporations Committee 

about participating there and doing the job that is required to 

ask those sorts of questions. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I might just digress, 

just for a moment here, with respect to the minister’s comments 

just now. I believe if she would elaborate . . . is she referring to 

attendance at the Crown Corporations Committee meeting this 

morning? 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I have to caution both the minister 

and the member that the purpose of interim supply is to grant 

money for the operation of government departments on an 

interim basis and complete, detailed reviews will be available at 

another time. 

I think we’re getting off the subject here, so let’s stick with 

interim supply if we can. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chair, thank you very much. 

Mr. Chair, what I’m trying to say to the member opposite is that 

you’re asking questions in this process that there is another 

process to deal with. 

 

And there is a Crown Corporations Committee which has 

government and opposition members on it. It’s also open to the 

public and to the press  that’s the appropriate place to ask 

questions about Crown corporations and it’s not during interim 

supply. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Madam Minister. 

I really do feel, though, that it is necessary just to explain the 

lateness of the members of our caucus this morning to the 

committee meeting, but as the Chair of the committee was well 

aware, it had been made known to them that they would 

possibly be late at some time. But I’ll get off of the topic now 

and I’d like to get on to something that is pertinent to my 

Thunder Creek constituency. 

 

In my constituency and in the neighbouring constituencies of 

Moose Jaw, there’s an event taking place on May 1 and it’s of 

great concern to all of Saskatchewan people. We all know that 

the Canadian Armed Forces has been scaling down. Part of that 

scaling down has involved mothballing of fighter aircraft to 

lengthen the fleet life of our CF-18 fighters. And the 15 Wing 

Moose Jaw has long been a major employer in this province, 

and we all hope that the centre continues as a training centre for 

pilots. But we realize however that, unless Moose Jaw trains 

pilots for other countries, the expense of operating the base and 

the program may be too great for the taxpayers to bear. 

 

And on May 1, these officials from NATO (North Atlantic 

Treaty Organization) will be visiting the city of Moose Jaw to 

view the facilities at the base, and they’ll also be viewing other 

amenities offered in the city. And the visit will play a large role 

in their decision of whether to use the 15 Wing Moose Jaw as a 

training centre. 

 

And I wonder if the minister could just tell us whether the 

government is providing any special funds for this very 

important occasion from this interim supply. And secondly, 

does the minister intend to participate in promoting 

Saskatchewan at such an important event? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, what I would say to the member once again  and I 

hope I can say it clearly enough so that he understands — what 

this is, is interim supply. This is merely providing enough 

money to finance the operations of key parts of the government 

and third parties who need money to continue to provide 

programs for the people of the province until the budget is 

passed. 

 

The member opposite keeps on asking very detailed, 

complicated questions which this government is more than 

prepared to answer. But in order to answer your questions, we 

have to have the appropriate department here. I’m quite willing  



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

to call the appropriate department and give you all of the 

information we can. But you’ve got to understand that this is 

not part of interim supply. So if he wants to have those 

questions answered, we would welcome an opportunity to 

answer them, but allow the departments to come who can give 

you the answers. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Call my estimates on, Gerard; I’m ready 

to get at you right now. Come on; let’s have some fun. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do hear the Premier 

asking us to have some questions for him later on with respect 

to Executive Council, and he will have that opportunity. 

 

In relation to the supply being asked for, Madam Minister, I 

wonder if you could tell us how much of it is directed towards 

payments to individuals. Does the minister have a figure of how 

much is used for such transfers versus how much on a 

percentage basis is distributed to third parties or departments 

and the like. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the money being allocated here is just two-twelfths of 

the spending that occurs in any department. So I would refer the 

member opposite to page 26 of the budget because on page 26 

of the budget, they breakdown where the money is going: how 

much goes to third parties, how much goes to individuals, etc. 

 

So it would be exactly the same proportion because this is just 

two-twelfths of all the spending of government departments. So 

I would refer the member opposite to that page because it has 

that breakdown available. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Madam Minister. 

Madam Minister, in the 1950s and the 1960s when the federal 

government began making significant transfers to the provinces, 

it also began insisting upon the provinces modernizing their 

administrative structures. And part of those improvements 

involved creating a proper public service, creating professionals 

who could do policy analysis. 

 

Most importantly, however, there’s a number of improvements 

insisted upon when it came to accountability and to 

bookkeeping. And I’m sure the minister is well aware of such 

events, being that she is a history professor by another life. 

 

Given that many of the funds here are being distributed to third 

parties, I wonder if the minister could tell us what sort of 

controls are in place to ensure that third parties, individuals, and 

the like, spend these funds as they were intended. And then 

secondly, what sort of bookkeeping standards and reporting 

standards are generally in place across the system? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again what I would say, Mr. 

Chairman, to the member opposite is that there is a high level of 

accountability. Any government funds that are being spent, the 

agencies have to ensure that the money is being spent as it is 

designed to be. You would be better off to ask each department 

in detail how they do this, because it varies from agency to 

agency. 

 

But I would say this. In terms of accountability and openness in 

terms of how the government spends its money, Canada West 

Foundation, an independent agency, recently evaluated all 

governments in Canada, including the federal government and 

including all the provincial governments, on their finances and 

how open and how accountable they are to the public in terms 

of how they spend public dollars. And I would point out to the 

members opposite that clearly the highest mark went to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The grade Saskatchewan got from Canada West Foundation in 

terms of open, accountable financial management was 85 per 

cent. 

 

To give you some idea of what that means relative to other 

provinces, the federal government got a 73 per cent, the 

province of Quebec got a 20 per cent, the province of P.E.I. 

(Prince Edward Island) got a 43 per cent. 

 

So I think the record of the government, in terms of ensuring 

that tax dollars are spent wisely and there is accountability, is a 

good one. And I’m sure that you will want, as you get each and 

every department in here, to go into a great amount of detail as 

to how they ensure that in each of their areas. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and, Madam 

Minister. I just have one more question here for you this 

afternoon. I know a number of my colleagues also have further 

questions that they would like to ask at a future time. 

 

But I know the members opposite are always especially 

concerned when my colleagues raise concerns and problems 

with respect to the amount of spending in Health and especially 

with respect to the government’s decision to force the Regina 

Health District to close the Plains or closure of the geriatric unit 

in Moose Jaw. 

 

And, Madam Minister, we’re not asking for massive amounts of 

additional money for health care in many of these instances. 

What we’re asking is for this government to show a little bit 

more responsibility, more fairness, and more accountability as 

to how it spends our money. And we were all shocked to 

discover the government spent something like $54,000 on 

out-of-province health care consultants when it has a branch 

where there’s a budget for $1.2 million allocated to consultants 

within the department. 

 

And I don’t know if the minister perhaps thinks this is a good 

way to spend our money, but I would say she’s not been talking 

perhaps to the average person or people in this province. I 

would just simply ask, how does the minister think that she can 

consult and then spend her way to prosperity in this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, that question is 

almost incoherent. It’s almost incoherent. How do you begin to 

correct the inaccuracies of what you just said there? Mr. 

Chairman, first of all, the Regina Health Board decided to close 

the Plains hospital, not the government. 

 

In terms of spending our way to prosperity, I just read the 

member opposite Nesbitt Burns analysis of the budget of this  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

province which said we have cut spending a whopping 4.4 per 

cent  unparalleled. You stand in this legislature and read the 

budgets from the Liberal provinces and the Maritimes. After 

doing cutting to essential services, they’re spending more. 

They’re actually increasing their spending. 

 

So for the member opposite to stand here and say we’re 

spending our way to prosperity when I’ve just read a report 

from an independent agency saying cutting spending by 4.4 per 

cent — how can I answer that question? That’s incoherent. I 

mean how can we be spending less and yet be spending our way 

to prosperity? 

 

And again the member opposite is not trying to make the 

process work. He says tell me about this $54,000 in the 

Department of Health. And I’ve told him again and again, give 

us an opportunity to address your detailed questions. We 

welcome the opportunity, but please understand you’ve got to 

call forward the Department of Health. They will go through the 

spending, and tell you precisely where the money was spent and 

why it was spent there. So the level. . . the frustration I feel is 

that there is an incoherence to what is coming from across, from 

that side of the House. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1500) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 49  An Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

stand before the Assembly today to address Bill 49 which 

contains amendments to The Natural Resources Act. 

 

As we all know, natural resources play an extremely important 

role in the economy of Saskatchewan. The livelihood of a great 

many people who live in this province, especially those in the 

North and rural areas, depend on natural resources . . . on their 

way of life. Any Bill that may affect the well-being of the 

people in the rural and northern Saskatchewan causes a great 

deal of concern and deserves time and research into the effects 

it will have on rural municipalities across the province. 

 

As has been stated before in this House, the main purpose of 

the Bill before us today is to alter the way in which the Minister 

of the Environment and Resource Management is able to use 

assets from the fish and wildlife fund for payments to 

municipalities in lieu of taxes. The amendments put forward in 

this piece of legislation will give express authority to the 

Minister of the Environment and Resource Management to 

make payments to the rural municipalities for provincial lands 

that were acquired by the province using the assets of the fish 

and wildlife fund in lieu of taxes. We support that objective. 

It’s only fair that if the province takes lands out of the local tax 

base, it should make a grant to the municipalities in lieu of 

taxes. Those of us in this House from rural areas, and including, 

I might add, many of the government caucus, know only too 

well how difficult it has been for rural municipalities to finance 

their operations in recent years. The financial situation of rural 

municipalities is tough under this government, to say the least. 

Anything that can ease this situation, even a small amount, is to 

be welcomed. 

 

But the other part of the Bill concerns me. Under this Bill, the 

Minister of Environment will be able to increase the fees or 

charge additional fees for haying and grazing permits in order 

to raise the funds that will be required to make the payments to 

the rural municipalities. 

 

This may sound reasonable at first glance, but I wish that this 

minister and this government would take a second glance. 

There are no rules or even guidelines as to how great these 

increases can be or when they are supposed to take place. Are 

the increases supposed to take place all at once or over several 

years to ease the burden of transition? 

 

And once again, we have the prospect of the government 

breaking existing arrangements or contracts. This time it’s not 

with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) participants; it’s 

not with the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District Health Board. 

This time it’s with the livestock producers that are holding 

grazing or haying permits. 

 

Many livestock producers will have constructed careful budgets 

in cooperation with their bankers that will have been based on 

certain assumptions, including the fees charged by the 

government for grazing and haying permits. This Bill will 

shatter those assumptions. It will make all that careful planning, 

that careful budgeting, meaningless. 

 

Under this Bill a livestock producer could see his grazing or 

haying permits suddenly be subject to either additional fees . . . 

increased fees, as the Bill so charmingly calls them. How high 

will these additional fees be? When will they kick in? When 

will they apply to existing permits, or just new ones? The Bill 

tells us that they can be high enough so that the entire amount 

paid to the rural municipality in lieu of taxes may be recovered 

in whole or in part, to use the words of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is far too vague. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, to 

charge the local livestock producer the entire cost of the grant 

to rural municipalities would be wrong. We should remember 

that the purpose of acquiring land for the fish and wildlife fund 

is to preserve lands that are suitable for fish and wildlife 

enhancement projects and fish and wildlife related purposes. 

 

One of the costs of acquiring and keeping lands in the fund is 

the annual grant to the rural municipalities in lieu of taxes. It is 

unfair to charge this entire annual cost to the local livestock 

producer who may possess a simple haying or grazing permit on 

the land. 

 

That’s putting the burden of conservation totally on the local 

rural economy. But it’s the entire province, including the urban  



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

dwellers, who benefit from the protection of our fish and 

wildlife species by the acquisition and retention of such lands in 

the fund. The lowly cattle producers should not have to bear the 

whole burden. The burden should be spread around a bit. That’s 

the way things are usually done in Saskatchewan. 

 

Furthermore, the timing of these fee increases and additional 

fees could not have come at a worse time. As the minister 

probably knows, and some government back-benchers certainly 

know, that cattle prices are extremely depressed. The livestock 

industry is suffering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to sadly conclude that while the 

government gives a little to the rural economy with one hand  

I am referring to the grants in lieu of taxes  it takes away 

from the rural economy with the other, and I am referring to the 

fees and increased fees that are going to be imposed on the 

people with hay and grazing permits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concludes my remarks on the second reading 

of this Bill. If the Bill is debated in the Committee of the 

Whole, I would like to discuss with the minister the timing and 

the volume of the increases in hay and grazing permits that he 

has in mind. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 54  An Act 

respecting Conservation Easements and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 54 will 

introduce some significant changes to the way conservation 

easements are set up and managed throughout Saskatchewan. I 

do recognize the Minister of Environment is trying to encourage 

the voluntary development of more conservation easements 

throughout Saskatchewan’s 11 ecodistricts. But I am concerned 

that the amendments contained in Bill 54 will cause more 

problems than good in some cases. 

 

The amendments outlined in Bill 54 will also be applied to 

some sections of The Planning and Development Act, 1983; 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act; and the Saskatchewan 

enforcement Act. So we cannot overlook the far-reaching 

implications this Bill may have. 

 

I do believe that our land, our air, and water are precious 

resources. These resources, along with Saskatchewan’s wildlife, 

help make Saskatchewan’s wide-open spaces unique. I also 

agree with the endangered species report released earlier this 

year — that Saskatchewan must do more to establish 

conservation areas. As that report stated, only one new 

ecological reserve has been established in Saskatchewan in 

recent years. 

I believe the government is trying to rectify this problem by 

offering landowners more incentives to donate or sell parcels of 

land to recognized conservation agencies. Unfortunately, 

although some of these goals are honourable, the methods by 

which they are achieved could create many headaches for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

As the minister proudly emphasized while addressing this 

legislation, one of the major changes proposed would enable 

landowners to donate or to sell easements for a designated term 

or for perpetuity. That means the sale of the land that contains 

the easement will not necessarily end the easement. 

 

Section 10 in Bill 54 outlines the conditions which must exist to 

terminate a conservation easement. One of the ways an 

easement may be lifted is if the holder or the owner of the land 

can convince the courts that continuation of the easement will 

produce severe hardship for those parties. 

 

I have had many concerns brought to me by people involved in 

the conservation and development area authorities about this 

section of the Act. They want to know if the courts can easily 

be convinced that easements must be withdrawn for special 

interest groups who will take the responsibility for negative 

impact to that particular piece of land and the potential negative 

impact to the land surrounding the conservation easement. 

 

Some of the conservation authorities are particularly concerned 

about what impact this section of the Act could have on the 

surrounding landowners’ access to drainage systems, which in 

turn could lead to possible flooding of their land. 

 

Bill 54 does make changes to the notification process for 

conservation easements. While section 8 does outline a period 

of notification for the landowner and the municipality involved, 

there is little in this Bill that provides input for landowners in 

the surrounding area. 

 

Section 8 was also highlighted as a potential problem section by 

several of the conservation and development area authorities I 

contacted. Surely the minister must realize that creating a new 

conservation easement or terminating an old easement could 

have a far-reaching implication for surrounding landowners. 

 

As I mentioned, access to drainage systems is a concern. We 

cannot ignore the potential impact of possible higher wildlife 

populations on the conservation easements. Yesterday one of 

the minister’s colleagues told me in question period that the 

government is committed to working with municipalities and 

landowners on this issue. But, Mr. Speaker, once again we see 

the government proposing legislation that requires more input. 

We have seen the government making the same mistake on 

other Bills, and here we’re seeing it again. Let me offer the 

minister a simple reminder: consult first and then draft the 

legislation. 

 

This spring the government clearly showed a lack of concern 

for damage done to Saskatchewan crops by the deer, the elk, 

and the geese. Even though the Environment minister has 

admitted that these animals are under the jurisdiction of the 

provincial government, he has also said there is no money for  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

compensation. Landowners in the vicinity of a new 

conservation easement might be subject to more crop damage 

by the wildlife attracted to this new easement area. These 

financial concerns and the concerns about future access 

problems should not be ignored by the minister. I would like 

Bill 54 to include a mechanism to allow for more input from 

owners of the land neighbouring future conservation easements. 

 

The minister has stated that this Act will assist the province in 

achieving its goal to protect representative areas in each of 

Saskatchewan’s ecoregions. I don’t see anything in this Act that 

will ensure there is a balance of conservation easements among 

the 11 ecoregions in the province. 

 

I am also uncomfortable with the term, qualified conservation 

agency. Of course the requirements a non-profit agency must 

meet to qualify as a conservation agency in Saskatchewan is 

described in the regulations. Of course, again, the regulations 

are left to the discretion of the government. It’s too bad the 

government doesn’t feel the confidence to put forward that 

information along with this legislation, so it can be openly 

debated in the House. 

 

Overall, there are many concerns and many more questions on 

Bill 54 and I would like to move adjournment of debate on this 

Bill, please. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

 

The Chair:  I will ask the minister to introduce his officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My 

officials with me today are Ms. Susan Amrud, who is with the 

Crown counsel from legislative services, and seated behind her, 

Mr. John Stacyk, who is the employee with SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) in charge of 

procurement and projects. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

welcome your officials, Mr. Minister. Just to preface some of 

my questions, just to underline the fact that not being an 

engineer, or anything that may even closely qualify as one, such 

as a welder or whatever, please bear with me with some of the 

questions that I may have regarding this particular Bill. 

 

The first question I have is the interpretation on 2(d) under 

“building”. I understand the definition for the term building is a 

change in definition from the former Act and I just wonder if 

the minister can just explain to me why this change was made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you for the question. The change 

was to make the terminology consistent and uniform with The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act. So we’re  

just making it consistent with that piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I’m just a little unclear. Perhaps you could 

clarify  architects work on structures that are not meant to 

live in, is that something that I can consider? 

 

I’m thinking about something like a bridge, for example. You 

know, we might have people living under them but I don’t 

believe their main purpose is for occupancy. And can I just 

have a little clarification perhaps on how structures, for 

example, like this, fit into this particular Bill and into the 

practice of architecture, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, the definition of building 

as we have it described under the Act, as I’ve indicated earlier, 

is really to make it consistent, as I’ve outlined, with The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act. And when 

you ask the question as it relates to the practice of architecture, 

and really what the definition within the Act is, is that it’s 

preparing for the “hire, gain or hope of reward, a design” 

governing the structure of a building. 

 

And that is the . . . sort of the principle purpose of it is, as 

you’ve indicated, for the human habitation and occupancy, 

which is a bit different of course than as you’ve described that 

might be included if we’re talking about highways or bridges or 

roadways. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that answer. Again, my next 

question is a matter more for a term of clarification about 

definition. This time for the term “architect” and “practice of 

architecture.” It seems like the new Act really stressed the term 

“building”, meaning “for human occupancy.” Again, can the 

minister clarify why this particular change has been made. 

 

I just want to also say that I realize there is an engineering Act 

coming right up as well. So is the purpose of these changes to 

better clarify the role of the two professions that they play in the 

construction and/or design field? And if may add, if its 

appropriate at this time, the Bill probably shouldn’t come up for 

a final vote until that to the engineers Act is up for discussion. 

They appear to be tied in somewhat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the question, 

that’s correct. The purpose that the Act is coming back  the 

Architects Act is coming back  as you probably are aware, 

that this piece of legislation is one of the first pieces of 

legislation that was ever drafted or crafted in terms of 

legislation for professional occupations. And I believe the date 

of that was back in 1912. And here we have . . . and I can 

appreciate that it’s before both your time and mine. 

 

There were some amendments made to the legislation back in 

1968. And today when you asked the question as it relates to 

redefinition of the term “building”, really the architects have 

requested that we bring this piece of legislation back, and 

there’s consistency and support from them in respect to the 

definition that is in the Act. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

Mr. Koenker:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members in the 

Assembly, some 47 students from Sutherland School in 

Saskatoon. Accompanying them are teachers Grace Skrudland 

and D. Miller, and chaperons Mr. Nyborg, Ms. Olson, Mr. 

Dumais, Ms. Savitski, and Mr. Luciuk. 

 

I’d like to welcome these young people and their chaperons and 

teachers to the legislature and to watching the proceedings of 

making the laws of the province. And I’ll be pleased to meet 

with them shortly, in room 218. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 

add on behalf of the official opposition and members on this 

side of the House, a very warm welcome to you young people, 

our future leaders of our communities, our province, and our 

great country. Thank you for being here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 27 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, my question again. This one, Mr. 

Minister, will deal with membership. This definition — once 

again, just a clarification — definition of membership is much 

shorter than in the current Act. Can the minister just explain 

how this new definition of membership will affect the 

professional association? 

 

And perhaps as well, the section of the old Act providing for 

the issuance of temporary licence has been removed from the 

new Act. And may we please be apprised of what the reasoning 

was for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, the first part of your 

question as it relates to . . . simply a drafting instructions to 

better appropriately define the registration and membership. 

 

When you asked the question regarding registration of 

members, the council . . . And I might just read this off. My . . . 

registration of member is under section 19. And that relates to: 

the councils may register members as persons who have 

graduated from an approved school of architecture, who have 

worked for the past three years under the direction of a member, 

and who have passed the examination of admissions as a 

member. 

 

And the proposed Act, I believe, really increases the . . . from a 

current two-year period to a three-year period. And the increase  

is in accordance with what is now the Canadian and both the 

American standards and is required under the current 

reciprocity agreements. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you please, for 

me, define how professional engineers and architects differ here 

in Saskatchewan. I’m wondering if in fact the same definitions 

may be used in other provinces. And how much similar . . . and 

how much overlap are there in the duties of architects and 

engineers? What is the similarity overlap? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The definition 

of both the architect and the term “engineer” in all of the 

provinces across the country would really be somewhat 

consistent. If you were describing or defining an architect in 

Saskatchewan and describing and defining an architect in 

British Columbia, that description would be the same, as it 

would be for engineers. 

 

I think when you ask the question as to whether or not there is 

overlap in duties and functions, I would suggest that in many 

cases there are. Obviously the training programs that one would 

take in receiving an architect’s degree or that of an engineer’s 

degree, there would be some courses and some studies that 

would be very similar or the same in some instances. The 

definitions, of course, would change in terms of work practice, 

as to whether somebody would be designated as an architect or 

would be designated as an engineer. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. Under the 

council, some changes have been made to the association’s 

council. And could the minister please explain the reasons 

behind the change in the make-up of the council. And again, 

was this change sought by the association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you for the question. Mr. Chairman, 

the current legislation, as we’re presenting it, really permits for 

there to be two public representatives. Under the current 

legislation, we’re now talking about having a representative 

from the university community, which in fact has been the 

request of the architects. And we’re certainly accommodating 

by ensuring that one of the representatives on the council would 

be then a representative from one of the two universities. 

 

The other individual would then be a public representative of 

which would represent the views of the general community of 

Saskatchewan and would need to be a resident of Saskatchewan 

and would be an appointee by order in council. And certainly 

this is a request that has come to us from the architects and is 

included in the Act. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Could you tell me if there are similar councils in 

place in other provinces, similar ones to what is proposed here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you for the question. This is a 

standard practice across the country and certainly the provision 

that we’re making within this Act is consistent with the 

professional legislation for professional Acts in Saskatchewan  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

as well. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Just for clarification, or perhaps I missed what 

you had indicated earlier about one of the members being from 

a university  two members from the public, one has to be 

from a university  can you just clarify what the reason is for 

that? Perhaps you had before but I might have missed it; just to 

clarify it, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s correct. There will continue to be a 

representative from the university and the request to have 

somebody from the university comes from the architects 

themselves. And I expect it’s to do with ensuring that there is a 

consistency. Some consistency is continued, to provide it in the 

practice in the field as applied to the institutional institution 

from which the training occurs and to provide some continuity 

with the educational institution and that of the practice in field. 

And so that’s the . . . I expect that’s the reason for why we have 

somebody from the university community that has been 

requested and is going to be sitting on the council. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You had indicated that 

the appointments would be made by order in council. What 

criteria will the minister use? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, what we would do with 

that process is that we would really sit with the council and 

have the council provide for us recommendations of who they 

felt would be the representative that would best speak on behalf 

of the Saskatchewan community as it relates to this particular 

piece of legislation. So it would be a consultation process with 

the architects and that of the council before an appointment 

would be made. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can we move on to 

by-laws? And I notice that in the new Act there is quite a bit 

more to be said about by-laws. Why have these sections been so 

thoroughly beefed up? Is that as a result of some concerns of 

not having enough teeth in that particular Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well part of what I’d said earlier is that 

this legislation has been around for a long time, having said that 

it was introduced first in 1912, having been one of the first 

pieces of legislation that has come into being. And secondly it 

was updated again in 1968. 

 

And what you’re seeing here with the significant upgrade to the 

by-laws is in fact making them consistent with the standard 

professional legislation that’s in place right now. 

 

So it’s really an upgrade of housekeeping requirements to the 

by-laws. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that answer. I’d just like to make 

a comment. When looking over these by-laws, I can’t help but 

be reminded a little bit about the discussion of the debate our 

member from Arm River had with the Minister of Highways 

regarding regulations. So much that leaves this House, on 

occasion, is somewhat ambiguous. 

 

However by-laws that are passed by this association must come  

before the legislature under this particular Act. And let’s face it. 

What by-laws are to this Bill is the same that regulations are to 

every other Bill, so it’s really kind of too bad that the cabinet, 

which has the power to pass any of these regulations if it sees 

fit, without the approval of this Assembly, doesn’t have to be as 

accountable as these professional associations. I make that only 

as a comment before moving on to the area of discipline, under 

your Bill. 

 

The new Act spells out the process for discipline and 

investigating alleged misconduct by members of the 

association. Are these changes in line with other professional 

bodies regulated by government, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, and to the member. 

They are consistent. They are exactly written in the same 

fashion as the standard is currently, Mr. Member. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Again, were the changes requested by the 

architects’ association or by the professional engineers or 

perhaps by both? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The architects themselves had asked us to 

update the disciplinary regulations as they’re here, so it’s come 

from the architects. 

 

Mr. Osika:  A question that I’m sure will be asked many, 

many times on any Bills or any processes or procedures that we 

undertake is, will this new process be a cost to the association, 

its members, or the government itself in any way, shape, or 

form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There won’t be any cost to the government 

and certainly won’t be any . . . But there will be a cost, I expect, 

to the association of some type or another, particularly if there’s 

a requirement to convene the disciplinary committee for some 

particular reason or another. So that cost, as is consistent with 

most professional organizations who have discipline 

committees and have members who serve on them, have an 

internal budget and an internal mechanism that they can use to 

provide for some sort of sustenance for people to arrive at a 

location where they need to deal with this particular issue. So 

the costs would be, by and large, borne by the association based 

on the kinds of formula they would establish for themselves to 

make that kind of remuneration. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Is this a little more stringent that what’s going 

on, than what’s going on in other provinces? And perhaps you 

might be able to just enlighten us a little bit about what’s going 

on in other areas across the country as opposed to what’s 

happening in Saskatchewan when it comes to discipline under 

this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  This would be most consistent with what’s 

happening across the country. As I said earlier, the changes that 

we’re making to this legislation is . . . parallels what is in place 

across the country, and because the request is coming from the 

architects and as we drafted the legislation that’s before us 

today, it is very much succinct with what we’re seeing in other 

provinces. So there isn’t any more stringency here than there is 

in other provinces. 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

Mr. Osika:  Are these discipline committees made up of 

members of the association or are they, and excuse me for lack 

of a better word, lay people that would sit on this committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The way in which the legislation is 

written, there would be five members here that would be sitting 

on the committee, on the discipline committee, and they could 

be both. They could be lay people or they could be, in fact, 

individuals who are professional folks from the architects 

themselves, from the association. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, and I will just make an assumption 

that that decision would be made by the association itself as to 

who would constitute that committee. I appreciate that. 

 

These complaints, if there are any, can be appealed to our court 

system I understand, from what I’ve seen. Is the government in 

any way responsible then for the costs associated with these 

hearings? And if so, are these costs the same as they are under 

the existing Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The member is correct that the decisions 

of the discipline committee certainly can be appealed, and they 

can be appealed to the Court of Queen’s Bench, and there aren’t 

any costs that would be associated here to the government at all. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that. And it’s always reassuring, 

and it makes us feel good, when there are no costs attached to 

government that’s coming under constant scrutiny for spending 

lots of money for things that they don’t have to. 

 

It seems that  I don’t mean to digress  but it seems the 

definitions for professional incompetence and professional 

misconduct in the Act are fairly loose definitions. Are they 

similar to those in other jurisdictions once again? Are they 

similar to other professional associations? 

 

It seems to me that just such a loose definition leaves room for, 

perhaps, too much interpretation on the part of committees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well the wording that you’re reading from 

is standard with what we’re using in all of the professional 

Acts, not only in Saskatchewan. But that would be standard 

with the wording that would be used in the drafting and crafting 

of professional legislation across the province . . . across 

country, so there wouldn’t be any deviation there. 

 

Certainly there’s an occasion here where discipline committees 

would be setting up their own framework in terms of what they 

would be measuring, dependent on the type of action that 

somebody might have contravened. And the interpretation of 

looseness of course as to the degree of which somebody has 

violated a segment of the practice would be defined differently 

in various different professions and would be dealt with 

differently. 

 

But of course we always know that you have the ultimate 

opportunity  if you’re not satisfied, you can appeal that to the 

higher level, as you’ve indicated. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Again I’m going to make an assumption then 

based on what you have told me with respect to the Act; the 

contents, the make-up of committees are in fact similar to that 

of other provinces across the country. So I would take it that 

any penalties imposed by the association would be similar and 

consistent, that there would not be anything more severe, say, in 

Saskatchewan than Manitoba or Ontario or British Columbia? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s right. There is consistency across 

the country in terms of the fines. There have been some 

increases of course that you’re seeing in this legislation in terms 

of the fines, and the types of penalties for which individuals 

might find themselves having to pay for have also increased. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, sir. There seems to be a real need for 

some legal knowledge for the investigation and disciplinary 

committee, particularly when it comes to informing the 

Department of Justice for possible violations of the Criminal 

Code. Will this legal guidance be in place, or will these 

committees be acting as a police force without the proper 

knowledge? Or will there be someone that’s educated in that 

type of a process to carry out the fair investigational and 

reporting process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s a good point that the member 

makes. And certainly part of the reason, of course, that we have 

people who sit on the disciplining committee are individuals 

who are extremely knowledgeable in that, of the operations and 

the workings of the architectural community . . . would be 

sitting on the discipline committee. So they would be able to 

provide the kinds of information that would be necessary to 

assist in making a finding, or at least a recommendation on 

whatever it is that would be the disciplinary action. 

 

Certainly as well, the committee itself, the disciplinary 

committee itself, would have access to legal counsel for the 

disposition. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I guess what I was concerned about 

was that if there was in fact a proper investigation that had to be 

carried out, the people carrying that out would know some of 

the rules of evidence. If it was in fact appealed to a court, that 

they would know the role, their rights, and limits, with respect 

to statements of people involved. That can become fairly 

onerous and it’s quite a serious fact-finding and 

information-gathering process for presentation ultimately to a 

court of law. 

 

Will those people have either access to . . . will they be able to 

hire consultants, or perhaps retired police officers  who 

knows?  to assist them in these kind of investigations> 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you for the question. In my 

travels, I’m finding that we have retired police officers that are 

doing investigations in all sorts of venues these days. And 

certainly in the portfolios that I have responsibility for, I have 

nearly as many retired police officers working for me as there 

are working, I’m sure, for the Ontario police department. 

 

But your question certainly can be answered from the point of  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

view that the committee will always have access to legal 

counsel, and they can solicit the services of legal counsel to 

assist them with making the recommendation that would take it 

the next step if that were necessary or to help them in making a 

final decision at the committee level. 

 

If there are broader, investigative requirements that the 

committee believes that they would need in order to reach some 

sort of a consensus prior to making a decision or a finding on 

the behaviour of a particular individual who is being 

disciplined, they could also solicit those services as well. So 

that, within the legislation, permits for them to do that, but they 

would act on their own volition in all of those instances. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Just a couple more brief questions, 

Mr. Minister, and I appreciate your time and your responses. 

Again if in fact you required some legal support, guidance, you 

would then ask the Department of Justice, I would assume, for 

some input if necessary from the minister’s part of the exercise, 

whatever it might be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well if the discipline committee was 

requiring some legal advice or legal assistance, they would go 

to the private sector and get that information and advice from 

the private community, from the private legal community. It 

wouldn’t come from the Department of Justice. It would be 

from the private sector legal community. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I guess maybe my question wasn’t clear enough. 

If in fact there was some need for yourself to make a decision or 

render an observation which you required some legal support or 

background on, I would make the assumption that the 

Department of Justice would be your adviser? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  In response to the question, the 

government or the ministry or the department, in this case 

Saskatchewan Property Management, wouldn’t be involved at 

all in that process. The professional community really is 

responsible, and the Act permits for that, for them to discipline 

themselves within their own environment. 

 

So if there was a need or a dispute around an issue that required 

a legal interpretation or direction or some assistance in order to 

reach a consensus or to move a process ahead, then what the 

discipline committee would do and the council would do is they 

would, in my opinion, then solicit the services of a legal 

individual  a lawyer  to advise them. And it wouldn’t in 

any way, shape, or form include or involve either the ministry 

and/or the government. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I’m sorry if my earlier question was 

kind of fuzzy on that, and I thank you for explaining that. 

 

Just one final question, Mr. Chairman, of the minister and the 

officials. 

 

The immunity clause in section no. 39 just raises a little bit of 

concern. It seems that at any point any council or any committee 

can go awry a little bit. If someone is subject to a  

malicious, unwarranted investigation by the committees, they 

do not appear to have any recourse. And I’m wondering why 

this is included. It seems to me that it does leave in fact this 

council and its committees completely unfettered, if you wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Under the current Act what of course the 

expectations would be, as you suggest, is that really the 

discipline committee is, I believe, who you’re asking the 

question around and/or the council. The expectation here would 

be is that these people would be acting really in good faith. And 

so when we redrafted the legislation and updated it, what we’re 

seeing here is that we’re seeing a consistency from what the 

request was previously . . . or in the legislation previously to 

what the request is today. And really the expectation here is that 

the practice would be that of a good faith practice. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just my concern was 

just so that people who may be put in jeopardy had some kind 

of recourse. 

 

I appreciate your comments. I want to thank your officials for 

assisting with this process. I thank you sincerely, and thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. I have no further questions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 52 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 61  An Act respecting the Practices of 

Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I’m pleased to 

introduce on my extreme left, Mr. Bob Cocks; on my immediate 

left, Dave Abbey; and on my immediate right, Susan Amrud. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to once 

again welcome the officials that are here helping our 

Government House Leader on this matter. And I’ll be brief in 

my questions, but I’d like to ask them directly. 

 

First of all, can the minister please give us just a brief summary 

of this particular Bill and the objectives that the government 

wishes to achieve through the implementation of this particular 

piece of legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I would be pleased to do so. 

This Bill provides the following, in main, although this isn’t an 

exhaustive description. 

 

By-laws hereafter of the profession will be approved by the 

minister. That’s becoming a standard within government, and as 

we update these Acts, we tend to include these things in  



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

them. And this is sort of part of what we do when we update 

them. 

 

And this is the real thrust of the amendments; the geoscientists 

are included in the Act. We include public representatives on 

the council. Again this is something we do whenever these Acts 

are updated. 

 

The disciplinary process is improved to comply with the rules 

of natural justice. And again, this is something we do. Ms. 

Amrud actually . . . I don’t want to embarrass her, but some 

years ago, in 1992 actually, she produced a . . . she and the 

department, I guess, but she brought it to legislative review  a 

guideline for professional Bills. And it has become a kind of a 

standard. And we refined it. It’s become kind of a standard. 

 

Whenever these Bills are updated  in this case to include the 

geoscientists  we put them through this system, and thus we 

include public reps. And if they’re not there, we include 

approval by-laws by the minister, again to provide a degree of 

public accountability. And the disciplinary process almost 

always, almost always has to be improved to comply with 

modern concepts of natural justice. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And it is, I know, a 

commendable task to come up with recommendations and to 

include in legislation regulations to improve on what’s already 

in existence. So whoever was responsible and your assistant, 

that’s great. 

 

I just . . . Could you answer me then, Mr. Minister: what is the 

reasoning behind regulating professional engineers and 

geoscientists with the same piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I think the primary answer to your 

question is they regard themselves as part of the same 

profession. I think in an intellectual sense there’s an overlap in 

the disciplines. And I think there’s an overlap in terms of the 

organization of these two professions. 

 

So I think basically it’s the intellectual disciplines . . . there’s 

quite an overlap. And they kind of regard themselves as a 

subset of the engineers. In addition, I’m told this is the way it’s 

organized in every other province for whatever . . . if there’s a 

value that has. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. So then there’s some consistency 

then from province to province, and I had that assurance in 

dealing with the last Bill. 

 

Were any of these, of the sections and reasons for the Act 

respecting architects, an influence on this Bill with respect to 

engineers and geoscientists? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, they are consistent because 

they’re being made consistent with the standard. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And were they, in fact, 

formulated in conjunction with one another? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer to your question is  

probably not really. They were going forward at the same time. 

But the work was really being done separately. I mean, they 

were talking to each other, but the work was being done 

separately really. 

 

Mr. Osika:  That leads me to my next question, Mr. 

Minister. Due to the uncanny similarities between these two 

Bills, I just want to ask, were there simultaneous consultations 

done with all the groups involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Not only was there simultaneous 

consultation; there was also intermingling in the sense that the 

two groups were talking with other. So the consultations were 

going on simultaneously, but there was also conversations 

going on between the two groups, a three-way process in a way. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, would it be correct to say that both 

the Saskatchewan Association of Architects and the association 

of engineers and geoscientists of Saskatchewan are run and 

governed in a very similar fashion by very similar pieces of 

legislation? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This goes back to the comment 

which I made earlier that we established a set of rules back in 

’92, a set of rules with respect to how professional 

organizations ought to be governed. The work which was done 

by Ms. Amrud  again I don’t want to embarrass her, but the 

work was done by her and her department  was an attempt to 

provide a code. And it was really . . . I think she took work from 

across the country, sort of took the best of the professional 

Acts, what’s current thinking among professions in terms of 

how we govern ourselves, our accountability to the public, and 

so on. And that became a kind of a model to which everyone 

else has followed. 

 

So the Acts look very similar, but that’s because we really do 

have a common model which we ask the professions to very 

carefully consider so that they each meet the leading edge 

concepts of accountability and to the public and to their 

membership. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope you’ll 

appreciate if I ask you to reiterate on some of these. It gives us 

an opportunity to underline again the important work that has 

been done leading to this. 

 

Could I ask now what is the reason, concerning architects, that 

at least one of the appointed councillors must be a member of 

faculty of one of the province’s universities while this is not the 

case for the legislation concerning engineers and geoscientists? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This is not one of the things that we 

established a norm or standard on. Who they had on the council 

is really their business. Their accountability to the public, to 

their members, dissimilar proceedings, compliance with natural 

justice  we kind of regard that as the kind of thing we ought 

to do. Who actually sits on the council is really their affair. I 

gather that the background to this is that historically they’ve 

always had an academic on the council, the architects  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

historically. The engineers never had. They just carry on with 

traditions, so I think the answer is probably historical. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The main purpose of 

Bill C-61, The Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act, is 

to bring geoscientists under the same legislation as engineers 

due to the similarity of work performed. The Architects Act is 

almost identical in content to The Engineering and Geoscience 

Professions Act. Why are all these professions not legislated by 

the same piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We actually gave that some 

consideration. In fact we gave it a lot of consideration some 

years ago, and we actually had a project of one big Act, kind of 

thing. It just proved to be a super difficult task. The department 

I think gave up on it after investing an enormous amount of 

time on it. 

 

To summarize the problem and to perhaps oversimplify it . . . at 

the risk of over-simplifying it, very difficult to get the 

professions to abandon their own peculiar piece of legislation 

and accept the one-model Act. 

 

And I think the department invested a lot of time in it without 

getting much agreement and finally decided that there were 

other ways to provide a degree of accountability to the public 

and to their members and to provide assurance that the Acts 

complied with the rules of natural justice as they were 

understood in this day and age. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Human nature being what it is, there 

is the natural turf protection process that we encounter. 

 

The Architects Act deals with the admission of members to the 

association where there is no such section in the engineering 

Act. Could you perhaps enlighten us on why that is so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Acts, I’m told, are very similar. 

There’s just a difference in nomenclature. In the engineering 

Act it’s called registration, and in The Architects Act it’s called 

. . . yes, it’s actually called registration as well. If you look on 

page 11  I say to the member from Melville  look on page 

11, and it’s actually called registration. So the answer, now that 

I’ve been a couple of minutes on my feet is there isn’t any 

difference. It’s called registration in both Acts. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s stated in the 

engineering Act that no partnership, association, or corporation 

is eligible to be a member of the association. Is this the case for 

the association of architects as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They’re both identical, I’m told. And 

this is a subtle distinction; it’s fairly subtle, but important. They 

can’t be members. A partnership, association of persons or 

corporations, cannot be a member. Only individuals can be 

members. However they can be licensed to practice. So I’m 

told, identical in both Acts. And I think for those professions 

which allow incorporation, of which The Legal Profession Act 

is not one, and neither is the medical profession, but for those 

which allow incorporations, I think that’s standard throughout 

them all. They can’t be members — only individuals can be  

members — but they can be licensed to practise as such. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. The council of the association of 

architects may, if it wishes, delegate to the executive director 

the power to admit persons as members, admit persons as 

students, and issue licences. This power can be delegated to the 

registrar of the association of professional engineers and 

geoscientists. Why the difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m told, if you refer to section 24 of 

the engineering and geoscience Act, in fact it is the same. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister, for pointing that 

out. Is it correct then to state that the professional misconduct 

committee of the architect association has the same duties as the 

investigation committee for the engineering and geoscience 

association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. The professional misconduct 

committee of the association of architects consists of at least 

three appointed members. How many members make up the 

engineers and geoscientists investigation committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In section 31, there is no minimum or 

maximum number. 

 

Mr. Osika:  The discipline committee for the engineering 

and geoscience association will consist of how many members 

then? Can you tell me that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It’s the same. There is no maximum 

or minimum. It’s up to the profession to determine the 

committee make-up. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Are then the disciplinary hearing requirements 

and functions the same for both associations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Criminal convictions and 

suspensions are the same for both associations then. Is that 

correct as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Osika:  With all other aspects of these two Bills being 

almost exact thus far  and I’m obviously asking the right 

questions and getting the right answers, the short ones  what 

is the reason for the enforcement section for the engineers and 

geoscienctists and not for the architects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They requested it. They were having 

difficulties with enforcement. The architects reported no such 

difficulties. And they are again, very different professions. 

Engineering firms can be very, very large. You know, they’re 

just organized quite differently. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. The immunity clause then in this 

piece of legislation causes the same concern as it does in the  



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

Bill regarding architects. Why is it included in both pieces of 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They are protected in both cases 

against any actions, and I think this is not the only Act. I’m not 

sure this is common, but immunity given to disciplinary 

committees is relatively common. Perhaps I might go so far as 

to say it’s standard. Again you just need to protect your 

disciplinary committee against frivolous, vexatious, and 

harassing court actions. And this area of discipline often 

produces just that  vexatious and harassing actions. And this 

protects the disciplinary committees against that kind of thing. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

I have just one final question. And once again the question is, 

why the two Bills? They are almost identical. Could the same 

goals and objectives not have been accomplished through just 

the one Bill instead of the two? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I think the answer is yes. Again 

we worked with the professions in this regard, and these don’t 

proceed until we have the . . . the profession signs on and says, 

this Bill meets our objectives. If it doesn’t, we don’t proceed 

with the Bill; we leave things as they are. The question 

therefore, it’d actually have to be directed to the professions. 

 

But each profession sees itself as distinctive. Belonging to a 

profession, I understand that. Each one sees itself distinctive, 

and each one wants its own piece of legislation which 

recognizes and protects not just the public but also protects its 

distinctiveness. 

 

And so it just had proved to be impossible. We didn’t spend a 

lot of time on one common Act. It just proved to be impossible 

to get the professions to agree. They wanted their own 

distinctiveness, and at the end of the day, perhaps it’s important 

to preserve that. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to at 

this time thank the minister and very definitely thank the 

officials for being present here this afternoon to answer my 

questions. Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, there is . . . does the Clerk not 

have it? There’s a House amendment. Oh, they don’t. Can I 

have the assistance of the page? 

 

We have an amendment to subclause (b) of clause 2. And this is 

a bit of a . . . Yes, can we give the page one then to give to the 

opposition leader. 

 

I’ll hand you the one you should have had. It’s addressed to Mr. 

Cosman. It should have arrived at the desk. 

 

Perhaps while the Table is sorting out the paper, I could just 

explain to the opposition. This corrects a typo. There’s a typo, 

in that you’ll see in the line 2, there’s a figure . . . is at section  

68. It was 69 in the printed Bill which you’re being asked to 

pass. It should have been 68, and this changes at the 68. So let’s 

roll, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair:  We have a House amendment moved by the 

Government House Leader to clause 2 of the printed Bill to: 

 

Amend subsection (1) of clause 2 of the printed Bill by 

striking out clause (b) and substituting the following: 

 

“(b) ‘appointed councillor’ means a councillor who is 

appointed pursuant to section 10 or subsection 68(3) or 

who is continued in office pursuant to subsection 68(2)”. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Deputy Chair, just one question again for 

clarification. As the minister has indicated, it’s merely to 

change in that current 2(b) from 69(2) to 68(2), and 69(3) to 

68(3), as a matter of a typographical error. Is that . . .? 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 

 

(1615) 

 

Clauses 3 to 56 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 57 

 

The Chair:  Clause 57, we have a House amendment 

proposed by the Government House Leader to clause 57 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

Amend Clause 57 of the printed Bill by striking out 

“clause 2(d.l)” and substituting “clause 2(1)(d.l)”. 

 

Is the committee ready for the amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It’s the same problem, just a typo 

with the numbers. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 57 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 58 to 71 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before the officials scatter, I would 

like to thank them. They not only have this Bill . . . what we 

deal with here in a few minutes represents an enormous 

investment of work on their part. They’ve done, in my view, a 

very credible job of these professional Acts and all of this is 

very important. 

 

They also sat in the hallway in a spot which I don’t think they 

find terribly entertaining actually, the spot in the hallway for, I 

think it was a good hour, waiting for this to occur. So I want to 

thank them for their patience and endurance, but particularly on 

behalf of the public of Saskatchewan I want to thank them for  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

some very dedicated, able work which we, the representatives 

of the public, are the beneficiaries of. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I also recognize the hard 

work and dedication of our public service sector and the people 

who do work on behalf of the public of Saskatchewan. Having 

been one myself once, I know how difficult it is, so I too 

commend you and thank you very much. 

 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend 

The Film and Video Classification Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to introduce Linda Ens, 

who is the policy analyst in legislative services, and Keith 

Laxdal, who’s the associate deputy minister. They’ll be 

assisting me this afternoon. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Mr. Chair. I 

would like to welcome your officials, Mr. Minister, and we’re 

pleased to have them here with us today. 

 

I think, for the benefit of some of my colleagues, I would really 

be very pleased if you could just give me an overview on the 

need for the amendment. I don’t expect that you should have to 

go into length over it, but I would appreciate a summary, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I appreciate the last time that I was given 

an open-ended question like that I stretched the limits of your 

patience. 

 

But today I guess I would like to say that the amendments today 

are to allow for some other possibilities of dealing with film 

and video classification in Saskatchewan. They will allow us 

more flexibility in seeing whether we will cooperate on a prairie 

basis or on a western Canadian basis or on a national basis to 

deal with some of the film and video classification issues. 

 

As we step into the 21st century where it’s very difficult for us 

to control the images that come into our community from 

satellite or cable or radio waves, this issue needs to be 

re-addressed, and we are looking at many possibilities. And the 

way the present Act is drafted, there are a number of restrictions 

that don’t allow us to discuss these issues with our neighbours 

in other provinces. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 

like to refer you to section 3(a.1), please. This section states that 

. . . where it says, gives the board the right to charge a fee for 

registration. How much will the average registration fee be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  At this time, no fee has been set. It’s just 

allowing for the possibility of a fee, if that is the appropriate 

way to deal with this, though. Since we’re going into a little bit 

of a different system, then we needed to set out this possibility 

of a registration fee. 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do other 

provinces charge a fee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, most other provinces do charge a 

fee. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Do you have any idea, Mr. Minister, how much 

their fees are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I do have some of the other fees. In 

Ontario, the charge is $100. In Manitoba, it’s $92. In B.C. 

(British Columbia), the fee varies between 58 and $185 

depending on whether the retail outlets carries a product. And 

also the New Brunswick fees are variable, so there’s a range. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do you 

think that charging a fee, if we charged a fee, that would have a 

negative effect on the flow of film material into Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There is a possibility that it could affect 

some of the smaller operators. And that’s one of the reasons 

why we haven’t a fixed registration fee now, because we need 

to look at those operations that are in some of our smaller 

communities over and against the large operations that are sort 

of North America-wide and where the fee like this wouldn’t 

affect their business at all. So we’re wanting to keep some 

flexibility that way. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Am I correct then, and 

from what I’m hearing from you, in saying that the operators of 

the outlets are the ones responsible for the fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, if we introduce a fee, it would be the 

distributor or the operator of an outlet that would be responsible 

for the fee. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In other jurisdictions, is 

this also the case or do the provinces in fact help with the fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I think all of the other jurisdictions, 

that is the case  that they charge the distributor. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

now refer you to section 4. The Film Classification Board could 

refuse to classify or edit a film based on the decision of a 

classification body in another jurisdiction. The board will not 

need to actually screen the film to classify it or to ask for 

editing. 

 

My question is, do other provinces accept film classifications 

that are arrived at in other jurisdictions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, there is that capacity in, I think, all 

other provinces except Saskatchewan. For example, the Nova 

Scotia board does the classification for all of the Maritimes, and 

it’s agreed by the other boards in the other Maritime provinces 

that they will use the Nova Scotia classification. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. To your knowledge, do 

they have then a regional authority there with those provinces 

being the region? 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s in Nova Scotia. It’s called the 

Maritime board so it is essentially a joint board. But it has . . . 

like, I’m not totally certain of how it’s administered, but the 

other provinces do have some say, I think, in the board. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What assurances do we 

have that classifications that Saskatchewan may accept from 

another jurisdiction will reflect the same level of community 

standards as we have here? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Nationally there’s very little difference in 

the classifications. That’s the history of the film and video 

classification business. They have some different names for 

some of the classifications, but nationally there has been very 

little difference. So that’s one thing we can rely on. 

 

The other thing is that we will have an appeal process in 

Saskatchewan which will be Saskatchewan people. And so if 

somebody wishes to appeal the classification that we might 

accept from another jurisdiction, that is still possible and will 

be dealt with by people from Saskatchewan who constitute the 

appeal board. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are there 

sort of types of checks and balances in place that we may 

measure the standards that we have against other standards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If your question is if there’s some body 

that sets standards, I don’t think that’s the case. But what we do 

have is a long experience of the film and video classification 

boards operating in Canada where we have noted that most 

often the classifications are similar or the same right across the 

country. And so that would . . . But to have another group or 

body set some kind of national standard, I don’t think there is 

anything like that. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do you 

think that it’s right to charge a registration fee for a film that 

our board may not even screen before accepting the 

classification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think your question relates to . . . there’s 

two types of fees. One is a fee for classification which would be 

paid by the movie distributor. For example if it’s a big chain, 

that fee would be paid. 

 

The other one that you asked about previously, which is a 

registration fee which would be paid by the local distributor of 

a video, that’s the one that we haven’t decided yet whether we 

are going to do that. 

 

But that type of fee wouldn’t be a fee on each film. It would be 

on basically the distribution business of video. It would be more 

of a, I suppose, licensing registration kind of thing as opposed 

to paying for the classification. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I apologize, but I need 

some clarification on the first point you mentioned. You said 

one is a fee for the distributor. Could you just elaborate on that  

again, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  For example if it’s Cineplex Odeon, or a 

big company that they would have a film that they wanted to 

show in their theatres across Saskatchewan, they would pay a 

fee for a classification of that. So that’s one fee. That’s clearly a 

fee that would be paid. 

 

But the other, the second fee that we’re talking about is the 

person who has the corner grocery store and has some videos to 

rent. That’s a registration fee to have that kind of an operation. 

We’re not sure that we’re even going to have that fee, but we 

wanted to have the power in the legislation to do that if it was 

deemed appropriate at some later date. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Who receives the fee? 

Where does the money from the fee end up going to? Does it go 

to the provincial government? Where does it go? Does it go to 

the Canadian classification board, or what does it go to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  At the present time there’s an annual 

amount collected of about $85,000 and that goes into the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Although the 

amendments to this Act do not specify what the future of the 

Saskatchewan Film Classification Board may be, can the 

minister tell me if the government is considering dismantling 

the board and joining a regional authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s a possibility. It could be a regional 

one or it could be a national board; we don’t know. Or it could 

be that we’ll just stay with what we have. 

 

But there are many discussions going on about how we 

organize our country, and this is actually one of the areas where 

the provinces and the federal government are talking about 

some sharing of responsibility. 

 

Ms. Julé:  If that was the case, what guarantees would we 

have that strong representation would take place for our region, 

if it ended up being a national board? 

 

Like I want to have some . . . I guess I need to have some 

assurance that we have got strong representation to protect our 

values here. And so I want to know if you’ve thought ahead to 

what guarantees that we might be able to put in place that 

would ensure that we have strong representation here that 

would protect our values. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The way I will answer that is that there is 

no model of exactly how an interprovincial or a regional or a 

national classification board would work. 

 

Our present arrangement would be, in the way this legislation is 

set up, is that we would always retain the appeal board, which 

would be Saskatchewan people. So that if a classification was 

accepted from another province by this process and a person in 

Saskatchewan objected to it, whether it was a distributor who 

didn’t like the fact that a film was prevented from being 

distributed or somebody in Saskatchewan who had an interest  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

who objected to a film being shown, that would still be dealt 

with by an appeal board of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think as 

we all well realize that by the time you go through appeal 

boards and there’s enough public outcry to in fact confront 

what we may believe is certainly putting our values down, 

sometimes there’s a lot of damage done by that time, I would 

say. And so how would the public be assured here that we 

would not have to wait until it’s too late  let’s put it that way. 

 

I feel that we need to have some sort of standards, at least 

regional authority for our standards, and I just want to know 

what your comments would be in that regard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  You can be assured that anything that we 

would do, if we entered into an agreement with another 

province or group of provinces or on a national basis, that this 

would be one of our concerns that we would want the rights of 

Saskatchewan people protected. 

 

The other thing is that the appeal board process for film and 

video classification is a very quick process. I mean it could 

happen in a number of days as opposed to appeals in other 

matters. It’s something that the industry and the people who are 

involved with this realize that you have to act quite quickly, and 

they do. 

 

Ms. Julé: Thank you, Mr. Minister. But what would the 

degree of . . . I guess I’m using the word outrage, which is 

probably a little strong, but what would the degree of  yes, 

let’s use outrage  be from the public before in fact enough 

appeals were put in that there would be something done to 

determine that maybe the standards that we have allowed have 

been lowered quite a bit and we may want to change this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think the appeal would be based 

on community outrage, if that’s the term you want to use. It 

would be based on a distributor or a person who has an interest, 

making the appeal. So it could be dealt with with one person 

raising the question and the appeal board dealing with that right 

away. 

 

So it doesn’t take, sort of, a whole array of people concerned to 

get the matter to the appeal board. It could take only one 

person. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I guess that’s my concern that we 

should have a set of standards that we certainly submit and put 

forth very strongly before anything else takes place. Because if 

one person appeals and another person appeals tomorrow, I 

mean you could have a whole barrage of appeals, but whether 

or not these appeals would be significantly looked at would be 

in question. 

 

And I think that you would have to have people on an appeal 

board dealing with this stuff every day. And so it seems to me 

that if we have a set of standards set out it would assure that we 

don’t have to deal with a lot of problems. 

 

I would just like you to go to section 6 . . . I’m sorry, section 7.  

This change will allow the board, it says, or a representative of 

the board to enter a premise that is not a private home without a 

warrant to enforce its Act or regulations. This may be done only 

during a routine inspection or under the authority of a warrant. 

 

I understand, Mr. Minister, that this power is needed to seize 

material that would otherwise go unregulated. But what 

guarantees are in place to ensure that this new power will not be 

interpreted to freely infringe upon another’s rights? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is at 

the bottom of the page, on page 3, which is that a warrant 

would be issued by a justice of the peace or a Provincial Court 

judge. So practically, that’s how and why we use warrants, is 

because there is a judicial review of the issuance of the warrant 

before you would even start into this procedure. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I was 

wondering if there had been some consideration given to the 

fact that, with Internet in place as it is, we have all sorts of 

access to what I term as garbage through Internet coming 

through. 

 

Is there anything or any mechanism put in place to in fact 

screen what we want here in Saskatchewan and ensure that our 

already, sort of, society that is ending up to be in trouble, I 

guess, as far as our young people  and certainly not all young 

people, but we do have, as you well know, a problem with 

violence, etc. 

 

So I want to know if in fact your government has looked into 

this matter and has decided to do something to ensure that we 

are not promoting more violence and that kind of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think we agree with you that there are 

some issues around the use of the Internet that are quite 

difficult to deal with. This particular legislation is not the place 

where we would try to deal with that. And practically, some of 

the companies are looking at some kind of self-regulation. And 

I know that, for example, Microsoft and some of the things that 

they have been doing on the Internet has been to see if they 

can’t get anybody that uses it to self-regulate. 

 

There have been some discussions with some of our officials 

with the arcade people about regulating the kinds of games that 

they would have in arcades. But this particular legislation 

doesn’t deal with that. 

 

I think hate messages and things like that that might come over 

the Internet are a matter for the Criminal Code. But then again 

it’s how do you have access if it comes into your country or 

your jurisdiction from a place somewhere else. There’s some 

very difficult questions here. We don’t have the answers yet, 

but it’s definitely a concern. And whatever we can do to prevent 

the use of the Internet in that very terrible way is . . . I think we 

all agree that we should do something about it. 

 

(1645) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I would like to now thank you and 

your officials for the input that you’ve had into this and for  



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1996 

your work, and I think the hon. member to my left has some 

questions for you. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Minister, when this Bill was first 

introduced, Justice official, Al Dwyer, was quoted as saying in 

the Leader Post on March 23, that the province was considering 

changing the film and video classification long before that Exit 

to Eden controversy that took place about two years ago. 

 

My question is, why did it take so long? Why did it take more 

than two years to formulate a policy on this particular issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I appreciate that question because what 

has been happening in this particular area is that there have 

been discussions, ongoing discussions between the provinces 

about whether this could be a matter of shared jurisdiction. And 

those discussions have been going on for quite a number of 

years. 

 

And part of the difficulty, obviously, is that many times films 

and videos are classified in one place and then shown in the 

neighbouring province, and so there was an agreement quite a 

number of years ago that this was an area where people could 

cooperate. 

 

And I think Mr. Dwyer’s comments relate to the fact that there 

have been these discussions. Now we also have some 

discussions in light of looking at how we’ve organized Canada 

and whether there aren’t some things that we can do on a 

national basis as opposed to on a provincial basis that make 

more sense in how you govern the country. 

 

And this is actually one of the areas that is up for discussion in 

the same way as the Securities Commission issues. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. In reflecting, as you mentioned 

that move toward national standards, Mr. Dwyer went on to say 

that in 95 per cent of the cases different provincial boards made 

the same rulings. Most of the remaining cases, he said, did not 

involve banning films but rather involved whether or not the 

films should be used by children under the age of 14. 

 

Isn’t this really the most important category of enforcement of 

community standards when we’re talking about that age under 

14? We’ve heard repeatedly in the House about the dangers of 

exposing children to excessive violence. Is there not a danger 

that we’re abrogating our responsibility in this province by 

backing away from this area of classification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I don’t think there’s any danger about 

that. And as I was explaining previously, we will retain an 

appeal board which is Saskatchewan people. And so that if we 

accept a classification from another province  if that’s how 

the eventual arrangement is set up  and there’s some concern 

by an individual or a distributor that the Saskatchewan standard 

is different as it relates to that particular matter, that can be 

dealt with, with the appeal board which will still be in place. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I appreciate the answer that was given to a 

question that was asked earlier about whether it would take 

some kind of community outrage to get something to happen.  

And I think the answer involved that an individual could go 

ahead and present something. And my question deals with that 

part. If an individual expresses a concern, will that concern then 

be acted on, or is there a judgement call to be made as whether 

it’s valid or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer lies in the description 

of the board. It’s an appeal board. They are given some ability 

to use their discretion in dealing with the matter, and we would 

expect that whoever is on that appeal board, that would be their 

job. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. The main rationale for going to a 

joint classification system I think is probably to save money. 

This Bill seems to leave the door wide open to keep the existing 

board in place, but simply reducing their workload by farming 

out the classification. 

 

Mr. Minister, if and when the province goes into a joint 

classification situation, will the size of the board be reduced? 

And will its budget, office space, and other resources also be 

reduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s a bit difficult to answer your question 

directly because there is no other plan. So right now we need to 

maintain what we have, and it may be that we’ll maintain that 

for a while. 

 

If in fact there was an agreement, for example, to do a western 

Canadian classification system or share it in some way, well 

then I think clearly there would be a reduction in the nature of 

the board in Saskatchewan. And then the appeal committee is 

something different than the board. So it could involve a 

reduction in the numbers of people involved, and in the office 

space and everything else. The whole . . . one of the questions 

here is how do we use our dollars, and I think that’s 

acknowledged by everybody. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay, if we’re dealing with the financial 

situation, the board . . . what is the cost of the board now and 

the administration that’s been involved with it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present cost of the board is about 

$80,000. It’s included in the consumer protection branch so that 

it’s roughly equivalent to the fees that we collect now. So it’s 

not something where we’re generating, you know, hundreds of 

thousands dollars . . . only an $80,000 cost. But it’s fairly 

equivalent to what the fees are. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  The one classification system that I think has 

been discussed is the British Columbia one . . . and to adopt 

possibly that system. My question is, why are we looking at that 

particular province? Have some other ones been looked at? And 

if they have, why does the B.C. one seem to come out ahead? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is that 

we’ve been looking at a number of different possibilities, both 

with Alberta, Manitoba, and British Columbia. One of the 

things about the British Columbia system is that it’s quite a 

comprehensive system and has a good reputation across Canada  



April 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

so that there are some positive aspects that way. But I think 

practically there’s still quite hope and discussion, and that’s 

why the legislation is drafted the way it is, because there are 

still quite a number of possibilities. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I definitely have some concern about 

adopting a system from outside of Saskatchewan just because it 

may not fit with our Saskatchewan values and mores. What 

other jurisdictions have been approached or looked at besides 

the British Columbia one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The answer to your question is that there 

have been national discussions which would involve all of the 

provinces working together. As a subset of that, there’s also 

been regional discussions which would include Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia, and I assume the 

Territories. And then there have been discussions on an 

individual basis with Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia. 

 

So there have been discussions on all of these things. And it’s 

the various combinations that are being looked at. As I said 

before, one of the things was the whole matter with using the 

British Columbia one . . . is their good reputation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report considerable 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 61  An Act respecting the Practices of 

Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I move that the amendments be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

Oh pardon me, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move 

that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 51. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1145 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1145 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1146 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1146 

  Thomson ........................................................................................................................................................................1146, 1147 

  Anguish ..........................................................................................................................................................................1146, 1147 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1146 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1146 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1146 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1147 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1147 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1147 

  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1147 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1147 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1154 

  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1162 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1162 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Melfort Mustangs Win Anavet Cup 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1147 

 Rural Municipalities Share Services 

  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1148 

 Let the Sun Shine 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1148 

 Prince Albert Business Awards 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1148 

 Iconography Exhibition 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1148 

 Municipal Cooperation 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1149 

 Canada Book Day 

  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1149 

 New Edition of Saskatchewan Food Industry Directory 

  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1149 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Providence Place Funding 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1149 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1150 

 District Health Board Funding 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1151 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1151 

 Court-house Closures 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1151 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1151 

 SaskPower Crow Rate Compensation Revenues 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1152 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1152 

 Teachers’ Collective Agreement 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1152 



 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1152 

 Minimum Wage Board 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1153 

  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................1153 

 Sales Tax Harmonization 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1154 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1154 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1154 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Interim Supply 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1155 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1155 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1159 

 Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1160 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1161 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1161 

 Bill No. 61  An Act respecting the Practices of Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1165 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1165 

 Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video Classification Act 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1169 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1169 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1172 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1173 

 Bill No. 61  An Act respecting the Practices of Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1173 

 


