













































May 30, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2025 

 May 30, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition on 

behalf of people of Saskatchewan concerned about the closure 

of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the signatures, besides being from Regina, are also from 

Earl Grey, Govan, and other small communities from 

throughout southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains. 

 

The communities that people have signed from are mostly from 

Stockholm, Spy Hill, Esterhazy, and Gerald, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 

today to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Esterhazy, Whitewood, Stockholm, Regina, Churchbridge, 

and throughout the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures from this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city 

of Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follow, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Pilot Butte, White City, Balgonie, Yorkton, and Regina. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition of names of from people throughout southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by concerned citizens 

from Kipling, from Kenosee Lake, Carlyle, Estevan, Wawota, 

Creelman, Kennedy, Broadview, Langbank, Indian Head, Fort 

Qu’Appelle, and McLean. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the communities of Weyburn, Moose Jaw, and the city of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 

today to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from the city of Regina, and I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues in presenting petitions today on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan in their efforts to save the Plains Health 

Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of the 

people that have signed the petition are from Crane Valley and 

the Assiniboia districts. I so present. 

 

  



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order, petitions regarding the closure of 

the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and pursuant to 

rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Deputy Clerk:  Ms. Hamilton, Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Estimates, presents the first report of the said 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee considered estimates for the Provincial 

Auditor and adopted the following resolutions: 

 

Main estimates, 1996-97: 

 

1. Resolved, that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 

12 months ending March 31, 1997, the following sums: 

 

 For Provincial Auditor ........................... $4.288 million. 

 

2.  Resolved, that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31, 1997, the sum of $3.216 million be granted out of 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Your committee considered estimates of the Legislative 

Assembly and adopted the following resolutions: 

 

Main estimates, 1996-97: 

 

1. Resolved, that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 

12 months ending March 31, 1997 the following sum: 

 

 For legislation ........................................ $4.853 million. 

 

2. Resolved, that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31, 1997, the sum of $3.64 million be granted out of 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Your committee recommends that upon concurrence of its 

report by the Assembly, the sums as reported and 

approved shall be included in the next Appropriation Bill 

for consideration by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Signed, Doreen E. Hamilton, Chair 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

move by myself, seconded by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Estimates be now concurred in. 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Legislative Assembly, special visitors to 

our gallery from Switzerland. His Excellency Daniel Dayer, 

Ambassador of Switzerland  would you rise, please  and 

Mrs. Dayer. Mr. Claude Duboulet, Consul General of 

Switzerland, and Mrs. Marie-Louise Duboulet. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan has many business, 

governmental, and trade relationships with Switzerland. His 

Excellency and the Consul General have been in Saskatchewan 

meeting with their country’s various trade and industry partners. 

 

This morning His Excellency and Mr. Duboulet met with the 

Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor, and the Minister of 

Intergovernmental Affairs. I hosted a luncheon for them today 

on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. We had a 

wonderful time — amongst other things, talking about fishing 

in northern Saskatchewan and sharing some fish stories. 

 

Following their visit to our gallery today, they will meet with 

officials of Economic Development, Tourism Saskatchewan, 

and the Regina Chamber of Commerce. Tomorrow they will 

visit and tour the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in warmly 

welcoming our special guests from Switzerland. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, by your leave, and on behalf of 

Her Majesty’s Official Opposition, I would like to add my 

words of welcome to our very special guests, along with the 

Minister of Finance. Please enjoy our great province and enjoy 

our company and hospitality here in our legislature. Thank you 

for being with us. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our 

caucus  and we would indicate to you, the official alternative 

for the next government  we would like to also join in 

welcoming the delegation from Switzerland, the Ambassador 

and his wife, and those people that are with them. 

 

It is with great pleasure that I do welcome you here to our 

country. I have been in your country. My wife has relatives and 

friends in your country and we've been there. It is a beautiful 

place and I would recommend it to anyone who ever wants to 

go there, to either visit or to do business. We certainly enjoyed 

our time there and we hope that you will enjoy your time here 

in Saskatchewan as much as we have enjoyed your country. We 

have a lot to offer here; it’s just a little further apart. So 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you, some students who I know 

will go home with great stories to tell of their visit to the 

legislature and sharing the gallery with such honoured guests 

from Switzerland. 

 

We have a group who I’m welcoming today on behalf of the 

hon. member from Regina Dewdney. They’re 27 grade 5 and 6 

students, seated in the right portion of the Speaker’s gallery, 

from Stewart Russell School of Regina. They’re accompanied 

by their teacher, Mrs. Campbell. 

 

I’m going to be meeting with them following their time here in 

the gallery and ask all members in joining me in giving them a 

warm welcome today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m so very pleased 

today to be able to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature, a young group from Weyburn 

Junior High, a Red Cross youth group that are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a group that I spoke of here in a private member’s 

statement just a short few weeks ago about the wonderful 

activities that they’re doing in their community and throughout 

the province in their Red Cross activities. They hosted a 100th 

anniversary celebration of the Red Cross in Weyburn and I was 

able to attend. 

 

And I’m so very pleased that they’re here today to see some of 

the democratic process that we do in this legislature. I’ll be 

meeting with them for drinks and pictures afterwards and some 

discussion. 

 

They’re accompanied today with their teacher, Judy 

Buzowetsky, and the chaperon, Wayne Wheeler. Judy is an 

extraordinary teacher and volunteer . . . well with the Red Cross 

but also with a number of cultural activities also in the 

community. 

 

I’d just like everyone to join me in a very warm welcome to this 

outstanding group of youth from Weyburn, and join with me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a group of 41 grade 7 and 8 

students from Queen Elizabeth School in the constituency that I 

represent, Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

They’re seated in your west gallery and they’re accompanied by 

their teachers, Mr. Cherkewich, Mr. Gibault, Mrs. Barks, and 

Mr. Carleton. The students also have along with them today 

chaperons, Mrs. Wall, Mrs. Hockey, and Mrs. Thomas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be meeting with these students at 2:30 for 

drinks and photos and I would ask all members in the 

legislature to join me in welcoming these young people to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

for me to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in 

the legislature, a group of students on behalf of my colleague, 

the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Indian 

Head-Milestone, 18 students from Odessa School in Odessa, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they are from 

grade 7 and 8. They are accompanied by their teacher, Lloyd 

Posnikoff, and chaperons, Sharon Posnikoff, Connie Seitz, 

Annette Gaetz, and Brenda Schneider. They also have with 

them their bus driver, Faye Pearson. 

 

They are going to be having a tour shortly, after they spend 

some time here, and I look forward to meeting with them to 

share a drink and also answer any questions they might have. 

So please join me in extending to them a warm welcome. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Bob Borreson, who is seated in you gallery. I’d 

ask him to stand, please. 

 

And Mr. Borreson is a graduate of the University of 

Saskatchewan but is a civil servant with the Government of 

Alberta and is here spending some time talking to Social 

Services officials as well as getting some information from 

officials at the Department of Health. And I know all members 

will want to join with me in welcoming Mr. Borreson to 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Humboldt Wildlife Refuge 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to commend a Humboldt family for their donation of a 

parcel of land for wildlife refuge. Henry and Cheryl 

Kloppenburg have donated 159 acres of land to be designated 

as the Kloppenburg Wildlife Refuge. 

 

The Kloppenburgs say they are donating the land so that it 

remains as a natural area and home to the plants and animals 

native to that area for ever. 

 

They are dedicating the refuge in honour of Henry J. 

Kloppenburg Sr., who first settled the land. 

 

I would like to commend the family for their generous donation 

and for their efforts to conserve the natural plant and wildlife in 

the Humboldt area for future generations. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

Investment Dealers Association of Canada 

Report on Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, I have some very good news, 

and contrary to what some members may now be thinking, this 

is unrelated to my personal life. 

 

It’s about another day of good economic news. Fast on the heels 

of a major credit upgrade for Saskatchewan comes a glowing 

report card from the Investment Dealers Association of Canada. 

The association’s spokesperson, Ian Russell, is quoted as 

saying: 

 

It’s very clear that the province has made significant 

progress in addressing the very serious fiscal situation it 

faced in 1991. It’s a massive turnaround. 

 

He also praised the government’s policy of targeted tax 

reductions for manufacturing and processing companies, and 

reductions in corporate income tax rates for small business. 

 

The association says the export boom in the agricultural sector 

will help the economy rebound this year. It predicts 

Saskatchewan will see its real gross domestic product expand 

by 2 per cent in 1996. 

 

Business capital spending is expected to increase by 6 per cent, 

to $3.9 billion. Potash mining is also anticipating a good year. 

Oil production exports are expected to increase. An increase in 

diversification is also helping the economy. Non-traditional 

activities such as biotechnology, information and 

telecommunications technology, and call centres, are having a 

major impact on our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are setting a good example for other provinces 

to follow in responsible financial management. As the bond 

rating agencies and the investment dealers association are 

saying, we are right on track. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Community of Pinehouse 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’d like 

to commend the people of a small community in northern 

Saskatchewan for their accomplishments and ambitions. 

 

The village of Pinehouse is about 160 kilometres north-west of 

La Ronge and has a population of approximately 1,200 great 

people. Some of these people are employed in the mining 

industry, as the Key Lake operations and McArthur River 

operations are close mining projects to the community. But 

Pinehouse has also a lot of other potential for other industries 

like tourism, forestry, and fishing. 

 

But just as important as the natural resources of the Pinehouse 

area is the creativity and vision of the people who live there. 

The mayor and council of Pinehouse are continuously working 

to attract new business interests to the area and hope and  

opportunity for their people. They know the people of 

Pinehouse are struggling to create a prospering economy for 

their area and for their people. 

 

I would like to commend and recognize all the people who 

invest their time and money into various community 

development projects in the village of Pinehouse. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology’s Home Care Graduates 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Another 

health care success story, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure of 

being at the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology) graduation last week. And of course, 

graduation is always an exciting time. That was no exception. It 

caps off a lot of hard work, beginning of new opportunities for 

many people; and of course families are always very proud of 

the graduates. 

 

The largest class by far, Mr. Speaker, were the home care 

graduates, some 280 home care graduates from across this great 

province. I was advised 70 to 80 per cent of these graduates are 

at work, and the prospects are great for all of the graduates. Mr. 

Speaker, this is what health care reform is all about: evolving 

health care roles, enhanced community opportunities, taking 

services to people in their own homes. 

 

And I say, congratulations to all the graduates and thank them 

for their commitment to Saskatchewan’s health care reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Future Skills and Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council Collaboration 

 

Ms. Lorje:  During Access Awareness Week and as we 

launch a modern training program through SIAST, it is 

necessary to remind ourselves that there are those who are 

willing to work and deserve our extra-special attention. 

 

Therefore the Saskatchewan Abilities Council in Saskatoon is 

working with the Future Skills program to assist 14 people with 

disabilities to make the transition to meaningful, salaried work 

 work that has taken them off welfare and into the waged 

economy. 

 

These people have been trained as lab assistants and will 

perform basic lab procedures. The candidates were trained 

under the Future Skills program and now work with the ag 

biotech sector in Saskatoon. These 14 have been so 

well-received that a second project has recently started. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Abilities Council is quite justifiably proud of 

this project because it is a departure from the traditional jobs 

people with disabilities usually obtain. Our economic and 

financial recovery since 1991 has been achieved because we 

have paid attention to matters both great and small. We have 

saved a dollar here and a penny there and we balanced the  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

books in the process. And in our rush to prepare students for the 

new jobs of the new technology, we have not forgotten that all 

work has value and all workers, including those with 

disabilities, have dignity. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

are a young province with a brief recorded history, but we do 

have some established traditions which are the envy of the older 

provinces. And particularly we can point out with pride to the 

Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival which today opens its 

doors to start its camera rolling for the 32nd time in this 

province. 

 

This is Canada’s first and North America’s longest running 

short-film festival. It exists to display, celebrate, and reward 

Canadian short-film productions. Its existence far away from 

the ordinary centres of film culture is a justifiable point of pride 

for the people of Yorkton and for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The 1996 festival has received over 400 entries which will be 

competing for over 30 different categories. Many of the entries 

will be shown to the public over a three-day period of the 

festival. 

 

The Golden Sheaf Award will be presented at the banquet and 

the celebration on Saturday evening. Our master of ceremonies 

this year, Mr. Speaker, will be Mr. Bret Hart from the TV series 

Lonesome Dove, also a WWF (World Wrestling Federation) 

wrestling star who has very strong ties to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this festival’s theme is The Festival is a Country 

Attitude. It is a festival where people can come to enjoy the 

finest, most up-to-date film creations, at the same time enjoy 

the atmosphere of our Yorkton hospitality. 

 

Yet another example, Mr. Speaker, of where Saskatchewan is a 

leader for Canadians and North Americans to visit and enjoy. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Piping Plover and Muttering Mandryk 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, occasionally a story leaps 

off the page and gets your attention like no other. Such was the 

case recently with an article calling for volunteers to conduct 

the yearly census of the piping plover, an endangered shore-bird 

that inhabits small lakes and basins. This international census 

will take place in June. 

 

I then looked for, but could not find, the article calling for a 

search for the muttering Mandryk, a clipped-wing ground bird 

known for its pitiful cry of hypo-crite, hypo-crite. 

 

Watchers of birds like the Mandryk know that the biggest threat  

to the survival of a species is loss of habitat. Canada’s national 

paper in Toronto, which by default now brings us the news of 

Saskatchewan, told us this week that the previous habitat of the 

muttering Mandryk is greatly reduced. The Black forest and the 

Hollinger basin do not seem to provide a hospitable 

environment. 

 

As a noted bird-watcher of the Mandryk and other similar 

species said recently, “In a nutshell, that paper has gotten 

worse. It’s clearly weaker.” Protective coverage is not what it 

used to be. 

 

For those of us, Mr. Speaker, who have grown accustomed and 

even fond of the daily mutterings of the Mandryk and his 

cohorts, for those of us who will miss their daily presence in our 

lives, I can only suggest that we, with sadness, take our 

binoculars off of Hollinger and turn them on Hansard. For a 

mere $100 a season, Hansard can provide us with a complete 

view . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 

expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farm Fuel Rebate Program 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission has ruled that this 

government’s farm fuel rebate program discriminates on the 

basis of marital status. Four farm women in this province 

challenged the program because they did not get a rebate 

because they were married to farmers, even though they are 

farmers in their own right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commission also ruled that any farmer who 

received the maximum rebate since 1992 must be notified that 

they may be eligible for more funds if their partner in marriage 

also farms. 

 

Will the Minister of Finance indicate to us today in the House, 

if her government intends to abide by the ruling of the 

commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the question. The judgement is being looked at by the 

Department of Justice. And I don’t want to make any further 

comments on that particular issue, except to say that taxpayers 

in Saskatchewan do provide to the farmers of the province more 

than $100 million each and every year in tax-free fuel of one 

kind or another, whether diesel or gas. Beyond that I do not 

want to make any particular comment on that specific issue. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 

opposition has raised this issue with the Finance minister on 

several occasions. We have tried to get her to acknowledge the 

unfairness associated with the rules of the current program. Yet  

  



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

the Minister of Finance has refused to make any commitment 

whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, the minister could have averted this 

controversy if she had simply listened. I spelled out these 

concerns in a letter to the minister last November. 

 

Will the Minister explain to this House today why she and her 

government continually ignore the wishes of Saskatchewan 

people, and as a result, once again make the wrong choices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, as I said before, the Department of Justice is looking 

at the issues. So I do not want to make any further comment on 

it except to say that the people of this province, I think, do a 

very good job of supporting the farmers of this province. More 

than $100 million of tax dollars goes each and every year to 

ensure that farmers do not pay any tax at all in diesel, and that 

they get gas tax at a lower rate . . . or they get gas at a lower tax 

rate. Beyond that, I have no comment on the particular issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Farm women in this province have lived with 

this inequity and discrimination for far too long. The Human 

Rights Commission has recognized this fact and we, the official 

opposition, share the view of the commission. Yes, monetary 

costs could be substantial, but what is more important is that 

women are finally recognized as individual contributors to 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural sector. It’s too bad the government 

doesn’t recognize this. 

 

Will the minister tell me why women in Saskatchewan have to 

go the Human Rights Commission to get the recognition owed 

to them by this government, and will the minister also make a 

commitment to women of this province to recognize the 

recommendations of the commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, as I say, I don’t want to comment on that because the 

Department of Justice is looking at it. But I do want to comment 

on the opposition parties. These people have more money for 

everything  more money for farm fuel rebate, more money 

for health, more money for education, more money for farmers, 

tax cuts from this one . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Speaker’s having a 

great deal of difficulty hearing the minister provide her 

response to the question. I will ask all members to cooperate 

and allow the minister to be heard. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, they would give more 

money to everybody in the province for every single thing, and 

at the same time they’d reduce taxes, and at the same time 

they’d figure out how to reduce the debt of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen this before in the 1980s in this province, 

and the people of Saskatchewan are not going to buy parties 

that say we’ll do everything and some day you’ll pay the bill. 

This government is committed to fiscal responsibility at the  

same time as we are committed to ensuring that we have a 

compassionate and humane society in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel Advertising 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to bring to the attention of this House an eight-page 

supplement that appeared in yesterday’s edition of the Toronto 

Globe and Mail. This supplement provides information on such 

things as SaskTel calling cards, SaskTel Internet, and call centre 

technology  not for Saskatchewan readers but for Toronto 

readers, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to send a copy over to the 

minister in charge of SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has wasted countless dollars on focus 

groups. It has two well-paid presidents. And, Mr. Speaker, just 

like the Energizer Bunny, the foolish spending goes on and on 

and on. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SaskTel explain how many 

valuable tax dollars were spent on this useless venture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, only in 

Saskatchewan could this happen. We have an opposition, we 

have an opposition, who doesn’t understand the new 

technology, Mr. Speaker, that allows advertising to be placed 

directly to Saskatchewan audiences only in the issue of The 

Globe and Mail that circulates in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is the technology that has existed for quite some time, Mr. 

Speaker. And if you were in the Alberta version there would be 

the Alberta ad. In the B.C. (British Columbia) version, there’s 

the B.C. ad. We’re not wasting Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money 

advertising in other parts of the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

one of the biggest . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’m going to ask all hon. 

members  and I’m asking members on both sides of the 

House  to allow the . . . Order! Order. I’m asking members on 

both sides of the House to allow the questions to be put and the 

answers to be heard. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

the biggest complaint we get with the Crowns is all the 

advertising dollars that are wasted. Now we’re promoting in a 

Toronto- or an Ontario-based newspaper. At least if you’re 

going to advertise, do it in the Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix 

where our people get the benefit of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most people agree with the decision to have an 

insert in the Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix, but one might 

certainly question the value of spending precious tax dollars for 

a fluff piece of newspaper ad going in the Toronto Globe and  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

Mail. The people of Saskatchewan hear this government claim 

day in and day out that they are attempting . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now I’m going to ask the 

hon. members on the government side to allow the Speaker to 

be able to hear the question being put — on both sides of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

most people might agree with the decision to have such as insert 

in the Regina Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix, but one must 

certainly question the value of spending precious tax dollars for 

a fluff piece of paper in the Toronto Globe and Mail. The 

people of Saskatchewan hear this government claim day in and 

day out that they’re attempting to be as efficient as possible, yet 

the ad I refer to serves as proof that this is nothing more than an 

NDP (New Democratic Party) myth. 

 

Will the minister justify the decision to spend money on a 

newspaper insert for Ontario readers and explain why our tax 

dollars are being used to provide revenue for an out-of-province 

newspaper? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, don’t let the answer 

interfere with the question. I think I already explained that the 

ads appear only in the Saskatchewan version and, you know, 

just in case the members opposite should ever happen to pick up 

Maclean’s magazine, for example, I would provide the same 

explanation — that there would be a full-page ad for SaskTel in 

the Maclean’s issue for Saskatchewan only, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in terms of which newspaper we advertise in, I guess it 

doesn’t really matter much since Conrad Black owns them all 

now anyway. It goes into the same pocket. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Milk Control Board 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a letter here from Ken and Ruth Baker who 

run a dairy farm near Saskatoon. In recent weeks, they’ve had 

to cut back on the size of their operations because of the 

restrictions placed on them by the Milk Control Board. The 

Milk Control Board is preventing them from selling to markets 

they have located in the United States. 

 

They say: 

 

. . . we are currently 40 percent over quota and we only get 

$11.42 per 100 kilograms, whereas the United State’s 

plants are willing to pay (us) between $29.00 and $40.00 

. . . for our surplus milk. This is a huge loss to our 

operation and is opposite of the government’s stated policy 

of encouraging exports. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is your Milk Control Board standing in the  

way of dairy farmers like Ken and Ruth Baker selling their 

excess production? Will you look into the matter immediately 

and take action to correct this problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I can say, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite that the policy of this 

government since we came into power this last time, and I think 

previous to that for the most part, has been to let the industry 

decide what control mechanisms they would like or what 

restrictions or what type of marketing policy they want. We’ve 

done this with chicken marketing, egg marketing, pork 

marketing, and dairy marketing  all the marketing boards. 

 

I say to the member opposite, if the industry, if the milk 

producers, come to me as a group and say that we want some 

changes in the milk marketing program, I will certainly 

consider that. 

 

So I think the member opposite should talk to the people that 

are concerned about this shipment; get them to work with their 

industry counterparts. And I’d be very willing and open to 

discuss the matter with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I have a 

copy of your government’s Partnership for Growth economic 

strategy. Apparently you and the Milk Control Board haven’t 

read this document. Objective no. 2 is “Reduce the regulatory 

. . . burden on business.” Objective no. 7 is “Expand the 

agri-value sector.” Objective no. 18 is “Develop 

Saskatchewan’s export (sector) . . .” 

 

The actions of your Milk Control Board are running counter to 

all of those objectives and it’s preventing Ken and Ruth Baker 

from expanding their operation and selling their products into 

new markets that they’ve found for themselves. 

 

Mr. Minister, Ruth Baker told us, the Milk Control Board has 

our hands tied so tightly we can’t even do anything without 

their blessing, and they don’t bless anything. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is the Milk Control Board ignoring your 

government’s own economic strategy? Why aren’t they 

encouraging dairy farmers like the Bakers to develop new 

markets instead of discouraging this activity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, in a democracy you have to 

take into consideration that the majority of the people make a 

decision. If the regulatory regime is handcuffing all dairy 

producers, I would expect the dairy producers would come to 

me and say so. If one person has an opinion different than that, 

they’re totally entitled to that opinion. If they go to their 

industry counterparts and bring that forward to me, I’m 

certainly open to look at it. 

 

In fact I’ve said in the past many times, marketing boards in this 

province have served the producers well. If the current 

marketing board system is not going to serve us well into the  

  



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

year 2000 and beyond, then the industry should come and tell 

me that. And I’ll work with them to provide the best marketing 

system that we can to give our producers an advantage that they 

can take and put dollars in their pockets and provide economic 

development to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Labour. Minister 

of Labour, I would caution you to listen up. This is a short 

question but very important. 

 

Mr. Minister, can your government change the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement without the consent of the 

Construction Labour Relations Association and the building 

trades council? Or do those two organizations have to give their 

consent to any proposed changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The parties to the Construction 

Tendering Agreement met today. It was a very good meeting. 

There was a harmonious discussion. Both sides, reported to me, 

have been very reasonable, and they’ve agreed to have another 

meeting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

supplemental for the minister. Mr. Minister, you made a deal 

with these two organizations representing the unions and 

unionized contractors. And by doing so, you have effectively 

given them a veto over any changes to your tendering policy. 

That’s just plain insane. 

 

The truth is that you no longer control your government’s own 

Crown tendering policy which oversees millions of dollars of 

construction and Crown construction work every year. You 

signed this deal to buy labour support on the eve of an election. 

And now you’re stuck with it for five years, and you can’t 

change it even if you want to. Who in their right mind would’ve 

signed a deal like that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that you would like to see some 

changes to this agreement but that you have no ability to change 

this agreement for five years because you’ve given away the 

control to the unions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t surprise 

me that the member of opposite suggests ripping something up 

because when they were in government that’s what they were, 

were rippers. They ripped the fabric of Saskatchewan apart is 

what they did. 

 

But we are, in the New Democrats . . . is a party and a 

government of builders, and we’re building on the strengths we 

have  the culture of Saskatchewan, the traditional values that 

Saskatchewan has, respect for private business, as well as 

respect for the working people who make this province operate. 

 

And I’m happy and the member opposite should be happy that 

the parties today sat down to talk in the Saskatchewan way 

about how we build for the future. We’re not people who are 

going to rip up something that’s thoughtlessly requested by the 

members of the Conservative Party. 

 

What we want to do is build on our strengths and our values in 

Saskatchewan for the next century. We believe that people are 

coming onside with that and wish the opposition would from 

time to time as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a second 

supplemental for the minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) officials were sitting down with 

representatives from both sides today. What happens if CIC and 

the construction association do come to some sort of an 

agreement but the CLR (Construction Labour Relations 

Association) and the building trade council say no? What 

happens then? 

 

You’ve been giving these guys a veto over your own tendering 

policy, a veto that goes to cost millions of dollars over the next 

few years, the next five years. Mr. Minister, it would be kind of 

funny how badly you got snookered on this deal if only it 

weren’t that the Saskatchewan taxpayers will end up paying the 

bill. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a very simple question for you, and I’d like 

a yes or no answer. Very simply put, yes or no, is it possible for 

you to change the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement) without the consent of the CLR and the building 

trades council? Yes or no, Mr. Minister? Which is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

shows an obvious lack of understanding of how public policy is 

developed. And it wouldn’t surprise me because the 

government that he would represent from the days of the 

previous administration didn’t pay much attention to good 

public policy. 

 

The New Democrats, our government, have worked very hard 

to build public policy. How do you do that? You arrive at 

agreements with people from time to time; you search 

consensus or you can find consensus; you have consultations to 

get as broad as you can the public input and the stakeholder 

input into the programs that you develop. 

 

Today there were members that sat down concerning tendering 

agreements, concerning construction work in Saskatchewan, to 

come to a compromise, to come up with better public policy. 

That’s how you build public policy. 

 

We take responsibility for the public policy we build, and in the 

end of the day it will be good public policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

HARO Shareholder Agreement 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to bring to the attention of this House a January 

1992 memo from the present Government House Leader to the 

Premier which refers to the HARO Financial Corporation and 

other Crown investments. I’d like to share copies of this with 

the cabinet members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this memo confirms that the deal the previous 

Conservative government agreed to saw a number of 

shareholders, including Harvard Developments which is owned 

by the Hill family, receive $15 million worth of shares for only 

$600,000 cash and a $5.4 million loan that would not have to be 

returned unless there was a profit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in essence what the Tories did was agree to use 

taxpayers’ money to give wealthy individuals more than their 

fair share. And the present NDP government hid this fact from 

the public for four years. 

 

Will the Premier explain why his government continues to 

overtax the average person while giving wealthy HARO 

shareholders millions of dollars in free shares? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well no one would argue that the 

style of economic development of the former Conservative 

government was in the best interest of the province. And I think 

to that extent, the current members of the third party are fairly 

apologetic about the style of government and the style of 

economic management. 

 

This memo, which I have not had an opportunity to read, refers 

to that and certainly this government has had the challenge of 

restructuring some of these arrangements which really were 

pretty bad. We have restructured them. 

 

I am pleased to say that the . . . that Crown Life has now had 

quite a successful quarter. And I would say to the hon. member 

from Thunder Creek  I’m not sure where this is leading  

but it seems to me it’s time that the member from Thunder 

Creek left the attacks on Crown Life alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, not only did the Premier and 

the current Government House Leader know about this, but so 

too did the current Minister of Finance. Others who knew the 

taxpayers were being taken to the cleaners included Ron Clark, 

the current president of SaskEnergy; Don Ching, the Premier’s 

law partner and newly appointed president of SaskTel; and the 

present ministers of Economic Development and Municipal 

Government, who both sat on the Crown Management Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this government closed hospitals, cut rural 

services, and raised taxes, they hid a sweetheart deal that 

provided wealthy HARO shareholders, including the Hill 

family, millions in free shares. Will the Premier explain why 

the double standard? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite, the member from Thunder Creek, that his 

continuing attack on Crown Life long after, long after the fact, 

tells me something about the members of the Liberal caucus. 

First of all, they don’t understand business. That’s one of the 

reasons that they’re in opposition. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, across Canada, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now I’m going to ask the members of 

the official opposition to allow the Speaker to be able to hear 

the answer being put. I’m simply not able to hear the answer 

being put, and I’ll ask for the cooperation of all members. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I just say to the 

members opposite, members of the Liberal caucus, is that their 

continued attack on Crown Life and other businesses in this 

province is both unbecoming as members of the official 

opposition . . .  

 

And to quote an important person in the company’s 

management, the vice-president, Alan Rowe, the Liberal 

opposition’s uninformed and irresponsible comments have cost 

Crown Life a number of insurance contracts and jobs  and 

jobs. All this is is cheap politics to try to get out of the deep 

difficulty you’ve been in since you kicked your leader out and 

have ruined the chances of the Liberal Party to form 

government in this province for a long, long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the last page of this memo lists 

some of the guidelines approved by this government for 

negotiating Crown investments and industrial projects. It states, 

and I quote: “no implicit subsidy should be provided by Crown 

agencies.” The memo goes on to indicate that if grants or 

subsidies are necessary, again I quote: “these should be 

budgeted for and publicized so that all Saskatchewan citizens 

can access them.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government helped give millions of dollars in 

free shares to a select group of well-to-do people. It was done in 

the dark, and worse yet, it was kept in the dark by the NDP. 

 

Will the Premier explain why his government broke its own 

rules and failed to inform taxpayers that they paid for a secret 

give-away to a select group of wealthy shareholders? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 

opposite once again, he has his facts all wrong, and everyone in 

the province knows that. 

 

The fact is, is that he’s talking about an arrangement, an 

arrangement made by the previous government, led by Grant 

Devine. And people can question . . . and the decision was 

made about kicking that government out. And he’s making that 

accusation, that shares were given by this government. There  

  



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

was no such arrangement made. It was made by the previous 

administration. 

 

What you’re doing here, and I quote from the letter from Mr. 

Alan Rowe, and I quote from the second page of that letter, it 

says to you: 

 

However, your uninformed and irresponsible comments 

earlier this year have had an impact on the value of the 

investment of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

You are causing a devaluation of the money that we have 

invested in this corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, in recent months people in this 

province have been subjected to news that this government 

plans to force the closure of the Plains Health Centre, the 

geriatric unit in Moose Jaw, and numerous long-term care 

facilities. There has also been a round of education and other 

service cuts. 

 

When this government allegedly renegotiated the HARO deal in 

1992 the Premier stated, and I quote, “There’s a limit to how 

much you can claw back in some circumstances.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is willing to claw back when it 

comes to health care for average people, but there’s a limit 

when it comes to the wealthy friends of his government. Will 

the Premier do the honourable thing and get back the millions 

secretly given away to HARO shareholders in a sweet deal that 

he and most of his cabinet colleagues have hidden from the 

public for the last four years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I 

had an opportunity to be in British Columbia over the last 

weekend and listened to the undiscernible message of the 

Liberal Party in British Columbia, but I can say, never have I 

heard a more inconsistent message than the members of that 

caucus. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now again I’m going to have to 

ask hon. members to come . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Which ones? 

 

The Speaker:  Order. It appears on both sides of the House. 

Order. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Which one? 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The hon. member will come to order. 

Order! The hon. member will come to order. The hon. member 

will come to order. I will ask all hon. members, all hon. 

members, all hon. members, to come to order. The Speaker is 

. . . Order! I will ask all hon. members to come to order. 

 

I’m not able to hear the answer being provided and I ask for all  

hon. members to show their respect to the House and the 

question period to allow the answer to be heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

members opposite that one of the reasons they’re floundering in 

third place in the polls in Saskatchewan is because of the 

inconsistent message, the inconsistent message that they are 

giving out to the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

The only question that I would ask the member from Thunder 

Creek and the Liberal caucus, are you urging us to shut down 

Crown Life or are you not? That’s the message that you’re 

giving to us, that you would kick 1,000  1,000 — 

Saskatchewan families out of their jobs. And if that’s the 

message, have the courage of your conviction to stand up and 

say that in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Temple Gardens Mineral Spa Opening in Moose Jaw 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to recognize the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in Moose 

Jaw on the occasion of their official opening of their new 

facility. This development has been formed through a 

partnership with the community, the city of Moose Jaw, and the 

province through the Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation’s $700,000 equity investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Temple Gardens is a $9 million spa and hotel 

featuring a year-round in-door, out-door mineral pool and 

health centre, 69 guest rooms, and banquet facilities. It’s 

located in the city of Moose Jaw’s historic, downtown core. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this development has made a significant impact on 

Moose Jaw’s economy. Construction of the facility resulted in 

80 person-years of construction activity, and the spa is hiring 80 

full-time and 20 part-time jobs at the complex. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the development will 

also contribute significantly to the province’s tourism industry. 

The Temple Gardens is expected to attract more than 60,000 

visitors a year to the facility; visitors that will spend their 

tourism dollars in our province. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, tourism has been identified in 

Partnership for Growth as one of the six key, vital sectors of 

the economy for growth and job creation in our province. And 

the province has supported the initiative with the $700,000 

equity investment by SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation), a tourism and development grant from the 

Department of Economic Development, and a utility agreement 

from Sask Water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the spa has taken the initiative to access support 

from other governments and private agencies to hire and train 

employees — the funding through the province’s Future Skills  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

program and support from SIAST, New Careers, Human 

Resources Council and the Saskatchewan Education Council. 

By doing this, Temple Gardens has developed an extremely 

progressive training program for 64 people previously 

unemployed or underemployed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province also supported development through 

the federal-provincial Partnership Agreement on Water Based 

Economic Development and a Partnership Agreement on Rural 

Development, and I want to say here that the federal 

government deserves credit for their involvement as well. 

 

Many community leaders supported this project development 

and they should be congratulated. And I want to say specifically 

to you, Mr. Speaker, and to yourself and the Minister of Social 

Services, this project is very, very much a result of your work 

with the community. 

 

The city of Moose Jaw and the federal government also deserve 

the support of the community in this investment, along with the 

private banking sector. But it was the initiative and support of 

the people of Moose Jaw that encouraged, nurtured, and 

supported the project to fruition. 

 

Private investors, most of them from the city of Moose Jaw, 

contributed more than $3 million to the project, and in the 

process created jobs for the city and for families in the Moose 

Jaw community. I know that all members will join with me in 

congratulating the community of Moose Jaw and those involved 

in the development of the new spa which will be opened on 

Saturday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, we’d like to congratulate the stakeholders 

on the Temple Gardens Spa in Moose Jaw on the grand opening 

of their facility. 

 

I’m not sure how many people recognize the work and the 

dedication it requires to start a business, and the extra 

challenges required in developing a world-class tourism 

destination. Saskatchewan has all the essential elements for so 

many different types of businesses and industry, not the least of 

which is the people whose talents and drives can move 

mountains. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my biggest dream is to be part of this Assembly 

when there are so many business start-ups in this province, 

we’ll no longer have time to recognize them each individually. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, certainly 

there’s a lot of good in this agreement that has been reached. 

The people of Moose Jaw, as you know, have worked very long 

and hard to see this project come into being. 

 

I certainly remember in our caucus, the former caucus, the 

former member from Thunder Creek spoke in glowing terms 

about this project. It’s been ongoing for many years, and it’s  

good to see that the project has come together. So we certainly 

congratulate the people of Moose Jaw in this latest endeavour, 

and we look forward to it being very successful. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  To ask leave to comment on the 

ministerial statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much. Well I am so 

delighted that the citizens of Moose Jaw have been able to bring 

this particular facility to fruition, and it is indeed a credit to 

their tenacity. I am quite sure that the minister recalls that he 

and I disagreed on how this in fact might be able to be 

accomplished, but it appears that we are equally pleased by the 

result. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was so enthralled when my dad explained 

to me that the original Temple Gardens’ floor was cushioned by 

horse hair in order for people to be able to enjoy their dancing 

more. 

 

And it is appropriate, I believe, that the deeply loved building 

that provided such good times is going to have its name live on 

in a facility that will provide more good times. So I say, 

congratulations to all the citizens of Moose Jaw and in 

particular the people that brought this about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  According to our policy of being 

open and accessible, I table the answer to 110. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 110 is provided. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 

Barb Hookenson, the executive director of court services; and 

Madeleine Robertson, a Crown solicitor. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to, on 

behalf of our members, welcome the officials today who are 

going to assist you, Mr. Minister. And we would of course like 

to talk to you a little bit about this Bill because once again in 

simplicity, as we read the title, it seems like a Bill constructed 

that doesn’t seem to do very much, and yet it has some very  

  



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

deep meaning for a lot of people. And it gives you and your 

government and your officials a lot of power to change things in 

Saskatchewan that cannot and will not be debated on a public 

forum once this Bill is passed. 

 

But in order to get people your opinion of how this Bill is going 

to be used, I think in fairness, I’ll allow you to explain to us 

how you plan on using the powers that you will achieve from 

this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  At the present time, the only way that we 

would be using this is to deal with the previous announced 

arrangement as far as Melville is concerned. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, you mention that this has 

only got to do with Melville, and yet my impression of the Bill 

is that it gives you the power to close certain facilities 

throughout the province that have to do with Court of Queen’s 

Bench, in other words, court-houses like the one in Kerrobert. Is 

that off the mark? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The only thing that this particular 

amendment deals with is the residences of Court of Queen’s 

Bench judges. It has nothing to do with court-houses. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Then tell me, Minister, what you’re doing in 

Melville that you’re going to have to close up a residence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well we could have a situation where we 

didn’t have a Court of Queen’s Bench registry in Melville, but 

we’d have a requirement in the Act that requires that a Queen’s 

Bench judge live there and commute to Yorkton or to Regina or 

Saskatoon or something, to do, as . . . do the jobs. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well it seems rather strange to me that you 

have to have an act of legislation in order to provide housing for 

a judge or to take it away. I’m trying to figure out in my mind, 

why we’re doing this? Surely there must be some provision in 

other Acts . . . you’re amending this Act, and I have the feeling 

and the sense that there’s more buried here than meets the eye, 

and I want you to tell me if this amendment is simply changing 

that part. Obviously then the rest of the original Act is the part 

that has been invoked to use as the power to close court-houses 

such as the one in Shaunavon. Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the difficulty that you have is that 

this particular amendment doesn’t have anything to do with the 

closure of court-houses. And I think what you should remember 

is, that this provision was placed in The Queen’s Bench Act at 

the time that the district court and the Court of Queen’s Bench 

were amalgamated. And the lists of towns or cities that are on 

this particular part of the Act are those places where, I think in 

1979, there were resident district court judges. And it just was 

sort of the luck of the draw that these places had resident judges 

at that point. And practically, that’s the only rationale. It only 

relates to the residence of the judges. 

 

We have a situation here where we’re trying to set it up so that 

we don’t have to go to the legislature every time a judge wants 

to move his residence. 

Mr. Goohsen:  So it is simply permission then to have the 

right to move the judge’s residence. In terms of . . . you’re not 

specifically talking about a little brick house. You’re saying, the 

very general term of a residence that he wants to move from 

Shaunavon to Maple Creek, and if he wanted to live in Maple 

Creek and commute back to work at the other place, he could 

have his residence somewhere else. You’re not saying that the 

government provides him with an actual home, that he doesn’t 

have to buy his own then. So the words are a little bit confusing. 

But I’ll let you straighten me out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. We do not provide a house 

or a place for judges to live. This relates to a sense, at one point, 

where there was the perception, when we didn’t have the 

modern communication systems that we do have now, that you 

needed physical access to the judge, the person of the judge, in 

the community. Now we have a very effective 

telecommunications system, we have a very effective court 

system, which allows for access to a judge any time, day or 

night, via telephone if necessary. 

 

And what we’re dealing with here is in a sense, an anachronistic 

piece of legislation which hampers the effective administration 

of justice. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, supposing I’m incarcerated in 

jail in Shaunavon and the judge no longer now lives there 

because you have, through this Act, allowed him . . . I don’t 

even know if one lives there, but I’m just using this as a 

hypothetical example. Now suppose the judge that used to live 

there, that my lawyer could have gone to and got a writ of 

habeas corpus to spring me out of that situation, and now that 

judge no longer is there because of this Bill. You’re saying that 

I still have my rights as an individual protected, that I could still 

get out, that I could still have my lawyer get a hold of a judge 

that same day and protect my rights as an individual? Or do you 

still have to have a written, signed piece of paper by a judge in 

some of these situations in order to protect the individual rights 

of people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the first piece of information is that 

there never was a resident Court of Queen’s Bench judge in 

Shaunavon at any point. That was never a designated spot. So 

that’s not a very good example. 

 

But to answer the second part of your question, the rules are 

such that one can file the documents by fax and get orders back 

by fax, which are deemed to be equally valid as if somebody 

hands them to you personally in this situation. And the whole 

idea is that we will have access to justice in just the situation 

you talk about even faster than maybe we did before. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  I apologize for using a bad example, 

Minister. I’ve never been in jail, not even as a visitor, so I 

didn’t know that they didn’t have one in Shaunavon or a Court 

of Queen’s Bench judge. However, I’ll use Swift Current then 

 it’s bigger; it must have one. I’m sure they do. 

 

So what you’re saying is that the individual rights of people  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

now are still protected because you have, in law, allowed that 

electronically transferred documents are legally binding and 

that the courts and officials in the jail system will act on those 

and that everybody that needs to have their rights protected still 

has the same protections that we had before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  That was my concern I guess and 

straightening out the interpretation of the wording of what 

residence really meant, and the fact that it doesn’t necessarily 

mean that you were buying houses for judges, or weren’t about 

to start to do so in the future. I think there are some people that 

should buy their own homes, probably . . . well I won’t mention 

any others. A couple came to mind real quickly. 

 

Anyway I appreciate your answers. I think it’s rather silly that 

we have lived this long in life in this province without having 

had the ability to do what you’re already doing. Probably 

somebody should have done this quite a few years ago. 

 

And so I have no further questions on the issue. I think you’ve 

done the right thing here. 

And I hope that it really doesn’t affect anybody’s rights though, 

and that everybody does have their legal obligations fulfilled 

and that people can in fact not have to be incarcerated 

improperly for long periods of time, and those kinds of 

fundamental rights are still protected. And I believe they 

probably are. So you can comment on that and assure us if you 

like. But other than that I have no further questions. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

believe that the power to pass regulations which would establish 

. . . or de-establish judicial centres as contained in section 52, 

subsection (2) of The Queen’s Bench Act, the power has been 

used extensively by your party, Mr. Minister, since it came into 

power in 1991. 

 

In June of ’93 the NDP passed an order in council for 60 of 

1993, enacting a judicial centres regulations 1993 known as 

chapter Q-1 regulation 3, which disestablished two rural judicial 

centres, namely Shaunavon and Gravelbourg. 

 

Curiously those two judicial centres just happened to be located 

in the constituency of Shaunavon, now known as Wood River, 

which happens to have been held by the Liberals. In fact it was 

held by our esteemed House Leader who was re-elected there 

with a margin of over 1,500 votes. More recently in July ’94, 

the NDP passed regulations no. Q-1, regulation 4, entitled the 

judicial centres regulations 1994. 

 

This regulation resulted in the de-establishing of another 

judicial centre. This time it was in Moosomin. Curiously the 

town of Moosomin just happens to be located in the 

constituency of Moosomin which is held by the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative). In fact it’s held by the esteemed 

House Leader of what is now the third party. I note the hon. 

member from Moosomin was re-elected in his constituency by a 

margin of 1,200 votes. 

 

Now we hear that the judicial centre of Kerrobert is next on the  

chopping block  not surprising. We find that the town of 

Kerrobert is located in the constituency of Kindersley which is 

held by the Leader of the Third Party of this legislature. 

 

If we look back over the last three years of NDP administration, 

it’s not surprising that people in the rural areas who place a 

value on the presence of their Queen’s Bench centres look with 

trepidation upon the power of the government to establish and 

disestablish judicial centres by regulation under section 52 

under the Act. One of the assurances that citizens in smaller 

centres can draw comfort from is the provisions of section 7.13 

of The Queen’s Bench Act. That’s the section which requires 

that at least one Queen’s Bench judge reside at or in the 

neighbourhood of 10 main cities and towns. 

 

These cities and towns are Battleford, Estevan, Moose Jaw, 

Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Yorkton, 

Humboldt, and Melville. To people in businesses in these 

communities, the presence of section 7.13 of the Act provides 

some long-term assurance that the government has no plans to 

de-establish their community as judicial centres. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Bill before this Assembly proposes to repeal 

this important subsection and replace it with just another typical 

NDP style section giving power to the Governor in Council to 

pass regulations designating places where the Queen’s Bench 

judges must live. 

 

Mr. Minister, I must say this to you in all sincerity, that I’m 

very disappointed by your decision to introduce this Bill. The 

Bill, if it is passed, will further remove the public debate over 

the establishment and de-establishment of judicial centres out of 

the world of the Legislative Assembly where it belongs, in my 

humble view, and into the realm of the quiet, closed door world 

of the cabinet where regulations are being made. 

 

Mr. Minister, this Bill is wrong. If you are planning to close 

down one or more of these judicial centres that would 

correspond to the list of 10 communities where at least one 

judge must reside, then in my respectful opinion you should 

have introduced an amendment to The Queen’s Bench Act 

which expressly removes the community from the list. 

 

You should be required to submit your proposed amendments to 

the elected representatives of the people  the MLAs of this 

province. And, Mr. Minister, it would be a move that would 

cause you some political heat and perhaps your colleagues in 

cabinet, but that’s the way the system is supposed to work, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

If you want to change the law in a controversial way, a way 

which may have a detrimental effect for our rural community, 

then I think it’s your public duty to bring that change before the 

Legislative Assembly and come clean. Debating that change 

may make you unpopular for a while, but it’s the right thing to 

do. It’s democracy in action, and it’s the open way. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Bill seeks to avoid that. Your Bill seeks to 

do an end run around the nasty debate in the legislature. It seeks 

to do an end run around having to introduce a Bill in this House 

which would expressly state what I fear your government’s  

  



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

intentions are in the case of several rural centres. To put it 

bluntly, Mr. Minister, and I hesitate to use these words, but your 

Bill seeks to do indirectly what your colleagues in cabinet are 

afraid to do directly. And in short, I think it’s wrong. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I’ve used some rather strong language in 

my preamble to the question on this Bill, and I regret if I’ve 

caused any offence. But I think it’s best that you know our true 

feelings about this type of Bill, and here I’m referring to the 

Bills to remove unpopular decisions from the forum of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

In any event, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you earnestly, in the 

next three and a half years of your government’s mandate, are 

you planning on eliminating the requirement that a judge reside 

in or at the neighbourhood of Melville, Battleford, Estevan, 

Moose Jaw, and the rest of those cities on the list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that the question and the 

comment doesn’t necessarily understand what we’re doing here. 

This relates to the residence of the judge. It doesn’t relate to 

where the court-house is. And we’re in a situation now where 

we have announced the closure of the court-house, the Queen’s 

Bench, in Melville. We’ll continue to have Provincial Court 

heard there, but we won’t have a registry for the Queen’s Bench 

any longer. 

 

This legislation has it set up so that a judge would live in 

Melville, a Court of Queen’s Bench judge would live in 

Melville, but commute to Yorkton or commute to Regina or 

commute somewhere. I think what we have to remember is that 

the history of this particular piece of legislation relates to the 

amalgamation of the district court with the Court of Queen’s 

Bench. And when we recognize that, then the list of names 

where these residents were relates exactly to the 1979 list of 

where district court judges live. 

 

Clearly the goal of any Department of Justice, any minister of 

Justice who is involved with providing access to justice in 

Saskatchewan, is to make sure that everybody has access to the 

appropriate resources that they need. 

 

Telecommunications have changed dramatically so that many 

of the kinds of things that were done by having access to the 

person of a judge in the community can now be done faster and 

with more efficiency by using fax pleadings, by using the 

telephone, by using other means. 

 

We have to look carefully at how much money that we have in 

our total system and how we spend that money. And one of the 

things that we in our department have looked at very carefully 

is how we structure the access to justice arrangements. And one 

of the things that creates a number of difficulties relates to 

having a provision in the Act that directs where judges live  

not where they work, but where they live. And that’s what we 

want to remove. That’s all. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 91  An Act to amend 

The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize, 

Mr. Minister, for not welcoming your officials last time. Mr. 

Minister, could you just briefly give us . . . just explain the 

major changes in this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  They’re basically changes to increase 

consistency with what happens in the Criminal Code. There are, 

I think, some changes surrounding the use of restitution, making 

it absolutely clear that we encourage the whole judicial system 

to use provisions of restitution. And then there’s provisions 

around the fine system, and how the procedures are used with 

the collections of fines as it relates to municipalities. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, in clause 3 of the Act, the 

definition of peace officer has been expanded. It appears RMs 

(rural municipality) will now have the power to appoint by-law 

enforcement officers. 

 

What is the current method of enforcing by-laws? Is it done 

strictly by the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think all we’re doing here is trying to 

make the legislation consistent with what happens now. By-law 

enforcement officers are appointed by the municipalities, and 

this just makes it clear that they then have the powers of a 

police officer. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, is this a change that the RMs 

have actually been asking for? Is that the purpose of the 

change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think practically it’s a legislative gap 

that we wanted to make sure was fixed. We just had by-law 

enforcement officers out there. When we looked what their 

authority was to do some of the things they were doing, it 

wasn’t set out in the Act. And so the officials recommended 

that this happen. 

 

So it wasn’t brought to us by the municipalities but they’re 

clearly not opposed to it. 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Bill also appears 

to expand the definition of prosecutor. Can the minister explain 

this change and why it was made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The concern here was to make sure that 

the definition of prosecutor was consistent with the Criminal 

Code, which is federal legislation and the practice across the 

country. It expands it slightly to make sure that people who 

were actually in the process of handling the first appearances 

usually have the clear definition of prosecutor under this 

legislation. 

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, if we can jump down to clause 6 

of the Bill, these amendments appear to . . . appear the 

government has the right to seize the property of corporations 

who have failed to pay fines. I’m wondering if this doesn’t 

appear to be an extreme measure or if the minister envisions 

seeing that it could happen very often. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think your definition is correct, that it is 

an extreme measure and it would be very rarely used to actually 

use this particular process of distress or seizure of assets. 

They’d have to go back to the justice of peace and say, we’ve 

tried all other ways to get this fine paid and we need to take this 

step. So it’s a procedure that is expected to be used rarely, but 

it’s quite handy if you’re trying to collect a fine. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, how are the corporations treated 

under the current Act as far as restitution is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Is your question about restitution or about 

distress . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . About restitution. Well I 

think practically, the answer would be that they’re treated like 

all other convicted offenders, and if they’re ordered to pay 

restitution, well then it’s clear that they should pay. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there any limit as to what can and can’t be 

seized? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If you’re talking about corporations, it 

would be the corporate assets, and that alone. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So it would be any of the unmortgaged, 

tangible assets. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How would the other unpaid creditors of the 

company be treated in these circumstances? Would they get a 

share of the proceeds of the sale of the seized goods? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think in this particular area there doesn’t 

appear to be Crown priorities, so they would share with all 

other creditors. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Would they share in a percentage relative to 

the amount that was owed by each? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Owed to each, not by each. 

 

What would happen in the case where the seized goods were 

covered by a security agreement under that Personal Property 

Security Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The security agreement would take 

precedence. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What if they were covered by the purchased 

money security interest; would that be the same thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to your 

officials, Mr. Minister. 

 

In carrying on the line of questioning of my colleague, I would 

just like to pose a couple more questions. Would it make a 

difference if the goods in question were a vital or essential 

commodity to carry on the company’s business? I’ll just give 

you an example if you like, such as maybe a delivery van for a 

delivery service company. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question lies in 

the way the procedure has been set up. The person who’s 

enforcing the payment of the fine has to go back to the justice 

of the peace before using these rather drastic measures. And 

often what the role of the justice of the peace in that situation is, 

to say, well is this seizure, or whatever you’re going to do, 

going to destroy a business or, you know . . . usually the 

questions are, well how have you tried to collect the money so 

far. And so there is a protection built into the proposal that’s 

here. 

 

Ms. Julé:  So then is it fair to say that there is a limit as to 

what can be seized if it’s detrimental to the ongoing function of 

the company in question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s no limit in the legislation here 

about that, but I think practically, what you have to recognize, 

there are very few situations where there are very large fines. 

Although you know, there are some examples of, I suppose, a 

$100,000 fine, but usually that’s with a larger corporation. But 

most of the time we’re talking about smaller amounts. 

 

But the role of the justice of the peace here would be to assess 

the size of the fine and how much money is needed to cover that 

fine. I think practically, corporations are one of the, I guess, 

should I say, the best payers of fines. When they’re fined they 

usually pay it because that’s just the nature of business. 

 

So this would be only used in some very drastic situations. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, would this 

power sort of kick in technically the day after the fine falls due, 

or when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, this power would be there 

immediately when the fine is ordered. But practically, there 

would be many chances to pay the fine before we’d ever get 

into this. Plus there’s the process of going back to the justice of 

peace — makes it clear that you have to go to the justice of the 

peace; say, well I tried to get paid this way or that way. 

 

The only time it might go very quickly is if it’s a corporation’s 

ordered to pay a fine and then there’s an asset that’s going to 

disappear. They might move faster. There are also other pieces 

of legislation that could deal with that problem. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will there 

be a reasonable warning period involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the reasonable warning 

period would be the day that the judge orders the fine, and then  

  



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

whatever arrangements a corporation might make to pay that 

fine. I can imagine that whoever’s acting or is the person who is 

involved with the corporation would have a very good idea of 

when this might take place. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there a waiting period 

between the seizure of the goods and their subsequent sale? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There isn’t necessarily set out here a time 

like that. But clearly, whoever is enforcing the fine would rather 

have that person come up with some money and then give the 

asset back. And that’s sort of the normal procedure. 

 

I think what we’ve done here is there have been a few difficult 

situations where this power didn’t exist for the people who were 

enforcing the fine. Just by adding this particular clause, it 

makes it very clear that as a corporation you can’t avoid paying 

your fine. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would a property that 

actually belonged to other people, was accidentally seized and 

sold . . . will the government have to compensate the owner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Are you asking about wrongful seizure? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mistaken seizure, yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think that would be appropriate, 

that there would be some arrangement to correct whatever 

mistake had been made. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the question of 

restitution, there’s no question that we fully support any attempt 

to provide restitution to victims of crimes by the perpetrators of 

those crimes — because we do support that. How exactly do 

these new rules broaden the power of Provincial Court judges 

for the issuing of restitution orders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think this is actually a significant change 

which does make it very clear that the judges do have the power 

of restitution in the legislation. Right now, what they have to 

use is probation orders and other ways of doing it rather than 

having it specifically spelled out here. So this is, I think, good 

news for all of us, that the judges will have a clear way to order 

restitution. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How does this compare 

to similar procedures in other provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think in Canada there were a number of 

provinces that just used the Criminal Code provisions, which is 

the federal law, and some other provinces were like we were up 

until we passed this legislation, without any specific provisions. 

So we’re, I suppose, in the middle of the pack. We’re now 

moving towards the side where we have very clear rules about 

restitution. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Okay, moving on, it appears the Bill restricts 

municipalities’ ability to offer discounts for early payment of 

certain fines. Why was this clause thought necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the concern that we had as a 

province, looking at the total administration of Justice, was an 

inconsistency of treatment of moving traffic violations  in 

other words, speeding  and where one municipality might 

have one rule about that and somebody drives down the road 

and they have a different rule. What we want to be certain is 

that there’ll be consistency across the province in dealing with 

those kinds of offences. 

 

Ms. Julé:  These are all the questions that I have at this time, 

Mr. Minister, and I thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just a couple of questions, Mr. Minister, and 

again welcome to your officials from your department. This is a 

question specifically for northern Saskatchewan, just a very 

few, quick questions. 

 

In one section, it says section 7.1 amended; 7.1(3) is repealed 

and the following substituted: 

 

“When directing where a judge shall reside, the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council shall ensure that at least one judge 

resides at or in the neighbourhood of each place designated 

in the regulations for the purpose of this subsection”. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan, as you’re probably aware . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That legislation has already been passed. 

We’re onto the next Bill. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the part I have in 

northern Saskatchewan, many judges that do come into the 

North and look at what the situation is, and the part I’m 

concerned about is when the judges pass judgement on 

somebody to pay restitution, is there a provision in there in 

terms of the length. Because on many occasions, people who’ve 

either been in . . . personally offended or the property offended, 

because of the economic situation, many times they aren’t able 

to recover some of their losses. Is there something to address 

that particular problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s quite clear that when judges 

use the restitution remedy in conjunction with another sentence, 

whether it’s incarceration or a fine, they are very careful to 

listen to the pre-sentence report which has information about 

the financial ability to pay, about the economic circumstances. 

And I would suspect that, especially in northern Saskatchewan, 

there would be a clear recognition of the limits of the ability to 

use the restitution remedy. It may be, if there is somebody that 

has substantial assets or a high paying job, that they might have 

an order of restitution which covers the full amount. 

 

(1515) 

 

Whereas if it’s somebody else whose income is seasonal or 

limited, they might have a very nominal restitution order or no 

restitution order at all. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Has there been any basic assessment of how 

successful the restitution efforts are on behalf of judges when it 

comes to areas that are economically depressed, such as  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the simple answer to that would be 

that there have been very few if any restitution orders in areas 

where people can’t afford to pay them. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I certainly respect the position, and 

especially the economic situation in northern Saskatchewan, 

where criminal or personal offences usually do not result in 

quick restitution of damages and costs incurred. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that we look at the option of . . . 

and I’ve seen many examples of where a person may have his 

tire slashed or maybe his car window broken; it’s a $600 job. 

And the judge can easily pass a restitution order of a dollar per 

month and that really doesn’t do much good. I mean it takes a 

person 600 months to pay off that thing. 

 

So really, within the limits of recognizing that there are no jobs 

in northern Saskatchewan, so the restitution policy follows the 

general guidelines of how you’ve been handling these cases 

over the years, that perhaps we can look at ways and means, 

within reason, on how we can increase . . . or decrease the 

amount of time that many people have to make restitution to the 

person whom he or she has offended . . . quicker than what the 

norm is. 

 

Again I go back to the earlier example of a $600 window. He 

could say, well I’ll pay a dollar a month; that’s all I can afford. 

And so I would suggest perhaps, that we have some flexibility 

in there for the victim; certainly, again, in respect to what the 

offender is able to pay as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s quite clear that the discretion 

of the judge handling the matter will take into account many of 

the concerns that you have. And if there are things that are very 

unfair or inequitable, then it would be possible to appeal those 

kinds of decisions. But I think practically  especially in 

northern Saskatchewan  we have judges who are very 

cognizant of the economic conditions and the ability of people 

to pay. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And, Mr. 

Minister, thank you for your patience. I just have one last 

question. I’m just wondering if, within the regulations or within 

the Act, there’s any restrictions that would control, in a relative 

size, the amount of an asset seized relative to the size of the 

fine. 

 

And I’ll just give you an extreme example. You can’t seize 

somebody’s car for a $100 fine. Is there any restrictions within 

that context? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think there are any restrictions in 

this particular legislation, except that once again for that 

particular provision you would have to go to the justice of the 

peace to get the okay to make a seizure. And they would . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they could say, well this 

doesn’t make sense, and would probably request that the person 

who is trying to enforce the fine go back to the person who’s 

supposed to pay and work out some other arrangement . . .  

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes. 

 

And I think clearly, all of the enforcement of fines using these 

kinds of distress provisions will be very unique and unusual, 

difficult cases to enforce a fine. And it could be, for example, a 

corporation that has a truck, owns a truck, and the truck is 

driving across the country and the fellow avoids paying the fine 

until they can actually seize the truck, which is the main asset of 

the corporation. Then he might quite quickly come up with the 

dollars. 

 

One of the difficulties that we have and why we’ve added this 

provision is that you can’t put a corporation in jail and you 

can’t take away a corporation’s driver’s licence. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank my officials for their able 

help. 

 

Bill No. 44  An Act to amend 

The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 

 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairperson. Seated on my immediate right is the general 

counsel for Crown Investments Corporations, Scott Banda; 

directly behind me is Mark Guillet; seated behind Mr. Banda is 

Ken From; and behind me and to my left is Ken Adams. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and 

welcome to the minister and your officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, under clause 3(1), there is an amendment to 

complete the definition of a Treasury Board Crown corporation. 

Can you tell me what Crown corporations will be included 

under the new definition of Treasury Board Crown corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s actually a good question. The 

subtlety escaped these learned gentlemen for a long time too. 

 

The previous definition apparently did not include . . . or there 

has been a definition of Treasury Board Crowns but it 

apparently did not include Crown . . . Treasury Board Crowns 

which had their own Acts. 

 

And an incomplete list of Treasury Board Crowns which have 

their own Acts, as distinct from those that are incorporated 

pursuant to the legislation which permits it, is the Agricultural 

Credit Corporation, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, Gaming 

Corporation, Grain Car Corporation, and SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation). 

  



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

So that’s an incomplete list of Treasury Board Crowns which 

have their own Acts and therefore were not included in the 

previous definition. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me how this will impact the 

budget of CIC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It won’t, actually. This whole Act 

will not have us doing anything different. All of these changes 

will . . . And this is very common in this Assembly  we bring 

in legislation which legitimizes that which we’re doing. All of 

these things in fact legitimize that which we are already doing, 

so nothing really will change. It’s just . . . 

 

Yes. Mr. Banda draws to my attention the fact that these are 

already operating as corporations, have been for some time. The 

existence of some of them indeed is in the process of being 

phased out, which is true of the Grain Car Corporation. 

 

So some of them having been born, lived, and are now dying, 

are we’re only now getting to legitimize them. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under clause 4, 

clause 4 is added to allow CIC to amalgamate with subsidiary 

Crown corporations. In what cases other than wind-up of a 

corporation would this amendment be necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer is none. That’s the only 

reason that that would be needed. The answer is none. 

 

Ms. Draude: Mr. Minister, under subsection 6(1) clause (u), 

there is repealed and replaced for the new section that expands 

the authority of CIC to provide loans. Why does the minister 

believe that this particular amendment is necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again, we’re already doing this. The 

courts have interpreted power to advance money very, very 

narrowly, and this can cause enormous headaches if you make a 

loan which has no statutory authority. 

 

So the answer is, we’re already doing this, but we are clarifying 

the legislation to make it crystal clear that CIC has the power to 

be doing it. That is has the power to do that which it’s already 

doing. So this is another example of something we’re already 

doing. The legislation simply makes it crystal clear that what 

we’re doing is legitimate. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I don’t see how you can claim, 

or the minister can claim, that the current provision of the Act is 

too restrictive, and yet we’ve never had tabled a comprehensive 

audit of CIC’s investment management system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I may need some clarification from 

the member on that. CIC has . . . I take a certain bit of pride in 

this, actually. CIC did not file annual reports until I was 

minister back in ’92. We then brought in a comprehensive set of 

guidelines which prescribed what the CIC report should 

include. 

 

And after ’92 it has been very complete, and a very complete 

description. So we do provide an annual report; we do provide  

audited statements of what CIC does. And that process really 

began with the election of this government in 1992 when I was 

minister, and I take a little bit of pride in having played a 

modest role in ensuring that CIC is fully and completely 

accountable. 

 

In the ‘80s when the other old-line party was in office, I want to 

tell you that the accountability and the financial information 

provided with CIC was minimal and really unreliable. The 

Provincial Auditor, on more than one occasion, took the 

opportunity to say the information was so incomplete he could 

not provide an audited statement of the corporation’s affairs. 

We changed that, and we have had, since the election of this 

government in 1991, we have had unqualified financial 

statements which have been filed every year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Because this 

amendment will significantly increase the liability of the 

taxpayers in cases where CIC provides financial assistance to 

corporations, are there new methods of accountability that the 

minister is considering for CIC investment management 

system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Really the opposite is true. The effect 

of these amendments is that the accountability will be increased 

for a number of reasons, including the fact that there will now 

be an order in council covering these things. So in fact your 

initial assumption upon which your hypothesis was built isn’t 

accurate. This legislation in fact increases the accountability. 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Can you give me some specifics on what you 

. . . you say it will increase it. How? What type of regulations 

do you mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well these loans are now covered by 

. . . will now be authorized by order in council. It’s a public 

document, and they’ll be available to you. That was not 

heretofore the case. So you will know when these are done 

because they’ll be done by order in council instead of being 

done under the basket. 

 

These things were done, but they were done under a different 

clause which we call, in the colloquial way, the basket clause. It 

said the corporation can do anything that was needed to carry 

out its functions; that’s the clause we used. That really provided 

no accountability. 

 

This clause will provide accountability because the loans will 

be authorized by an order in council, and they’re available to 

you within seven days of the time they’re passed. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, this particular amendment could 

significantly increase the liability of CIC and perhaps the 

government itself. I’d like to know what, if any, mechanism this 

legislation provides to restrict the liability of the taxpayers’ 

money for lending this type of financial assistance to corporate 

bodies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This does not increase the liability of  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

the corporation. It does not increase the corporation’s ability to 

guarantee loans or make advances or any of that sort. It simply 

makes it crystal clear that the corporation can do that which it 

has done for many years and increases accountability and the 

accessibility. So that this does not increase the indebtedness; it 

just makes the corporation more accountable, I suppose. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, what type of criteria will the 

government use when deciding which corporations deserve 

more of the taxpayers’ money as part of a financial assistance 

package? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well that will vary from time to time 

and will vary from one period to another. Currently, when the 

other old-line party was in office, loans were guaranteed  I’m 

being intentionally provocative  when the former 

administration was in office, the loans were advanced almost 

exclusively with a view to economic development. I accused, 

when I sat in the very seat in fact the member sits in, when I sat 

over there in the ‘80s, I used to accuse the corporation, CIC, of 

force-feeding economic development. And they did force-feed 

it with really quite disastrous results. So a lot of the loans turned 

out bad. 

 

Now since between 1982 . . . between 1991 and 1995, the 

general criteria was restructuring the loans. It really was a 

period of reconstruction, 1991 to ’95 was a period of 

reconstruction. It took us really that long to clean up the 

devastation left by the third party when they were in office. 

 

Now 1995 having come and gone, the restructuring having been 

successful, and indeed the signature on the reconstruction I 

think with Standard and Poor’s upgrade yesterday, that was the 

sign-off on the reconstruction. 

 

I think we’re now able to go back to a more balanced approach 

to Crown Investments Corporation. We will do some economic 

development, subject to the criteria, I may say, which aren’t 

very different than what the member from Thunder Creek read 

in question period today. That really is the criteria which we 

use. And it has saved this province an enormous amount of 

money  that criteria which has been that we maximize 

benefits and minimize risks. 

 

We also want to use the Crown corporations to increase the 

service to the Saskatchewan public, so that things like cellular 

telephones, access to cellular telephones, is maximized within 

our ability to do so. We’re now, I think, back to a more 

balanced approach. Some economic development, but also an 

emphasis on service to the Saskatchewan public so that the 

Crown corporations return to their original role of servicing the 

Saskatchewan public. Economic development is only one 

aspect of that broader purpose. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and welcome 

to the minister’s officials here this afternoon, and to the 

minister, certainly. 

 

Going back to some of my colleague’s earlier questions, and I 

must apologize, I came in a little bit late here, but with respect 

to . . . you were referring to orders in council that will be  

necessary in order for . . . was it just . . . Could you clarify, the 

parent Crowns to be lending money to whatever shareholders’ 

entity that they might choose, or could you just elaborate a little 

further. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Allow me to be clear about this: the 

order in councils only apply to CIC, only when CIC advance 

. . . guarantee loans or advance money in just this section 

actually . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. This whole section, 

Mr. Banda correctly points out, this whole section applies only 

to CIC. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a few . . . 

Now I’m not sure whether my colleague has questioned you 

about some of the documents that you had provided with the 

Bill. 

 

In the explanatory notes, you mentioned that the government 

believes it must give the Crowns the right to engage in capital 

market activities and you draw reference to a recent court case 

in the United Kingdom. Could the minister explain what 

particular court case this was and when did it occur? 

 

And then also perhaps, before I take my seat and allow you to 

respond, with respect to that same court case, could you provide 

an explanation of particulars and how . . . like how it applied to 

what particular Crowns, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Okay, it is a decision of the . . . the 

name of the case is Hazell v. Hammersmith and the Fulham 

London Borough Council and others, et al, I think. It was 

decided in 1991; it’s a decision of the House of Lords. House of 

Lords, as I think the member’s probably aware, is regarded as 

one of the more authoritative judicial bodies in the 

English-speaking world. 

 

The essence of the case was that the particular borough 

involved, which I think was the Fulham London Borough 

Council, could only loan money . . . Sorry, it could only engage 

in financial activities if authorized by the statute. These 

activities can only be engaged in if specifically authorized by 

the statute. You couldn’t refer to what we call the basket of 

power to do it. 

 

That case had very broad implications because it did not simply 

apply to this particular borough. It was a decision on how you 

interpret statutes. Therefore, there was a real fear that a court 

might also take the same interpretation of the Saskatchewan law 

since it’s a principle of statutory interpretation. 

 

Therefore, out of abundant caution and because we’ve done this 

for some time, this amendment is being made to make it clear 

that companies like SaskEnergy can engage in financial 

activities. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now the reference 

that you’ve made, Hazell v. Hammersmith I believe, would you 

be able to provide us with the court documents in that regard? I 

believe it would be of assistance to us. If you’d have a copy, 

even if you perhaps have it available today, I would appreciate 

it. 

  



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I don’t actually have a copy in the 

Assembly, but the page can . . . if I can attract the attention of 

the page here, I’ll ask you to go to the Legislative Library and 

bring back the volume. It’s in the Legislative Library. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Could you provide us with some overview or 

explanation as far as whether the Crown corporations have 

engaged in capital market activities? And if so, can you tell us 

under what circumstances that has occurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Oh, the first question is easy. The 

answer is yes. 

 

The second question is much more difficult. They’re quite 

varied. All of the Crown corporations may, for instance, 

purchase contracts which would often be called futures which 

locks in the cost of supplying a product, natural gas in this case. 

And that’s a future; that is a financial transaction. 

 

The circumstances under which the corporations engage in 

capital transactions are varied, broad and varied. I provided an 

example. They may agree to buy gas in the future, natural gas in 

the future, at a given price. That’s a futures contract and is in 

fact a financial contract. So that’s an example, but only an 

example. A complete description would actually be quite 

difficult to provide. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Then I would suppose then, Mr. Minister, 

that in terms of whatever authority that such an undertaking 

would occur, those would vary then as well perhaps. But could 

you just provide us some comment on that as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, certainly the circumstances 

under which the corporations would engage in capital 

transactions vary as the needs vary. That’s particularly true of 

the energy companies, which the member is probably aware 

that electrical energy is now one of the commodities traded on 

the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Power futures are bought 

and sold  that’s yet another example. 

 

The extension of the commodities markets in recent years . . . 

and they’ve become very extensive when you’re buying and 

selling power. It’s gone a long ways from the pork bellies and 

so on that used to consume the market. It’s really quite varied; it 

includes quite a variety of commodities and transactions. A 

comprehensive description would not be an easy thing to 

provide, actually. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, it would seem to me though in 

engaging in these sorts of activities there must be a certain 

element of risk. Could you make some comment with respect to 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There certainly is an element of risk 

when you engage in them. There’s quite a cost. If you . . . 

there’s quite a cost if you don’t engage in them. And indeed, I 

think I can say, thinking about it, properly managed, engaging 

in capital transactions reduces and sometimes removes the risk. 

 

Let’s go back to the example of buying natural gas on the 

futures market. By entering into contract which gives you the  

right to buy gas at a given contract or sell gas at a given price in 

the future, you actually reduce the risk and may indeed remove 

it. 

 

So properly managed, these transactions reduce and remove 

risk. Improperly managed, they can enormously increase the 

risk. And that is why we have these very professional and 

competent people who are assisting me today. They are the 

professionals who ensure that the management is proper and 

that these transactions are used to reduce risk, not enhance it. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  So, Mr. Minister, because within this Bill, 

when it draws reference to capital market activities, it’s very 

much a generalization, I guess I would say. And now you’re 

suggesting by your comments here this afternoon that the only 

type of activities that would be engaged in are ones of a, I 

would say, hedging nature perhaps rather than of a speculative 

sort of a nature. 

 

Now even when you’re engaging in market activities of a 

hedging nature there would be a certain element of risk in terms 

of when you would lift a hedge or otherwise. But certainly 

though, if you’re talking about in terms of activities undertaken 

by anybody within this purview of a purely speculative nature, 

then we’re talking about a whole different element of . . . and 

level of risk, certainly. And could you please just be a little bit 

more specific in terms of what capital market activities we’re 

referring to here. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member, I suppose, is correct. 

That’s possible, but it is not . . . It’s possible but it’s not our 

intention to engage in speculative transactions. These 

gentlemen are not going to be buying and selling derivatives, by 

way of example. They aren’t going to be buying and selling 

derivatives, hoping to make a killing on appreciation. 

 

The capital transactions which will be authorized by this statute 

will be those which a corporation of this sort would normally 

engage in. And I say again: they will be used to reduce and 

remove risk, and they will not be used in a fashion which 

enhances and increases risk. The purpose of these amendments 

is to reduce risk. We’re not going to be engaging in the type of 

speculative transactions which enhance the risk. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for a certain 

amount of reassurance, but you’re saying the intent on your part 

and on behalf of your officials here today certainly is not one of 

engaging in activities of a more speculative nature. But perhaps 

given the broad and unclear definition here within the Bill 

before us, it could allow for such activities to occur. 

 

Now I might remind you there’s a certain individual who 

worked for a Barings Bank at one time who thought he could 

make a pile of dough for that particular institution, trading in 

derivatives, I believe. And what is to prevent in the future 

somebody within the structure of government to decide that 

that’s his place within government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is a check and balance on this.  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

First of all, as the guidelines laid down by the Crown 

Investments Corporation, that we don’t engage in speculative 

transactions  speculative capital transactions  not in a 

business. And any corporation which does, exceeds its mandate. 

 

And apart from any losses they might incur, very severe 

consequences will follow for management of a Crown 

corporation which disobey the guidelines on engaging in 

speculative transactions. 

 

But secondly, quite apart from that, these transactions are all 

done under the general supervision of the rather cautious folk 

that I was working with last night  the Department of 

Finance. Under The Financial Administration Act, the 

Department of Finance has overall supervision of this; so that’s 

another check and balance. 

 

But the first check and balance is that guidelines set out by 

Crown Investments Corporation prohibit it. That’s the policy. 

As I say, the most severe consequences would fall on any 

management which disobeyed that and begin to engage in 

speculative transactions. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  But, Mr. Minister, with respect to the 

activities that I’m suggesting  you know, heaven forbid, but 

which might occur  am I to understand that there is a zero 

tolerance within the Crown sector in terms of  I’ll refer to it 

as a position  taking a speculative position of any nature? Or 

maybe a better way to put it, as a part of your risk management, 

do you maintain position levels within your department where 

you cannot exceed a certain dollar value at risk in any particular 

capital market transaction. 

 

You refer to some checks and balances, and I would just like to 

know if . . . could you elaborate a little bit further. And perhaps 

whether or not those checks and balances that you’re referring 

to are across the board, so to speak, or do they vary from one 

Crown to the next? Would they vary within one Crown entity? 

 

For example, and I’m not suggesting this is a case, but let’s say 

a SaskTel International  a gentleman under the employee of 

SaskTel International working in the U.K. (United Kingdom) 

 would somebody such as that have any authority to enter 

into any sort of a trading activities? 

 

And that being the case  and I know, given this is in terms of 

technology, we’re not that far apart, but the fact that they’re not 

under somebody’s immediate, watchful eye  again I’ll just 

draw the attention to the members opposite and to the minister 

and his officials that there was a gentleman in Singapore who 

got away with a lot more, even though there were checks and 

balances, I’m sure, in place within that institution and even 

though there might be severe penalties. 

 

I would suggest that the most severe penalty of all will be what 

the taxpayers of this province have to pay if any individual or 

individuals such as I’m describing could ever have more of a 

free rein for a very . . . it doesn’t have to be a very long period 

of time. We will be the ones who will be left having to pay for 

their actions. Could I just have some comments in this respect? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member refers to the failure of 

the Barings Bank as a result of some transactions in Singapore. 

It is almost inconceivable that such a thing could happen here 

for a whole variety of reasons which I won’t waste your time 

going into. 

 

For one thing, we do not . . . for one thing, we’re only dealing 

in the commodity which is the corporation’s business  gas. 

We’re not flipping investments and speculative investments at 

will here. 

 

Moreover, there is the normal controls which apply to any 

Crown corporation. No one person has the authority, in and by 

themselves, to make these kind of transactions. Transactions 

must be approved by various levels. What happened in the 

Barings Bank in Singapore was, these controls completely 

broke down. And it is inconceivable, really quite inconceivable, 

that that kind of thing would occur here. 

 

And indeed, in a note passed to me, the staff point out that there 

are controls on both sides of the transactions. We have the 

normal accounting controls, but so do the brokers who work on 

the other side. So it is really inconceivable that such a 

breakdown of controls could occur here. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, I know you’re saying or 

suggesting it’s inconceivable. But I’m sure that the people 

within the Barings Bank had thought the same. 

 

But I wonder, has it ever been tabled within the Assembly with 

respect to your checks and balances, with respect to more 

precise position limits that you may maintain within the Crown 

sector, within the Crown Investment Corporation; have you 

ever made this information public to us in the Assembly 

previously? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes indeed. Not here, because these 

are not our checks and balances. These are checks and balances 

in SaskEnergy, and actually some SaskEnergy people here, or 

SaskTel or SaskPower. Indeed there is a forum to do that, and 

that’s the Crown Corporations or Public Accounts. It may arise 

in either. 

 

I remember many years ago, when I was chairperson of the 

Public Accounts Committee, spending a fair time with the 

Provincial Auditor reviewing this very subject of what kind of 

controls are appropriate in Crown corporations to ensure 

individuals cannot damage or destroy public property. So there 

is a forum to discuss it. That forum would be Crown 

Corporations Committee, and I don’t know if the Crown 

Corporations Committee has completed its review of Crown 

investments or not . . . no, it hasn’t, so you will still have an 

opportunity to raise this very issue in Crown Corporations; 

that’s really the proper forum. 

 

I’ve been trying to be as candid as I can with the member from 

Thunder Creek, but this subject really is a way outside the 

limits of this Act. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  But, Mr. Minister, though surely, when we as 

opposition are trying to determine . . . and given the rather  

  



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

broad description here in terms of capital market activities that 

we see before us today, certainly I don’t think it is too much to 

ask that we should at least have . . . even if perhaps one of your 

officials here today representing a department  you suggested 

SaskEnergy  perhaps if you could elaborate as far as what 

position limits or checks and balances they may have in place in 

terms of the types of market activities that they may fall within 

here, within this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well a complete description, I mean 

that’s a volume. There are limits with respect to each level of 

official. There are limits to what they can engage in. Most of 

these transactions must be approved by more than one person. 

Transactions over a certain amount must be approved by an 

executive officer, and over a certain amount must be approved 

by the board of directors. These are simply the normal controls 

which any corporation exerts. Whether they deal in gas, pork 

bellies, or manufacture of widgets, all corporations basically 

have these same controls. 

 

And the member raises a spectre of another Barings Bank. What 

happened in the Barings Bank was, these controls completely 

broke down and weren’t being observed. Bad management can 

always occur. I only say to the member opposite that whatever 

the failings of this government has been, we’ve not been 

accused of weak management. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, I’d asked the Clerks to 

distribute a copy of a couple of amendments that we do intend 

to propose. And I have to apologize; I had intended to do that 

earlier and it slipped my mind. But can I just make one mention 

. . . one important tool of accountability for the taxpayer and for 

we as opposition is freedom to information. And this policy was 

introduced by the Tories and proclaimed by the NDP, and we 

maintain that that was a positive move. 

 

Now I’ve used that on a number of occasions, and often I’m 

told that we can’t get information because it will reveal secrets 

of private sector partners. And I, you know . . . this is an old 

excuse. 

 

Granted, the minister is giving the Crowns more powers to 

engage in more deals here today. And most of the deals will not 

be made public because it might hurt private partners . . . and 

the member from Regina South refers to Crown Life. Well they 

were of course referring to, and I’m sure he means, HARO 

Financial Corporation, and you’ve tabled some answers to us 

earlier in the week in fact. I believe one of them was. And 

really, as you’re aware, the answer was not adequate. 

 

Given this, I wonder what the minister thinks about exploring 

an idea that when private sector partners sign most or certain 

types of deals with the Crown corporations, that they should 

include . . . that you should include some sort of a clause that 

would ensure taxpayers would have access to information 

pertaining to those sorts of agreements or deals. 

 

And could I just get your thoughts on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The current legislation . . . first of all, 

let me say I agree with the minister to . . . agree with the  

member to the fullest extent possible. The public ought to have 

complete, unimpeded access to all information where it 

concerns the transactions involving public property of Crown 

corporations. 

 

These are their Crown corporations and they have every right to 

all the information which is available, save and except 

information which is required to be confidential by reason of 

commercial competition. And that really I think is the effect of 

the current Freedom of Information Act. So I think you now 

have available to you all information which exists except that 

which would be commercially imprudent to give you. 

 

I may say that I’ve been minister of this Crown corporation 

three times in the last five years, actually and in all those 

occasions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, that’s right. I have 

a varied career here. In all those occasions when we went before 

Crown Corporations that was our criteria as well, exactly the 

same criteria. The public have a right to all information unless 

there’s a legitimate concern about giving other corporations a 

competitive advantage. But apart from that, all information is 

available. 

 

That’s been the approach before Crown Corporations. That’s 

the rule with respect to freedom of information, so I think the 

member now has complete information, both in Crown 

Corporations and in the other respects. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But . . . maybe 

whether I was clear enough or not or whether I missed it in your 

response, but what I was trying to establish here is, with respect 

to structuring future agreements, would it not seem prudent to 

include within such agreements that any partners that you enter 

into an agreement with realize within that agreement that 

they’re subject to the freedom of information Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s not always possible. In many 

cases those who do business with us would refuse to do 

business with us on that basis. That’s just simply not possible. 

We enter into a variety of arrangements with a variety of 

concerns, some of them public, some of them private. And it’s 

just simply not possible to say to everyone: you’re dealing with 

a public corporation. Everything you provide to us is going to 

be made public. It just is not possible. It would not be possible 

to do business on that basis. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I would 

just remind you, if this sort of undertaking was followed 

through upon, it would prevent  I’m sure  instances of . . . 

like the Promavia’s the GigaText’s. Certainly people like this 

would never sign a contractual agreement suggesting that they 

would have to make all information public. Could you just 

make one further comment before I take my place. 

 

I know we could go back and forth about this for quite some 

time. We have some major philosophical differences here, I 

think, with respect to this Act, but I just would like a further 

comment. And I hope you and your officials here realize today 

that we are genuine in our concern for the people in this  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

province in asking the questions we have put to you today. 

We’ve spoke at some length in second readings and adjourned 

debates with respect to this Bill. We’ve tried to make our points 

known. I hope that the people in the province will feel that we 

have made a genuine attempt on their part to do so. 

 

And as I’ve related to you, we have a couple of amendments 

here that we will be introducing at the appropriate time. But if 

you would just like to have one further comment, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This is a subject about which I’ve 

given an enormous amount of thought. I spent 10 years in 

opposition battling a government who I felt was being . . . 

menacing the government if you like, who I felt was being 

completely irresponsible in its use of public property. 

 

We have spent, together with my colleagues, spent four years in 

government trying to clean up the mess which was created 

when our worst fears were realized. So I’ve spent a fair amount 

of time thinking about this. I believe there is only really one . . . 

there’s only really one check and only one way of preventing a 

reoccurrence of that style of governing, and that is an alert, 

vigilant public. 

 

At the end of the day, the only real . . . and an able, 

well-informed opposition. I agree with the member from 

Humboldt . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I’m sorry. I 

misnamed your riding. I agree with the member. 

 

An alert opposition serving an equally alert public are the only 

way of preventing it. Nothing you put in this legislation would 

prevent a reoccurrence of the 1980s. Only a properly 

functioning democracy and a properly functioning opposition to 

keep a government on its toes will truly do the job. 

 

Just let me close by saying I’d be the first to admit the sincerity 

of the members opposite. I’d be the first to admit the legitimacy 

of your role; and it is important, I think, in any functioning 

democracy that the opposition do its role well. I’m a strong 

believer that good opposition makes good government. 

 

I sent the page away for the copy of the House of Lords’ 

decision. Somewhat to my surprise, they don’t carry this 

particular volume. Certainly we have it back at the office and 

these gentlemen will forward a copy of this decision to you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We wish to 

introduce an amendment with respect to clause 4 of the printed 

Bill, and we propose that we: 

 

Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by deleting the clause 

and substituting the following: 

 

“4 Subsection 6(1) is amended by adding the following 

clause after clause (p): 

“(p.1) subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, amalgamate with a subsidiary Crown 

corporation”.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. We have 

discussed this in some detail under the general provisions of 

clause 1. I’m not going to repeat that. Suffice it to say, for the 

reasons I’ve discussed earlier, I’m going to urge the members of 

the Assembly to vote against this amendment. 

 

I’d be the first to recognize the sincerity of the members 

opposite. This is a subject about which honest people will 

disagree. We believe the provision which we have set out 

enhances the accountability and enhances the protection given 

to the public. The member disagrees, and I guess that’s what 

this legislature’s all about. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:07 p.m. until 4:09 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  6 

 

Osika Aldridge Draude 

Belanger Bjornerud Gantefoer 

 

Nays  26 

 

MacKinnon Shillington Anguish 

Atkinson Johnson Goulet 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Calvert Pringle Bradley 

Teichrob Nilson Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Wall 

Ward Sonntag Jess 

Flavel Thomson  

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I propose that 

we: 

 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

45.1(2) as being enacted therein and by renumbering 

subsequent subsections (3) and (4) as subsections (2) and 

(3) respectively. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I make the same comments. We 

discussed these earlier. You have your view. Our view is that 

the existing provisions will enhance public protection and 

accountability and I would urge the members of the Assembly 

to defeat this amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:12 p.m. until 4:13 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

  



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

Yeas  6 

 

Osika Aldridge Draude 

Belanger Bjornerud Gantefoer 

 

Nays  25 

 

MacKinnon Shillington Anguish 

Atkinson Johnson Goulet 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Renaud Calvert Pringle 

Bradley Teichrob Nilson 

Cline Serby Stanger 

Langford Wall Ward 

Sonntag Jess Flavel 

Thomson   

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 91  An Act to amend 

The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 44  An Act to amend 

The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 

Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the purpose of these 

amendments to the legislation for the teachers’ group life 

insurance plan. 

 

Secretary-treasurers of Saskatchewan school divisions do not 

have their own group life insurance. For convenience sake, 

they’re covered under the provisions of the teachers’ life 

insurance plan which is administered by the Teachers’ 

Superannuation Commission. 

 

For a number of years, the teachers’ life insurance plan has 

included provisions whereby retired teachers can maintain their 

insurance coverage until age 75. Premiums for teachers who are 

still working are shared equally between teachers and the 

government. Retired teachers are responsible for 100 per cent of 

the premiums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, until now these provisions for retired teachers 

have not applied to retired secretary-treasurers. These 

amendments to the Act will extend the option of continued 

insurance coverage to this group. As with retired teachers, the 

retired secretary-treasurers will be responsible for payment of 

100 per cent of the premiums. 

 

The teachers’ life insurance plan is one of the items covered by 

the provincial teacher bargaining. This being the case, any 

changes to this legislation must be approved by the parties to 

the collective agreement. Government, school trustees, and the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, have all agreed with these 

changes through the provincial negotiations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will be of benefit to 

Saskatchewan secretary-treasurers in Saskatchewan school 

divisions and have the support of all of the concerned 

organizations. 

 

I’m therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 111, An Act to 

amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to 

offer a few brief comments on this Bill before we ask that it be 

passed on to Committee of the Whole for further clarification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 111 offers some amendments to The 

Teachers’ Life Insurance Act and I don’t want to go on very 

long with this since any concerns or questions we might have 

will best be addressed in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all recognize the importance and contributions 

of teachers in our province. But when we recognize educators in 

Saskatchewan, so too must we recognize the importance of 

those who provide the administrative guidance to schools and 

school boards. 

 

Secretary-treasurers of school divisions are valuable individuals 

who can contribute much to the education of our children, 

through their valuable expertise at the division level. The public 

and the students may not see these people at work every day as 

they do their local, hard-working teachers, but that doesn’t 

mean the work of our secretary-treasurers is not vital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 111 does recognize in some small way these 

contributions by extending life insurance coverage to them even 

after they retire. This is not currently possible under the Act. As  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

I understand it, prior to these amendments, secretary-treasurers 

were not eligible to continue with the teachers’ life insurance 

plan. As is the case with retired teachers, retired 

secretary-treasurers can choose to carry on with their life 

insurance plan if they want to pay premiums directly out of 

their own pocket. 

 

I assume in bringing this Bill forward the government has had a 

request from superannuates, current secretary-treasurers and/or 

the teachers’ federation to make this change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have no major objections to this move if it is in 

the best interest of the affected parties and isn’t added to the 

cost to the people of Saskatchewan. So for now we are willing 

to let this pass on to Committee of the Whole for some further 

explanations and clarifications. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to explain the purpose of these amendments to the teachers 

superannuation legislation. I should begin by clarifying, Mr. 

Speaker, that the statute involved governs what is sometimes 

called the old, teachers superannuation plan, that is, the formula 

plan administered by the Teachers’ Superannuation 

Commission. It does not deal with the Saskatchewan teachers 

retirement plan, the newer plan administered by the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

Superannuation is one of the items covered by provincial 

collective bargaining with teachers. Saskatchewan teachers 

recently ratified a new two-year collective agreement for 

calendar years 1995-96. The purpose of these amendments is to 

incorporate into the Act a couple of new superannuation 

provisions which are included in the collective agreement. 

 

There are two amendments, both of which deal with the ability 

of teachers to have certain periods of service credited to them 

for pension purposes. Teachers who have had at least 10 years 

of service under the plan in Saskatchewan are currently entitled 

to purchase certain types of teaching service. At present the 

10-year requirement means 10 full-time equivalent years. 

 

For example, a teacher employed only half time would not be 

eligible to purchase such service for 20 years. Under the new 

provision, part-time service will be considered equivalent to 

full-time service for purposes of determining eligibility to 

purchase outside service. This concept already applies 

elsewhere throughout the Act and is now being incorporated 

into this particular section as well. 

 

The second amendment deals with categories of service which, 

under certain circumstances, teachers will now be able to 

purchase for pension purposes. There are four new categories, 

each affecting only a small number of teachers. These include  

service with a provincial government school, with the 

Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program, with one 

of the two universities, or with the Department of Education. 

 

In order to purchase these periods of service, teachers will be 

required to contribute both the employee’s share and the 

employer’s share of the cost. There is no requirement that the 

government match the employee contribution in any of these 

cases. 

 

As I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, these provisions have been 

included in the new collective bargaining agreement for 

teachers and now must be reflected in amendments to the Act. 

They will help to make the Act more internally consistent and 

will assist a small number of teachers who would otherwise be 

unable to have certain periods of teaching service credited 

toward their pensions. 

 

I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 112, An Act to 

amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

(1620) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to make a few brief comments on this Bill before we pass it on 

to committee. Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 112 deals with the issue of 

teachers’ pensions or at least some aspects of teachers’ 

pensions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course when the issue of pensions for our 

educators come up, the further issues of unlimited pensions 

liabilities are sure to follow. It’s an area that should be of 

concern to this government as it is to every resident of the 

province. 

 

However, leaving this issue aside for now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just 

deal with a few basics contained in this particular Bill. We have 

not had a lot of time to study the Bill fully or receive feedback 

from stakeholders. But I’ll offer some precursory comments 

here and save the more specific questions and comments for 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears the main focus of Bill 112 is to 

recognize more services in the field of education that are 

eligible for teachers’ superannuation and disability benefits, 

services that do not necessarily take place in the classroom or 

indeed even in the schools themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite often in our province, members of our 

teaching profession take up other duties in the education field. 

And while these duties or positions do contribute to the whole 

realm of education, some are not currently eligible for pension 

benefits. It appears Bill 112 will make these services eligible for 

such pension benefits with some modification. Teachers who go 

on to other duties such as working directly in the Department of 

Education or at one of our universities will now be eligible for 

pension benefits, the difference being the person in question 

would have to make both the contributions for the employer and 

the employee. 

  



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

In committee we’ll be asking the minister what effects, if any, 

this change will have on the current pension fund. We can only 

assume, as is the case with changes to other pension plans 

undertaken in this session of the legislature, these changes were 

proposed in full consultation with the affected parties. Again 

we’ll be asking the government for that assurance. 

 

The other major change proposed in Bill 112 is to the eligibility 

requirements for purchasing outside services for those teachers 

who have taught part-time. The change would now count 

part-time work as the equivalent to full-time under the 

eligibility requirements for purchasing certain types of teaching 

experience outside the province. 

 

As I understand it, under this amendment, teachers with 10 

years service, be it full-time or part-time, will now meet these 

eligibility requirements. While we don’t believe this change 

will have a major impact, we will be asking the minister to 

clarify this clause when the Bill comes up in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re still waiting for some feedback from certain 

stakeholders and legal counsel regarding this Bill, but I see no 

point in holding it up at this point, and we move it on to 

Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 

1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move 

second reading of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

The primary purpose of this Bill is to make the current 

legislation compatible with Saskatchewan’s post-adoption 

initiatives and to remove certain inequities in the process we 

use to make changes to birth and stillbirth records in 

Saskatchewan. As well there are two housekeeping provisions 

being proposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in January 1995, the Minister of Social Services 

announced a two-part expansion of post-adoption services in 

Saskatchewan. The first element was introduced last spring. It 

allows the search for an adult adoptee to be undertaken at the 

request of the birth parent. The search is conducted by the 

Department of Social Services. Any information which might 

identify the adult adoptee is provided to a birth parent only with 

the consent of the adult adoptee. Should both parties agree to 

exchange identifying information, the exchange is facilitated by 

the Department of Social Services. 

 

The second part is scheduled for introduction on September 1 of 

this year. It will allow either the adult adoptee or the birth 

parent to request from Social Services a copy of the adult 

adoptee’s birth registration where both the adult adoptee and the 

birth parent have consented. 

 

So in other words, Mr. Speaker, if a person who has been  

adopted becomes an adult, that person can go to Social Services 

and say, I consent to my birth parent getting in touch with me. 

Similarly the birth parent can go to Social Services and say, I’d 

like to get in touch with the child that I gave birth to but who 

was adopted out. And if both of those parties agree, then the 

Department of Social Services can facilitate an exchange of 

information between them. That is already in place. 

 

What this does is not to give effect to that. That happens 

already. This would allow certain officials under vital statistics 

to release information to the adult adoptee and the birth parent 

if both of them consented. 

 

Our current legislation does not permit vital statistics to release 

a copy of the birth registration to an adult adoptee or birth 

parent. In such cases, only post-adoption particulars can be 

released. Also the legislation does not permit the release of 

copies of adoption registrations or supporting documentation. 

 

This amendment, Mr. Speaker, will rectify this matter. It will 

allow for copies of these documents to be released to the 

Department of Social Services. It will actually be the 

Department of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, that the documents 

will be released to, not to the parties directly. These 

amendments really are consequential to what is taking place 

under The Adoption Act already. 

 

The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, removes inequities in the 

system we currently use with respect to the registration of a 

birth or a stillbirth in Saskatchewan. Currently there are two 

separate methods in place with respect to naming a child at 

birth: amending parental particulars on a birth record, and 

re-registering a birth where the birth parents marry one another 

after the registration of birth has been filed with the vital 

statistics branch. The amendments unify the two processes into 

one. This will simplify the administration of the legislation and 

will provide consistency and fairness to the parties involved in 

the registration of the birth or stillbirth of the child. 

 

The remaining two amendments to this Act, Mr. Speaker, are of 

a housekeeping nature. The first of these deals with local 

improvement districts. Local improvement districts no longer 

exist; therefore the provisions in the Act referring to these 

districts are being repealed. The second housekeeping 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with the remuneration schedule 

for division registrars. Such schedules are normally prescribed 

in regulation rather than legislation. We are therefore amending 

the Act to provide for the prescribing of these fees in the 

regulations. Mr. Speaker, these are the main provisions of this 

Bill. 

 

Accordingly, I hereby move second reading of The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 

know we originally agreed that this Bill was non-controversial 

and passed it through to the Non-controversial Bills Committee. 

Typically Bills that end up in front of this committee have just a 

few minor changes that don’t affect the law. For example, most 

of the Bills that we passed through had a few slight changes in 

translation or changes to the English words to clarify meaning. 

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

But this Bill, An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, is more 

comprehensive than just changes to wording. Therefore we 

believe that it warrants more attention from the members of this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act deals with the documentation of births, 

deaths, adoptions, and other vital statistics. One of the main 

changes in Bill 109 is necessary because the Department of 

Social Services will expand their post-adoption services in 

September. This means that in cases where adult adoptees and 

their birth parents both agree, the adult adoptee and/or both 

birth parents will be able to access birth particulars. 

 

I can see this being particularly important for health reasons. 

Knowledge goes a long way towards prevention. If a person 

knows they have a predisposition to a certain condition or 

disease, they will be better able to take preventative steps. But, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just good for health reasons. It provides 

adult adoptees with a chance to find answers to questions that 

may have been plaguing them all their lives. In the cases where 

it’s mutually agreed, I see no reason why these records should 

be withheld. 

 

Another change outlined in this Bill includes more fair and 

consistent rules when it comes to registering births, naming 

children, amending parent particulars on the record, and 

legitimizing births. I believe it makes more sense to have one 

set of rules. This should help create less confusion and 

hopefully somewhat less bureaucracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that we are not against the 

changes proposed in this Bill. And to a large extent, they are 

little more than housekeeping. At the same time, they are not 

inconsequential, so as elected officials we deserve to discuss 

these changes and make sure that they will not have any 

negative effects on the people of this province. I see no reason 

to hold it up further, but we do look forward to discussing it in 

the Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 20  An Act 

respecting the Management of Forest Resources be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely 

pleased to have this chance to talk about the government’s 

proposed Forest Resources Management Act. This is a Bill 

which needs extensive, detailed discussion because it could 

have repercussions on the province’s economy and on our 

forests for many, many years to come. 

 

The NDP government should not make rash decisions in a  

desperate attempt to ram through another piece of legislation. 

Because this Bill is not about changing a wording on a law, it’s 

not about correcting spelling, and it’s not about translating 

simple ideas into complex legalese. 

 

This Bill is about one of the most important natural resources in 

Saskatchewan. It’s about an industry that brings millions and 

millions of dollars into our economy. But it’s also about the 

traditional lifestyles that are deeply rooted in our forests. And 

this is why, Mr. Speaker, I feel that I must address some of our 

concerns about this Act in the House today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the government’s press release sent out a few 

weeks ago, the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management touted this Bill as the greatest thing going. He 

said, and I quote: “This legislation will provide a strong 

framework to ensure healthy economic growth is balanced with 

a healthy forest”. 

 

The release then goes on to talk about the many opportunities 

for involvement in all levels of forest management planning and 

on and on and on. If the minister was to be believed, that this 

Bill would make everyone happy from the first nations people 

to the multimillion dollar forestry companies to Metis groups to 

small business and northern communities, he has another think 

coming. 

 

In the March 15 article in the Leader Post, the minister 

apparently said that, quote, he doesn’t expect the backlash from 

industry partners because of the consultation he’s done with 

them. But this consultation certainly seems to be news to them. 

 

On CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio, forestry 

officials were clipped as saying they hadn’t met with the 

Environment minister and that they had ideas they wanted to 

share with him but he thought the consultations was complete. 

 

Of course, that shouldn’t be really a surprise to us, knowing that 

this government’s idea of consultation is based on talking at 

people and not listening to them. 

 

The NDP government is gaining a reputation as a government 

that holds open consultations and then does whatever it was 

planning to do in the first place. The pre-budget consultation 

and the SaskPower increases were a prime example of this, Mr. 

Speaker. Maybe someone should tell the members opposite that 

they’ve got the consultation process mixed up. First you talk to 

people. Then you make your proposal. 

 

It’s a simple concept, Mr. Speaker, at least for people not on the 

government side of the House. I find it hard to believe that the 

minister is naïve, that he actually thinks that the people affected 

by the forestry industry will wholeheartedly support this Act, 

hook, line, and sinker, unless they have been involved. 

 

In the March 22 Leader-Post, Saskfor MacMillan president, 

John Robillard said: 

 

“There is . . . middle ground and through negotiation we’re 

going to get there. 

 

  



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

Last week, it began to sound like the government was 

going to mandate changes, not negotiate. That was our 

concern.” 

 

Negotiation, that is their concern and that is our concern as 

well. I’m not denying that there are some aspects of this Bill 

which seems, at least on the surface, to work towards 

sustainability. For example, subjecting all companies 20-year 

forest management plans to the environmental impact process is 

a step in the right direction. Of course it shows the 

government’s turtle-like pace. 

 

(1645) 

 

The industry had the forethought and the vision to introduce 

these standards years ago, long before the light bulb went on in 

the NDP caucus. It is only unfortunate that the NDP can’t learn 

from these forestry companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re also pleased to see that provisions have been made to 

ensure that treaty rights to hunt, fish, and trap are respected. 

However the question still remains of the impact on the Metis 

people and all the communities of the areas involved with this 

issue. It is all too easy to look at our forests as financial 

windfalls and forget that their value runs much deeper than that. 

 

Our forests have an inherent value that cannot be measured in 

dollars and cents. They provide sustenance for many people, 

and traditional forest users have a right to maintain their 

heritage. However in the best interests of everyone, long-term, 

comprehensive management plans can help maintain the 

delicate balance between economic growth and traditional 

forest use. Protecting the forest from overdevelopment now 

should help to ensure they remain sustainable in the years 

ahead. 

 

Another measure this Bill introduces is forest pest control. 

Dutch elm disease, forest tent caterpillars, canker-worms, gypsy 

moths, and so many other diseases can severely damage our 

trees. Although we realize that nature relies on continuous 

cycles of natural controls, human intervention can help 

minimize the loss of trees. 

 

The same holds true for fire control. Last year we lost 

thousands of hectares to uncontrolled forest fires. Many people 

in northern communities were evacuated because forest fires 

were threatening to destroy their homes and their businesses. 

The fires also deterred thousands of tourists who had planned to 

fish, hunt, and camp. That of course meant a huge loss of 

money to residents relying on this money to feed their families. 

 

Keeping pest and forest fires under control is important, 

particularly if you continue to harvest trees for economic gain. 

But the government has proposed sharing these prevention costs 

with forestry companies, which apparently has the industry 

officials fuming. 

 

Again in the March 22 Leader-Post, Steve Smith from 

Weyerhaeuser is quoted as saying that “government should pay 

for fire suppression and control of insects and disease” because 

the forestry also includes recreation areas and private property.  

This is a tricky issue and one that deserve further negotiations. I 

think the pros and cons of shared pest and fire control need to 

be more clearly defined before any solid proposal is put 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in news story after news story, forestry industries 

officials claim that these changes will have a devastating impact 

on the industry. In one Leader-Post column, a MacMillan 

Bloedel official suggested that the minister must not be thinking 

clearly or consulting with proper people if he thought that this 

new legislation would encourage a healthy forestry industry. 

This does not show how unhappy the forestry companies are 

with this proposed legislation. 

 

Forestry officials themselves are asking who the government 

has been consulting with. They are upset that the government is 

planning to dump millions of dollars in expenses onto the 

private industry. 

 

The president of the council of Saskatchewan forestry industries 

claims that, in his words, “the industry can’t withstand a $25 

million increase in government expenses.” And they have the 

right to balk at the cost that will soon be offloaded onto them. 

 

Some of these increases outlined in this new Act include: 

increased inventory costs of $15 million to pay for forest 

mapping and surveys; an extra $4 million in seedling costs for 

trees the province currently provides to industry; new insect and 

pest control expenses of 3 million; backlogging costs of 1 

million; higher fire-fighting costs of 12.5 million; and doubling 

of revenues the province gets from stumpage fees to 7 million 

from 3.5 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a province that already discourages economic 

growth due to its stagnating tax policies, is only good to drive 

away more companies by imposing these types of expenses on 

forestry companies that are currently operating in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This does not include the number of companies that won’t even 

consider Saskatchewan for the expansion of industry, due to 

increasingly stifling economic situations that pervade every 

sector of our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the forestry companies are an extremely important 

part of our economy and they do provide a large number of jobs 

for people in northern Saskatchewan. But they are not the only 

ones who will be affected by this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very concerned about the well-being of the 

everyday people who rely on the forests of the North for their 

livelihood. I am concerned about the elders who pick berries in 

these forests. I am concerned about the people who use the 

herbs and grasses of the forest for medicinal purposes. I am 

concerned about the men and women who collect firewood in 

these forests for sale to local people, and of the people who’ve 

enjoyed this land for many, many years. 

 

What impact will this Bill have on these people, Mr. Speaker? 

Have they ever been considered in this equation? The Metis  

  



May 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

population of the North has been ignored by governments in 

many years and they are tired of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government cannot claim to have consulted with the 

people of the North because none of the Metis communities 

have had a say in what is going on. These people already felt 

caught in the middle and the government is isolating these 

communities even more. 

 

The people living in the North have a number of concerns with 

the possible implementation of this Bill. First, they are worried 

what’s going to happen to their hunting, fishing, trapping, and 

harvesting rights  rights they have enjoyed for centuries, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They worry about the impacts of needing permits and licences 

and the headache that will arise out of being the exception to 

the rule. Many people have told me that sharing information is 

not consultation, no matter how you look at it. These people 

know what decisions were made long before they were ever 

spoken to. 

 

What this government really needs to do is open its eyes and 

become aware, understanding, and tolerant of the 

socio-economic and political aspirations of the aboriginal 

citizens of the North, which includes the Metis population. 

 

These people vote; they are entitled to equal representation. Yet 

for some reason they feel ignored, misunderstood, and lacking 

in the ability to make a difference. They feel powerless over 

policies such as this, Mr. Speaker. This provincial government 

must acknowledge, recognize, and understand the inherent right 

of the first nations people as well as the rights of the Metis. 

 

There are over 32,000 people living in the northern part of this 

province. Why do these people feel as though they do not count 

as equal? Because they have not had any significant impact on 

this Bill. Why do these people’s wishes get put on the back 

burner by this government on a constant basis . . . to be stopped. 

Because they want to be heard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The concerns over berry picking and the use of medicinal herbs 

are not the only concerns of the people of the North. They want 

the assurance that forestry companies will continue to be viable 

in this province so that well-paying jobs continue to be 

available to our northern people. 

 

In an area where unemployment reaches 70 to 80 per cent and 

where the number of people with a grade 12 education is low, 

viable jobs are extremely important to the people of the North. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, making it harder and more expensive for 

forestry companies to operate in Saskatchewan is a devastating 

blow to the people who depend on these companies for jobs and 

economic well-being. 

 

It is important for this government to understand and 

acknowledge the importance of the utilization of renewable 

forest products by the aboriginal people of northern 

Saskatchewan. Harvesting berries, mushrooms, and fiddleheads 

provide economic opportunities for a number of aboriginal  

people in the northern parts of this province. On an average 

year, Mr. Speaker, over 47,000 pounds of wild rice and/or wild 

berries are harvested and sold in northern Saskatchewan. In 

1991 berry harvesting created over $90,000 in income to the 

people who picked those berries in our province’s northern 

wooded areas. 

 

It is easy to see why there’s a great deal of concerns over the 

impacts that this Bill before us will have on the people involved 

with this particular small industry. To add to this, value added 

processing opportunities had been associated with the 

marketing of fiddleheads, mushrooms, wild herbs, plants, fish, 

wild rice, etc. 

 

Floral industries in the United States provide Saskatchewan 

with a steady market for forest products such as birch bark 

sleeves, dead twigs covered with the old man’s bird moss, 

reindeer moss, and several varieties of peat moss, spruce, and 

jack pine cones, as well as a number of different and wild 

mushrooms. Softwood cones are also often picked for sale as 

seed stock for nurseries. 

 

This is not obviously a trivial matter for the people involved. 

And northern communities are demanding that this government 

pay more attention to the people of the North that are affected 

drastically by legislation introduced in this House. 

 

Simply because these people are out of sight does not mean that 

they should be out of mind, Mr. Speaker. Negotiations between 

the provincial government, forestry industries, and aboriginal 

peoples of the North must improve and continue to grow in 

order to ensure that all future forest management plans reflect 

the principles of holistic land use that is the very heart and soul 

of the people of the North. 

 

We all understand that the government and issues and the 

people in the North need to communicate and work together to 

recognize the socio-economic changes that are needed in order 

to be able to compete on the international scale. 

 

People though must be considered equally as important as the 

timber and mineral resources. They are, after all, our human 

resources. Holistic management planning, the type so desired 

by the people of the North, involves extensive consultation, 

negotiation, and the basic understanding of the aboriginal way 

of life by governments and industries in the North. 

 

I fully understand the extensive work that has gone on in tabling 

this piece of legislation in the House this session. Consultation 

has occurred on a limited basis over a period of the past few 

years. A cabinet approved policy framework was established a 

few years ago, followed by the creation of the Saskatchewan 

long-term integrated forest management plan. 

 

In 1994 the forestry legislation advisory committee was 

established to review background documents on related forest 

policy with the objective to formulate a new forest Act. 

 

In March ’95 a white paper on the proposed forest management 

Act was introduced, and later on that month a new legislation 

supporting the improved use, management, and protection of  

  



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1996 

Saskatchewan’s forest resources was introduced by the Minister 

of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management). 

 

Now for the life of me I cannot figure out when and where all 

the consultation took place, because there are a number of Metis 

communities that feel totally left out of the process. Many 

people feel that the people on the advisory committee were in a 

position of a conflict of interest while others see this committee 

as a smokescreen in the drafting of the actual piece of 

legislation. 

 

There are major, major gaps in communication between 

aboriginal communities and the people who ended up drafting 

this legislation that’ll have an effect on all of us. 

 

It is not only the aboriginal and Metis communities that are 

upset with the lack of consultation that went into drafting this 

legislation; forestry companies are also scratching their heads. 

What happened to their input? 

 

Forest product producers have expressed some concern over the 

past few months with regards to the offloading of financial 

resources by the government onto industry. The industry are not 

in the position to accept this offloading principle for the 

required financial resources needed to sustain forest resources. 

 

Due to the strong reaction to this legislation by both forestry 

companies and the aboriginal peoples, the government will no 

doubt be willing to further discuss this issue of concern. 

 

It is important to understand that this is not the only piece of 

legislation that affects the forestry industry in Saskatchewan. 

This industry is impacted by a number of government 

departments, their respective legislation, policies, and their 

related costs. Recent increases to Workers’ Compensation 

Board costs, fuel taxes, highway expenditures, all challenge the 

competitiveness of the forestry industry in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, many aspects of northern life have 

been excluded from this Bill. Northern communities have no 

ownership in the companies that are operating in their 

backyards. These people have no ownership in the companies, 

and they therefore have no say in the co-management process. 

They have no control over land in which they live in, and they 

have no assurances that this Bill will be in their best interests. 

 

The people of the North deserve an equal say in the economies 

of the North. With no ownership in the companies, they have no 

say, no profits, no decision-making abilities, and no 

employment guarantees. If this government would explore 

co-management options, opportunities for the people in these 

northern communities could flourish as could the industries that 

are there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister how he expects the North 

to support this Bill when these people have been ignored for so 

long and have been left out of the consultation process. For 

years the people have been asking for their fair share, not 

welfare, Mr. Speaker. For years they’ve been asking for better 

roads and highways, not social problems. For years we have  

asking for equal opportunity, not to be ignored by the present 

government. And for years, Mr. Speaker, the people of the 

North have been asking for their fair share and equal input, but 

have only continued to be ignored. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what we mean when we talk about 

respect and the lack of it on the part of the provincial 

government. 

 

These people in the North need equal employment 

opportunities. They need adequate housing. They need safe and 

secure communities. They need to be able to break the welfare 

cycle and the problems that are associated with it. Mr. Speaker, 

how can any of this ever happen if the people of the North 

continue to be ignored, forgotten, and simply used? 

 

I sincerely hope as the Bill moves through the House that the 

government will commit to looking into the issues that have 

caused the greatest amount of concern, not only for the forest 

industries, but for the people who depend on renewable forest 

resources for day-to-day living and the people who enjoy 

forests for many centuries. 

 

With this in mind, I look forward to challenging the minister on 

the many aspects of this Bill in Committee of the Whole. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2025 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2025 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2025 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2026 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Estimates 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2026 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2026 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2026 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2026 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2027 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Humboldt Wildlife Refuge 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

 Investment Dealers Association of Canada Report on Saskatchewan 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

 Community of Pinehouse 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

 Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology’s Home Care Graduates 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

 Future Skills and Saskatchewan Abilities Council Collaboration 

 Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2028 

 Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2029 

 Piping Plover and Muttering Mandryk 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Farm Fuel Rebate Program 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2029 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 

 SaskTel Advertising 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2030 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 

 Milk Control Board 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2031 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2031 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2032 

  Anguish .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2032 

 HARO Shareholder Agreement 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2033 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2033 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Temple Gardens Mineral Spa Opening in Moose Jaw 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2034 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 



 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2035 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2037 

 Bill No. 91  An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2038, 2041 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2038 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2039 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2040 

 Bill No. 44  An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2041 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2041 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 

 Recorded Divisions ........................................................................................................................................................... 2047, 2048 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2048 

 Bill No. 91  An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2048 

 Bill No. 44  An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2048 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2048 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2048 

 Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2049 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2049 

 Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2050 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2050 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the Management of Forest Resources 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2051 

 

 


