













































May 3, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1339 

 May 3, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf 

of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, I 

present a petition with respect to the closure of the Plains 

Health Centre in Regina. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the majority of the names on this petition are from Regina, 

throughout the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions of names from throughout southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the names of the people are from . . . mostly from Pilot 

Butte and Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of the names of concerned citizens about the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from Maple Creek. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present petitions of names from communities within 

my constituency regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Pelly and Norquay. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from all over 

southern Saskatchewan and of course from Regina as well. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names of people from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people who have signed the petition are from Regina. 

They’re from Moose Jaw, Maple Creek, all over southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition of names of people from throughout southern 

Saskatchewan in regards to the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people from my 

constituency in the areas of Brownlee and Central Butte and in 

through that area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names of people from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre in Regina. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from centres such as Balgonie, Fort Qu’Appelle, Edenwold, 

Davin, McLean. 

 

There’s also in here a number from White City, Wolseley, 

and Regina. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 

Clerk:  Mr. Johnson, as Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members’ Bills, presents the second report of the said 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 

has agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 

 Bill No. 01 - An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey 

Nuns) of Saskatoon, being An Act to 

Amend and Consolidate An Act to 

incorporate St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) 

of Saskatoon 

 

 Bill No. 02 - An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey 

Nuns) of Saskatchewan 

 

 Bill No. 03 - An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

 

 Bill No. 04 - An Act to Amend An Act incorporating 

Luther College, Regina. 

 

Your committee recommends, under the provision of rule 

66, that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with 

respect to Bill No. 01, 02, 03, and 04. 

 

Your committee also recommends to the Legislative 

Assembly that rule 64 respecting time limits for the filing 

of petitions of private Bills be suspended in order that 

petitioners for a private Bill respecting the TD Trust 

Company may proceed with their petition and Bill during 

the current session. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Cypress Hills: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce a friend to the Assembly. I’d like to introduce Avis 

Gray who is sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, next to our 

chief of staff. 

 

Avis was the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 

Cresentwood in Manitoba and was also deputy leader of the 

Liberal opposition. She’s visiting in Regina for the weekend 

and I know that all my colleagues in the Assembly will extend a 

very warm welcome to Avis. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly an exceptional group of people seated in your . . .  

actually the west gallery today. 

 

Louis Sebastian  maybe if I can get you to rise as I call your 

name  Louis Sebastian, Denis Sewap, James Pewean, Cherish 

Merasty, Philip Caza, Jesse Quitte, and Bradley McLeod are all 

young hockey players in the Regina Outdoor Hockey League. 

 

National Geographic World magazine recently featured Louis, 

Denis, and James and their contribution to the league. 

 

And I’d also like to introduce, if they would stand, Bill 

McLaren, Russ Matthews, Helen Finucane, and John Reid, all 

of whom are active volunteers from Ranch Ehrlo and the 

community who are instrumental in the success of the outdoor 

hockey league. They’re part of the Dress a Champion program. 

 

So please join me in welcoming this group of volunteers. I see 

there’s couple of people I didn’t introduce as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

have the great pleasure this morning to introduce to you and 

through you to my colleagues in the legislature a group of 12 

grade 11 students seated in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an exceptional group and I would like to 

introduce them individually to the Assembly, but before I do 

that let me say that they are engaged in an Interchange on 

Canadian Studies. They’re in Regina today for an orientation 

session and then they’re going to Charlottetown tomorrow to 

participate in the program. 

 

This program is a national program which provides 

opportunities, through student conferences and travel exchange, 

for grade 11 students from all the provinces and territories to 

meet with each other. And they hear ideas from prominent 

speakers and will have the opportunity to discuss those ideas 

with each other. 

 

Next year the conference is to be held in Prince Albert. So with 

your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, I’ll introduce the 12 and ask 

them to stand as I introduce them. 

 

Krista Ivey from Ituna; Jacquelyn Strandlund from Balcarres; 

Sheila Miller from Glen Bain; Holly Legros from Cadillac; 

Regan Van Luven from Dysart; Marit Chorney from 

Grasswood; Dominic Morgan from Saskatoon; Jamie Rempel 

from Carrot River; Christina Rosowsky from Kamsack; Sabrina 

Blocka from Leoville; Angie Strate from Shell Lake; and Abby 

Deschambeault from Cumberland House. 

 

My colleague, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle, will be 

meeting with these students after question period, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’d like my colleagues in the Assembly to welcome them 

here today and wish them good luck at the conference in 

Charlottetown. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

you I’d like to introduce some very special people to the 

Assembly. Sitting in the east gallery is my husband Martin; my 

youngest son Jeremy who has just completed his final exams in 

second year engineering; and a more frequent but equally 

welcome visitor to the Assembly, Hewitt Helmsing. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce 21 

grade 7 students from St. George accompanied by their teacher 

Mrs. Bev Barth. This is from Wilkie, Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And I will be joining them and their seven chaperons, 

Mrs. Marylou Friske, Mr. Dennis Keller, Mr. Rob Barth, Mr. 

Rob Fenrich, Mrs. Laura Keller, and Mrs. Janice Guigon later. 

And they will be joining us for question period, so I ask that 

you be on your best behaviour and make them welcome, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

welcome and introduce to you a number of students from grade 

4 and 5 from Balcarres, Saskatchewan, in my riding, and they 

are accompanied by Karla Esplin and Maryanne Renwick, and 

along with some parents who are here to view what goes on in 

the Assembly during question period. I’m looking forward to 

meeting them a little later on this morning. 

 

Please welcome them to our Assembly, my colleagues. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Lottery Winner 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to extend my congratulations to one of my very, very, very 

lucky constituents. Not only is Delmer Struss fortunate to be 

living in my constituency but yesterday he claimed his 

multimillion dollar lottery prize. In fact Mr. Struss of Sheho, 

Saskatchewan added about $16.7 million to his bank account 

after winning the Lotto Super 7 draw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, he has won the second largest 

lottery prize ever awarded in Canada. 

 

In a press conference yesterday, Mr. Struss says he plans to 

spend the first part of the prize on a new truck, tickets to the 

Stanley Cup play-offs and a trip to Australia. Then he plans to 

return home to share the rest with his hard-working family. 

Because he is also an eligible bachelor, I’m sure Mr. Struss will 

also be very busy receiving telephone calls. 

 

I wish him all the best and ask all the members to extend our 

congratulations to Saskatchewan’s latest millionaire. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Project Promotes Healthy Lifestyle 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People in my 

constituency are doing an excellent job of promoting healthy 

and active lifestyles. Today marks the culmination of a project 

promoting active lifestyle and partnered with O.M. Irwin 

Middle School and the Swift Current Health District. 

 

The objective of the program was to foster a better attitude to an 

active lifestyle. 

 

The grade 6 students kept a journal of their activities for two 

weeks, participated in various physical activities such as biking, 

round dancing, and skateboarding  something active every 

day. 

 

Business places were informed by letters and poster . . . of the 

posters and of the activities. Interviews were held with senior 

citizens with regard to their physical activities during their 

youth and comparisons were made. 

 

Two thousand students were invited to take part in the active 

living challenge by walking to a park near their school today 

where each participant will receive a healthy snack, a drink, and 

an active living pencil. In addition, all of the citizens were 

challenged to walk or bike to work today. 

 

Congratulations to Janet Chabot, Gwen Uher, Carol Moen, 

Dick Dunlop, and Bev Switzer on a job well done. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sisters of Providence 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw and area are fortunate to 

enjoy the selfless commitment of the Sisters of Providence. 

Since coming to Moose Jaw in 1913, the Sisters of Providence 

served and cared for people of all faiths through Providence 

Place and the now closed Providence Hospital and St. 

Anthony’s Home facilities. 

 

During those 83 years, the Sisters worked without material 

reward, facing many trials. Some members of the order gave 

their lives while providing care to those struck by the influenza 

epidemic which hit Moose Jaw in 1918. During the Depression, 

they walked out into the country daily to beg for food for 

patients too poor to feed themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this commitment is unmatched. It’s the 

commitment of caring which they intend to offer as part of the 

geriatric unit at Providence Place. 

 

I would like to give the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

and his colleagues a chance to show that they are committed to 

seeing this valuable work continue. I would like to send to the 

member an envelope, and in it he will find ribbons of support 

for the geriatric unit for all his colleagues to wear when they 

return to their constituencies this weekend. 

 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Arbor Day 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, next week is National Forest 

Week and Monday is Arbor Day, a day we set aside to 

recognize the tremendous importance of trees and forests to our 

way of life. 

 

This year’s theme for National Forest Week is “Forest Regions, 

Varied Treasures”. And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce 

that Weyburn, in the heart of the prairie, was chosen to host this 

year’s provincial ceremony where trees are truly considered a 

treasure. 

 

This honour is a fine acknowledgement of Weyburn’s work in 

planning of Tatagwa Park development, an ambitious, 

long-range green plan designed to protect, preserve, and 

enhance the integrity of the Souris River corridor and adjacent 

habitats. Thousands of trees have been planted and established 

in this park. 

 

I will be taking part in the ceremonies, along with the 

Lieutenant Governor, the Minister of Environment and 

Resource Management, Mayor Jim Brown, and other civic 

officials, members of the Saskatchewan Forestry Association, 

and National Forest Week Committee. 

 

Elementary schools throughout the city will be attending the 

ceremonies as well as the junior high school band. There will 

be a ceremonial tree planting and each class will plant one tree. 

Seedlings will be given to students to take home as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our forest resources are indeed national treasures. 

They beautify the landscape and enrich our lives. I am pleased 

and honoured to take part in the ceremony in Weyburn to 

celebrate the trees of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lanigan Gators Tier 1 Bantam 

Women’s Provincial Champions 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize the Lanigan Gators volleyball team who 

finished their season by winning the gold medal. They captured 

the title for the tier 1 bantam women’s provincial 

championship. 

 

Throughout the season, the Gators won gold in a number of 

tournaments. Their dedication and hard work culminated in the 

provincial gold, and for this they deserve high commendation 

on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Congratulations to their coaches, Garth Shoemaker and Rueben 

Bushman, and congratulations to the Lanigan Gators. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I recognize the hon. member for Regina 

Northeast. Oh excuse me, for Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Saskatoon Diocese Names New Bishop 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I was going to say 

how soon they forget when they put on the hat. But, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the hon. member 

seems to have forgotten that he should ought not to involve the 

Speaker in his comments and debate in the House. And I’ll ask 

him to simply withdraw that remark and proceed with his 

member’s statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. I 

withdraw the comment. And I do want to say to you today, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have an important announcement today about a 

special friend who has accepted an important position within 

the Catholic church. 

 

Vernon James Weisgerber, originally from Vibank, 

Saskatchewan, was named bishop of the Diocese of Saskatoon 

on March 7. Today is also a special day for Bishop Weisgerber 

because today he receives his episcopal ordination. And Bishop 

Weisgerber succeeds the late James Mahoney who served as 

bishop of Saskatoon from 1967 to 1995. 

 

Having received his early education and strongly influenced by 

the Ursuline nuns of Prelate, Mr. Weisgerber went on for four 

years to study at St. Peter’s College in Muenster and was taught 

by the Benedictine fathers. From 1959 to 1963, he attended St. 

Paul’s University Seminary in Ottawa and returned to the 

Archdiocese of Regina where he was ordained a priest in June 

1963. 

 

After his ordination, Father Weisgerber served in a variety of 

parishes and reserves throughout the Archdiocese of Regina. 

And in June 1990, he was named general secretary of the 

Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops. And while in 

Ottawa, Pope John Paul II gave him the title of Monsignor. 

Bishop Weisgerber will be responsible for approximately 

75,000 Latin rite Catholics who live in the Saskatoon diocese. 

 

I extend, and on behalf of all of the members of the legislature, 

a special congratulations to Bishop Weisgerber and his family 

as he assumes his duties as bishop in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dress a Champion Program 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to take another moment now to acknowledge a truly worthwhile 

project in the city of Regina. 

 

The youth and staff who I introduced earlier of Ranch Ehrlo 

Society have established two projects that allow all kids in 

Regina a chance to attain equipment and participate in 

organized hockey. 

 



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

The Dress a Champion program coordinates the collection of 

donated, used hockey equipment from indoor rinks and sporting 

goods stores. Volunteers gather the equipment, repair it, clean 

it, sort it. And each December for the past four years, this 

donated equipment has been given away to boys and girls. 

Having distributed over 1,300 pairs of skates, 500 sets of 

equipment over the last four years, this worthwhile project now 

constitutes the largest annual hockey equipment give-away in 

the world. 

 

The equipment give-away also allows boys and girls to 

participate in Ranch Ehrlo’s subsequent project, the Regina 

Outdoor Hockey League. From mid-December to early-March, 

this non-contact league allows inner-city boys and girls, aged 

seven to fourteen, to play Canada’s most popular sport. 

 

And perhaps the most exciting role is played by the young 

people themselves in organizing and operating the program. 

Hard-working and dedicated young people like those I 

introduced have put an enormous amount of work into making 

these projects a success. And for their efforts Ranch Ehrlo kids 

have been awarded the Duke of Edinburgh’s bronze medal 

award for youth achievement. 

 

I asked a young woman at the rink last year how it went. And 

she said you learn the rules, and you get out there and kick 

some butt. So I’d like you to join me in thanking them for all 

their hard work on behalf of the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Poland’s Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  (The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Polish). 

 

So began, Mr. Speaker, the constitution proclaimed by the 

Polish Sejm or parliament on the May 3, 1791, which attempted 

to reform and organize the old Polish state. At the time, it was 

only the second written constitution, after that of the United 

States of America in 1778. Joined from the British, French, and 

American experience, the Polish authors of the constitution 

nevertheless created an original Act, endeavouring to address 

the specific social and political needs of the old 

Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. The death of the 

commonwealth and the partition of Poland in 1795 added a 

new, symbolic dimension to the ill-fated constitution of 1791. 

 

Next generations living under foreign domination kept alive the 

memory of the constitution of May 3 as a powerful symbol of 

hope for liberation. The constitution was cited as proof that 

Poles were quite capable and willing to properly manage the 

affairs of their own state. 

 

Constitution Day is a national holiday in Poland and is 

celebrated by Polish communities throughout the world. I 

would like to extend, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the legislature, 

recognition to local Polish cultural organizations in Saskatoon, 

Regina, North Battleford, and Prince Albert, who celebrate this 

event annually. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

has been a bad-news week for the sick, the elderly, and anyone 

truly concerned about health care in this province. Let me recap, 

Mr. Speaker: cuts to Lestock and Balcarres hospitals; further 

deep cuts and staff reductions in Weyburn; slashing funding in 

Fort Qu’Appelle; and the closure, Mr. Speaker, of the Pangman 

Hospital. 

 

Now after closing 53 rural hospitals, the government appears to 

have its sight set on another 30 facilities in other rural 

communities. The residents of Central Butte and area are 

concerned that their hospital will be next on the chopping 

block. Their health district CEO (chief executive officer) told a 

recent public meeting, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “You will have 

something, but I can’t guarantee what it will look like.” Mr. 

Speaker, can you imagine. 

 

Will the minister stand in this House today and guarantee to the 

people of Central Butte and their community that their hospital 

is not and will not be targeted for closure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as that member well 

knows, and all members know, that decisions about services 

being provided in the district will in fact be made at the district 

level where people are more capable and in tune to the needs of 

the district. The member hollers from his seat. The member 

hollers from his seat; he says it’s a matter of lack of funding. 

An interesting observation to come from the Liberal caucus, 

when that caucus through its federal friends in Ottawa have 

taken from health care funding in our province over $50 

million. And this government, Mr. Speaker, in its most recent 

budget has been able to back-fill, to replace those dollars, dollar 

for dollar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

member from Arm River indicates that this has been an 

interesting week in health care. It certainly has, Mr. Speaker. 

Perhaps he’d like to get up now in the House and explain his 

comment in public yesterday, in which he said, and I quote: 

 

If people want to, and are prepared to pay for the services, 

why won’t you allow it? 

 

Now I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote from the Leader of 

the Conservative Party. 

 

Here’s the quote from the member from Arm River: 

 

If there are people that are prepared to pay, then I think we 

have to let them pay. 

 

Is it the position, Mr. Speaker, of the Liberal Party, that they 

support two-tiered medicare? 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, Central Butte and the area 

surrounding the community are served by one doctor. He is 

scheduled to retire in a matter of days and there is no immediate 

replacement in sight and they’re having problem finding a 

doctor and no support from the provincial government. The best 

the district CEO can suggest is that, and I quote again: 

 

You will have a doctor, even if we have to send them out 

from the city part time. 

 

Now what a suggestion. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t good enough for 

the people of rural Saskatchewan. The people of Central Butte 

deserve better. The fact is this government has demonstrated a 

careless disregard for the people of rural Saskatchewan during 

it’s so-called health reform process. Because of this lack of 

commitment to health care in our rural communities, doctors 

are questioning even why they should go to rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Health ultimately has responsibility for health 

care in this province. What commitment, if any, what plan, if 

any, Mr. Speaker, will he commit to in this House today to 

ensure that doctors are provided to meet the needs of Central 

Butte and all the other rural communities in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 

Health and on behalf of this government, I am prepared to 

commit in this House, that this government stands 100 per cent, 

full stop, period, behind medicare and a single-payer system, 

universal medicare, Mr. Speaker, and I challenge that member 

and his caucus to make it very clear to the people of 

Saskatchewan, where do they stand. Where do they stand, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the member in public now, in public, joins 

with the Leader of the Conservative Party promoting privatized 

health care, two-tiered health care, I say that caucus, perhaps 

through its leader or through its Health critic or perhaps through 

its alternate Health critic, ought to stand up in this House and 

declare that position, that they’re in favour of two-tiered 

medicine. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you will know and other members will 

know, this government has taken a situation of health care 

delivery in our province and has changed that delivery 

mechanism and has changed the funding formulas, Mr. 

Speaker. A funding formula which now allocates those precious 

health care dollars to the needs of the population, and dollars 

which follow the individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Providence Place 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

outrage at this NDP (New Democratic Party) government for 

breaking a promise to fund the geriatric unit at Providence  

Place in Moose Jaw is gaining momentum. Even church 

parishes are questioning this government’s action. A Sunday 

bulletin from St. Joseph’s parish in Moose states, and I quote: 

 

It would seem that money, not common need, is dictating 

the direction of this and many other aspects of our health 

care. The challenge is before you; it is time to speak out. 

 

And I’d just like to send some copies of that across to the 

members opposite. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw area residents are starting to 

speak out and they’ve only just begun. In the week since a 

clipping appeared to allow local residents a chance to express 

their concerns, I am told that as many as 1,000 people have 

already taken the opportunity to express their feelings. 

 

Will the Acting Minister of Health explain why he is refusing to 

honour this funding promise when this decision has created so 

much concern? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 

members, I am well apprised that the district board and its 

administration are continuing to work with the board of 

Providence Place and its administration, and the two are 

continuing to work with the Department of Health to ensure the 

best possible provision of services for the people of Moose Jaw 

and the Thunder Creek Health District, and indeed beyond the 

district. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that work is going on in spite of the political 

efforts of the member for Thunder Creek. I’m also informed by 

members of my community, many of them who are getting 

somewhat tired of the member of Thunder Creek, who resides 

in Regina, advising the citizens of Moose Jaw on how to 

conduct their affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am more than confident, knowing those who are involved with 

Providence Place, knowing those who are involved at the 

district level, and knowing the Department of Health, that a 

satisfactory solution will be worked out to this concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, people are concerned because 

of the NDP government’s decision to willingly break a written 

contract. However they are also confused because they 

continually hear this government speak of the wellness concept 

in which early detection and treatments of ailments is the key. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is precisely what the geriatric assessment unit 

does, and it can save untold millions by keeping patients out of 

institutions if it’s funded and funded separately, as was 

promised. 

 

An editorial in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald sums it up best by 

stating, and I quote: 

 

If the geriatric assessment unit is closed or scaled back, it  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

destroys the credibility of any health officials who yammer 

about Saskatchewan’s new wellness philosophy of health 

care. 

 

As the NDP prepares to put a nail into the coffin of the geriatric 

unit, we have yet to hear a peep out of the government member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

And I would just ask the Acting Minister of Health to tell the 

House what action is he taking to ensure that that unit does not 

close? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, to the member’s question, 

as I have for many years, I have continued, and continue to this 

day, to work with the board of Providence Place, the 

administration of Providence Place, the district board and its 

administration, and officials within the Department of Health. 

Because I’m convinced, Mr. Speaker, that within this group of 

individuals working together there are solutions to be found. 

Now the solutions are not to be found in the politicization of 

the issues by the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

And again I repeat, Mr. Speaker, two things: the entire delivery 

of health care services across our province would be assisted if 

that group of individuals that sit in the Liberal caucus would 

once  just once, just once  speak up on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people to their federal counterparts; and two, Mr. 

Speaker, I think today, given the events of this week, that 

Liberal caucus owes it to the people of Saskatchewan to stand 

up and declare very clearly what is their position on medicare 

and two-tiered health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I regret that the Minister of Health 

is not here to hear the wrath of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order! Order. The 

Speaker does not need the advice of the hon. members and is 

not asking for it. I’ll simply remind the Leader of the 

Opposition that it is contrary to the rules of the Assembly to 

refer to either the presence or the absence of hon. members of 

the House. And I’ll ask the Leader of the Opposition to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw that 

remark. But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to continue on what my 

colleagues here have indicated to this House  the devastation 

that’s occurring in rural Saskatchewan with our health care 

system, the sick and the elderly that need it and rely on it. 

 

Last year the people of Fort Qu’Appelle were greeted with the 

good news that they would be one of the few communities in 

Saskatchewan that would be getting a new hospital, thanks to 

an agreement between the federal government, the province, 

and Touchwood Qu’Appelle tribal council. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

those plans have been put in jeopardy. The hospital board  

recently received word their operating funding was being cut by 

20 per cent. And in the word of the chairman, Noel Starblanket: 

what’s the point of building a new hospital if there’s no money 

to run it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Health if he 

will stand in this House today and honour his commitment to 

the people of Fort Qu’Appelle and the Touchwood File Hills 

tribal council and restore adequate funding to the hospital. Yes 

or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I again will endeavour to 

explain to the members of the Liberal caucus that health care 

funding in Saskatchewan now is now based on a needs-based 

funding formula which is the fairest process for the distribution 

of those precious health care dollars which are fewer in number, 

Mr. Speaker. It is to provide the fairest distribution of those 

health care dollars. That’s what’s happening across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. In some districts the funding has rose; in 

other districts the funding has fallen, on the needs-based 

funding formula. 

 

Now I do appreciate the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the leader of the 

Liberal caucus has now come to his feet, and perhaps next time 

he comes to his feet he will explain what is the position of the 

Liberal Party in terms of medicare. Do you support universal 

medicare, or do you support the position of the member from 

Arm River when he talks about two-tiered privatized medicine? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, this government here is just a little 

. . . seems to be just in a little bit of short supply of really telling 

it actually how it is. Mr. Speaker, for goodness’ sake, the time 

has passed for political answers. And excuses have long passed 

blaming the federal government on all the woes and choices 

that that government has made. 

 

I’ll try once again, Mr. Acting Minister, to take some 

responsibilities for your actions. Mr. Speaker, the health district 

has stated the province has been at the table for all discussions 

over funding this facility. The province knew the hospital’s 

budget, and the province knew full well it was under-funding 

the health district. 

 

Will the acting minister finally do the honourable thing and step 

in and ensure that this hospital is adequately funded? And no 

more political answers, no more blaming the federal 

government  yes or no, Mr. Minister, will you make the 

commitment to the people of Fort Qu’Appelle and the tribal 

council? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I will most certainly 

commit on behalf of this government and its Department of 

Health that we will in this circumstance, as we do in every 

circumstance, work closely both with the tribal . . . and in this 

case with the tribal council, with the district health board, and  



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

with officials in the Department of Health around the issues that 

the member raises. That is the responsibility of our departments 

and the districts and the board locally. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that member, as a leader of a caucus in this 

House, I believe, also has a responsibility. And that is to declare 

today in the House, does he, does his party support the 

single-payer universal concept of medicare that was born in this 

province? Or does he support the position that was taken by 

then premier Thatcher and now the member from Arm River of 

a two-tier privatized health system? What is your position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kerrobert Court-house Closure 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 

Minister, I was very pleased that you took the time to come last 

weekend to my riding and attend the rally at the Kerrobert 

court-house. 

 

However the minister heard a lot of questions at that rally and 

provided very few answers, and as I understand it, those 

answers still have not been forthcoming. 

 

The minister said the closure would save the government 

money, but he couldn’t say how much. The minister said 

Kerrobert is one of the least used court-houses in the province, 

but he didn’t have any figures to back that up. 

 

Mr. Minister, if this case were being heard in the Kerrobert 

court-house, it would be thrown out of court for lack of 

evidence. Mr. Minister, the local bar association produced 

figures showing Kerrobert is not anywhere near the bottom 

when it comes to court-house usage in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s actually around the middle of the pack. 

 

Mr. Minister, given this information, how can you justify the 

closure of the Kerrobert court-house? Will you leave this 

court-house open until you review your decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

Leader of the Conservative Party for that question. 

 

The information that was provided by the local bar association 

should be explained. What they provided was the number of 

cases that were heard by the Kerrobert district, and that 

included Kindersley, Unity, Rosetown, and Biggar, as well as 

Kerrobert. 

 

And I think it would be well advised that you would listen to 

what the figures are last year in provincial court. The town of 

Kindersley, there were 2,509 cases. The town of Unity, there 

was 1,568; the town of Rosetown  1,209; the town of Biggar 

 994; the town of Kerrobert  510. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Firearms Regulations 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

also to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, this morning Allan 

Rock released the regulations on the new Liberal’s firearms 

Act, and we just received our copy from Ottawa this morning. 

You’ve had your hands on these regulations for several weeks 

now, and can you tell us what impact the new regulation and 

laws will have on law-abiding firearms owners in 

Saskatchewan? And most importantly, are you going to stand 

up for and protect the rights of Saskatchewan’s firearms owners 

and challenge the Liberals gun control laws in court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

that question. The regulations were tabled in the House of 

Commons yesterday, and unfortunately they were different than 

the regulations that we received a week ago. And in fact there’s 

been great confusion in Ottawa around this. And it seems to me 

that it maybe reflects the kind of confusion that we see among 

the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, what happened yesterday in question period in the 

House of Commons . . . a fairly rare occurrence. One of the 

Liberal members got up and asked the Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Rock, what consultations were now going to take place within 

the caucus about these regulations. So it’s a very interesting 

situation where the members in Ottawa have quite a bit of 

confusion. 

 

We now have a copy of the regulations which will be available 

in limited number in my office, and practically we’re continuing 

to keep our battle where our position hasn’t changed. It’s just 

that we now are dealing with a lot of confusion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Planned Parenthood 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, my questions, Mr. Speaker, are to 

the Minister of Health or his designate. Mr. Minister, your 

government provides about $77,000 a year to Planned 

Parenthood. Planned Parenthood uses this money to run 

something called The Facts of Life Line, a 1-800 sex 

counselling line for teenagers. Recently your Minister’s 

Advisory Committee on Family Planning began actively 

promoting this line through the printing and distribution of 

information advertising the 1-800 number. 

 

Mr. Minister, your department is very involved in funding and 

promoting The Facts of Life Line. What are you doing to 

control the kind of information that is given to young people 

over this taxpayer funded line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in terms of the efforts of 

various groups in our province, including Planned Parenthood 

in conjunction with the Department of Health, to address the 

issues that have to do with sexual health, particularly the sexual 

health of our young people, Mr. Speaker, this government sees 

that as an extremely important initiative, one that we feel is very 

responsible, given some of the concerns we know exist in  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

our community. I simply am not prepared at all to apologize for 

efforts in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, an 

article in this week’s Western Report magazine described how a 

12-year old boy who called The Facts of Life Line was 

counselled on participating in oral and anal sex with other boys. 

Despite his age, he was not discouraged in participating in this 

activity. He was told it is an individual choice; it’s whatever 

you’re comfortable in doing. 

 

In fact the executive director of The Facts of Life Line freely 

admits that when kids ask about homosexuality, she tries to link 

them up with a gay person or with the gay and lesbian services 

in Regina and Saskatoon. She also says that counsellors are free 

to recommend abortion to pregnant teenage girls. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think this is the kind of information that 

should be given out to children and teenagers over the phone? 

Do you think parents want their children receiving this kind of 

counselling on abortion and sexual activity behind their backs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I think I know where the 

member question is coming from, and I certainly respect that 

member. I would recommend that the member not use the 

Western Report as the basis for his research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, listen. As a parent, as a citizen of the province, as 

a member of government, I think we all share concern about the 

sexual health, particularly of our young people. We want our 

young people to be advised well. We want our young people to 

be given strong values in their home community settings. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I tell you, no government, no government of any 

political stripe, should back down from the challenge of 

addressing these issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A final question to the 

acting minister. Mr. Minister, I realize you’re not a lawyer, but 

your colleague is. Mr. Minister, you should know that section 

152 of the Criminal Code says that it is a criminal offence to 

counsel a person under the age of 14 of participating and 

touching for a sexual purpose. This in an indictable offence 

punishable by up to 10 years in prison. 

 

In the example I just gave, the boy identified himself as being 

12 years old. The bigger problem is, since this is an anonymous 

phone line, the counsellors have no real way of knowing how 

old any of the callers are. Mr. Minister, the only proper 

counselling for children under the age of 14 is abstinence. 

 

Where are the safeguards in this system? Your department is 

actively promoting this 1-800 number. Some children under the 

age of 14 are bound to call. Mr. Minister, what are you doing to 

ensure that counsellors at your government-funded sex line 

aren’t breaking the law by counselling children to take part in 

sexual activity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure, particularly as a 

result of the member raising the issue in the House this 

morning, that officials in the Department of Health will be 

following up, one, to ensure accuracy of what the member 

brings to the House. We have had experience in task in this 

House on a fair number of occasions where members have 

raised issues in this House, made accusations and so on, and 

then we find that the accuracy is not entirely there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but to go to what I believe is the fundamental 

issue here, the fundamental issue is the health of Saskatchewan 

people, and in this case particularly the health of Saskatchewan 

young people. Mr. Speaker, we have a high rate of teen 

pregnancies in our province. That is unacceptable. We have a 

high rate of . . . as the member from Humboldt has pointed out 

in this House, we have a problem with child prostitution. We 

have a problem with the sexually transmitted diseases in our 

province as we do across the world and across the nation. These 

are significant health issues that I believe we all must be 

concerned about, and all must take appropriate steps. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Economic Development. Yesterday we 

questioned again the $5 million agreement with Intercontinental 

Packers. In this House, the minister indicated that the forgivable 

loan was needed to accommodate increased hog production in 

rural Saskatchewan. However the March 11 edition of 

AGRIWEEK indicates that Saskatchewan is one of only two 

provinces in which hog production is actually declining. 

 

Will the minister justify this agreement, if in fact there is no 

reason to suggest hog production is on the rise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, as the member will 

know, if she has been following hog production in this province 

since 1991 or 1992 when we started to work on Ag 2000, hog 

numbers are up about 10 per cent. Although last year there was 

a downturn because of the drastic increase in the cost of feed, 

which she will understand being from rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The point of the issue here is, Mr. Speaker, is the issue of 

subsidies. And I’m pleased to engage in the debate about 

whether or not too much subsidy went into the meat packing 

industry or not because that really is what the debate should be 

about. 

 

The issue here is that is we’re competing with two provinces, 

one in the east and one in the west, who are putting huge 

subsidies into the meat packing industry. The question is and 

the fair debate is, should the taxpayers of Saskatchewan be 

involved in subsidizing in order to keeping a meat packing 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan. Or should we move 

out of that area with the risk of the meat packing industry 

shutting down and producers in Saskatchewan having to haul 

their product 500 miles to Edmonton or Winnipeg with the  



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

extra cost to the farmers and the reduction in the quality of the 

meat? 

 

Now the idea that you shouldn’t do that is an interesting 

concept but . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. Last question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I have another solution that 

maybe we could use toward solving this problem if we want to 

increase the hog numbers. I’d like to take the minister back to 

April 10 when in this House he indicated there was a number of 

selected tax cuts being considered by this government. He 

stated, and I quote: 

 

. . . the list would include such things as (the) potential of 

E&H tax remission on expanded agriculture production 

such as hog barns . . . that . . . is needed in order to move 

our hog production from where it is . . . today. . . 

 

The minister claims that his government is committed to doing 

everything within its power to allow the hog industry to flourish 

in this province and to meet the goals set out in the seventh 

objective of the Partnership for Growth. Will the minister 

explain when this sector can expect the tax relief he’s talked 

about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Interesting that the member would 

raise that issue because yesterday I was at the Sunnyland 

Poultry at Wadena . . . Wynyard. And the member will know 

that there again the production of chickens and turkeys in the 

province is very important to the economy of Saskatchewan. 

And that was one of the very issues we talked about, that is, the 

E&H (education and health) tax on new facilities. 

 

I also had the opportunity to talk to hog producers yesterday, 

and this is an issue that they have raised. And when we will 

make that change is as soon as we get the deficit and the 

spending extremes of the Tory government under control and 

the interest rate under control to where we can cut that tax. And 

as soon as the federal government quits offloading to the tune 

of a hundred million a year, we will be able to continue in those 

selective tax changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Before orders of the day, to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a moment this 

morning just to welcome a former member, Mr. Larry Birkbeck, 

who represented the constituency of Moosomin, to welcome 

him to the Assembly, but as well to extend our condolences on 

the passing of his father recently. Mr. Speaker, let’s welcome  

the member. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In keeping with our now well-

established reputation of being an open, accessible government, 

I table the answer. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 83 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 58  An Act to 

amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential 

amendment be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 

to take a few moments today to discuss the amendments that 

have been tabled through The Land Titles Amendment Act, 

1996. I feel that this is an important piece of legislation that 

deserves careful consideration before it is passed into law. 

 

A number of the Bills that have already been tabled in this 

House during this session are simply for housekeeping, and 

there was limited reason to debate them in detail. This Bill is a 

little more complex and deals with a number of very important 

issues. It is for this reason that I feel that more needs to be said 

on this matter before it moves on in this House. 

 

There are many small and simple amendments put forward to 

the Act through this Bill. The areas that we are most interested 

in are the ones that make two important and basic changes to 

this Act. The first deals with the Land Titles Office and the 

process by which caveats are lapsed. The second change is with 

regard to Indian bands and the purchase of land. This Bill 

allows for the purchase of land by bands without them being 

required to form a corporation. 

 

Some of the smaller changes that have been proposed through 

this Bill deal with the destruction of duplicate certificates and 

increased flexibility when it comes to providing personal 

information to the Land Titles Office. This Bill will allow for 

certified copies of documents to be given to Land Titles instead 

of originals. This will definitely cut down on costs for the 

people involved, as they will no longer have to apply for 

original copies of personal documents. Through these smaller 

changes, it is clear that the intent is to simplify the 

administrative process of dealing with the Land Titles Office, 

and that is a welcome change. We see this as a move towards 

cost reduction and time savings, and we certainly do agree with  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

this motive. 

 

There have been a number of amendments put forward in this 

Bill that are for the sole purpose of reflecting current 

legislation. In many cases the names of federal Acts that are 

cited in the Bill have changed, and this Bill will now 

subsequently change the names of the federal Acts that are 

referred to in this provincial legislation. 

 

Due to the changes made to this Act, further amendments to 

other provincial Acts have also been required. It is the larger 

amendment and issues related to these amendments that causes 

a little bit of concern. 

 

The first major change is being implemented to deal with the 

confusion and complications that arise out of the current system 

of dealing with the Land Titles Office and the problems 

associated with caveat lapses. These amendments to this Act are 

a welcome change for those people who deal with the Land 

Titles Office. 

 

The changes to the land titles system proposed by this piece of 

legislation makes the caveat lapsing system and the process by 

which it is run and driven, the responsibility of the Land Titles 

itself. The people involved in the lapsing of a caveat will no 

longer have to do the paperwork by themselves. Under the 

present legislation, it is up to the person who is seeking to lapse 

a caveat to provide notification to the caveator of the intent and 

desire to have the said caveat lapsed. There have been some 

significant changes to the provision of notice of the lapsing of a 

caveat. As this notification process is now the responsibility of 

the Land Titles Office, the people directly involved need no 

longer worry. 

 

Yet these people involved should be aware that there are 

exceptions to the process of lapsing caveats under certain pieces 

of other legislation such as The Homesteads Act, the 

community planning Act, and The Planning and Development 

Act. 

 

At the present time, persons who have claims against property 

register these caveats with the Land Titles Office. In order to 

remove the caveat, the person who wants it removed must get 

involved in this complex process. Further, evidence of proper 

procedure had to be provided to the Land Titles Office before 

the lapsing of a caveat could proceed through the proper 

channels. 

 

Due to the fact that these types of procedures, unfamiliar and 

complex for the general population, the process often became 

inefficient and bogged down with excessive paperwork. This 

does nothing but cause grief for everyone involved. And with 

the changes that this Bill proposes, the caveat lapsing process 

will be conducted by the Land Titles Office unilaterally. 

Allowing this procedure to be handled by the Land Titles Office 

in its entirety is a positive step to eliminate some of the red tape 

that is involved in the processing of the lapsing of a caveat. 

 

This is, as I mentioned, a welcome end to the confusion that 

arises out of the process, both for the people involved in the  

caveat and the people working at the Land Titles Office. The 

intent to reduce errors in this process is a very welcome change, 

in our humble opinion. I think these changes to the system of 

lapsing the caveats are progressive and will simplify an 

otherwise confusing and complex system for everybody 

involved in this type of a situation. 

 

The area of this Bill which causes the most concern is in 

regards to the Indian bands and the purchase of off-reserve 

lands. This Bill will allow Indian bands to purchase and 

consequently own off-reserve land in their own name. Currently 

they must form a corporation before they can purchase land. 

This is due to the fact that the definition of owner does not 

include Indian bands who want to purchase land. Amendments 

to this Act will allow direct ownership of land by bands, but the 

registration of these lands still does not give it reserve status. 

 

(1100) 

 

Further, a new section has been added that will set out the 

requirements for the acceptance of instruments filed by Indian 

bands in relation to the purchase of lands. Further amendments 

to existing sections that deal with the liability of assurance 

funds are made to reflect the participation of Indian bands in 

the land titles system. It is my understanding that there will be 

regulations to this Act that will set out the names that bands 

will be using when dealing with the land titles system for the 

purpose of purchasing off-reserve land. 

 

There are questions and concerns that arise when we begin to 

discuss the issue of taxation on these newly acquired lands. Are 

they taxable, or are they tax exempt? Are purchases made on 

these lands taxable, or are they tax exempt? These questions 

need to be addressed before this Bill is passed into law. 

 

The potential outcomes and consequences of this part of The 

Land Titles Act are numerous and very important. I don’t think 

that any of us would like to see piece of legislation move 

through this House until all the consequences of the 

implementation of an Act have been given careful thought and 

consideration. 

 

On top of this, consultation of the parties involved must be 

done on an in-depth basis. I am a firm believer that consultation 

must come before implementation, and it is for that reason that I 

believe that more stakeholders and legal opinions need to be 

gained with regards to gaining insight into the possible 

outcomes of some aspects of this legislation. 

 

The tabling of this Bill comes at a time when Indian bands are 

working very hard towards self-determination and 

self-sufficiency. Through treaty land entitlements and job 

creation policies, bands are hoping to become more financially 

and socially independent. Allowing bands to skip the step of 

forming a corporation before they can purchase land is just one 

more step towards economic improvements for these bands. 

 

Despite this, we still cannot ignore the question of taxation. I 

am somewhat surprised that a Bill that deals quite heavily with 

the purchase of land by Indian bands makes absolutely no 

mention of the system of taxation that will be used on those  



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

lands once the transfer of ownership has been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is for these reasons and some others that I feel 

that perhaps more research and analysis, particularly of the 

consequences of this Bill, needs to be done. I therefore move 

that debate on this Bill be adjourned. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 45  An Act 

to amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Provincial Mediation 

Board Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to address this House on the subject of The Tax 

Enforcement Act. At the outset, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 

I support the principle of tightening up the legislation dealing 

with the collection of municipal property taxes. 

 

The present legislation is too cumbersome and time-consuming. 

There are instances that we hear about from time to time where 

some private individuals and companies actually use the lengthy 

and cumbersome municipal tax recovery process as a substitute 

for part or all of their line of credit. They deliberately choose 

not to pay their municipal property taxes for a year or two, 

knowing full well that the penalties for late payment are small 

or insignificant compared to the interest they will pay on a line 

of credit from their credit union or bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a disgraceful situation and it must be 

remedied. The municipal taxpayers who do not pay . . . who do 

pay their taxes faithfully should be supplying free or subsidized 

lines of credit to those who choose not to pay their taxes. That’s 

not fair, Mr. Speaker, and furthermore it’s wasteful. 

 

It’s wasteful whenever municipalities have to borrow money, 

even temporarily, in order to finance their operations simply 

because some of their taxpayers choose not to pay their taxes on 

time. As anyone who’s been in the business knows, credit 

unions and banks charge interest on loans, and the interest on 

loans made to municipalities made necessary by late payment of 

taxes becomes another burden on the coffers of the 

municipalities. 

 

What is the result, Mr. Speaker? Well the result is an ongoing 

interest burden for the municipality and resulting in higher mill 

rates for the ratepayers. In other words, ratepayers who do pay 

their taxes on time actually have to pay more than they should 

because of the bad habits of a few ratepayers who deliberately 

decide to pay their taxes on a late basis year after year. 

 

The other point that needs to be made at the very outset, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we have to do something to restore the integrity 

of taxpayers who deliberately choose to pay their taxes late on a 

reoccurring basis. Mr. Speaker, I ask you, why would a 

ratepayer deliberately decide not to pay his taxes promptly year 

after year? Why would he not do the honourable thing and pay  

his taxes promptly as they come due? 

 

I do believe by the drafting of this legislation the government 

intends to crack down on those that abuse the current laws 

relating to municipal taxes. Unfortunately I think that some of 

these sections proposed need further revisions. 

 

Section no. 3 of Bill 45 amends the waiting time for the period 

of tax enforcement proceeding by six months. While I agree 

that the length of the waiting time needed to be shortened, I do 

wonder if six months might be a little too short. This means that 

the list of those who have not paid their taxes, their municipal 

tax bill, will be published in January. This brief waiting period 

before publication of the names and land descriptions, could be 

too short. It could cause unnecessary embarrassment for those 

who are just a little late in paying their taxes. I would feel more 

comfortable if notices were published possibly three months 

later, say in March. 

 

This legislation proposes some major changes within section 

19. This section would amend the Act so that people who are 

late paying their tax bill would also be charged for repairs, 

maintenance, and cleaning that must be done to the property or 

the buildings on that property while the bill is unpaid. I am 

pleased to see that the landowners will be held accountable for 

maintenance, but I am extremely worried about the fees that 

could be levied for these maintenance services. I see nothing in 

this Act that would protect the landowner from being 

overcharged for this service. 

 

This legislation would also allow municipalities to request land 

titles six months after the registration of a tax lien. Here again, 

while I do want landowners to be accountable for their taxes, I 

am concerned that the shortening of the waiting period before 

requesting the land title, to six months, is too drastic. 

 

Another amendment proposed in Bill 45 would also permit 

municipalities to lease out land that they have taken possession 

of, while the taxes are in arrears. I feel that this is a positive 

change because at least municipalities will get some type of 

revenue from the land while they are waiting for the taxes to be 

paid. Also, leasing the property to another tenant may reduce 

the amount of maintenance required on that property. I see these 

as positive changes. 

 

However, another section of Bill 45 says, notice of provision 

for lands with unpaid taxes will be outlined in the regulations. 

This legislation proposes some major changes to municipal tax 

enforcement and will have a significant impact on all 

Saskatchewan landowners. Why is something so important as 

this notification left to be defined in regulations? Why doesn’t 

the government show us what it intends in these notices and 

outline the changes in this Bill? 

 

Section 26 is amended to super-streamline the tax notification 

process for people who own more than one property worth 

more than $2,000. Under the old Act, the owner was sent a 

notice for each piece of property. These changes should reduce 

the paperwork significantly, and hopefully reduce some of the 

confusion on the part of landowners. Perhaps the $2,000 value 

should be even higher as to make the legislation more up to  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

date. 

 

Section 31 of the legislation outlines the changes regarding the 

sale of land taken over by the municipalities. The old laws are 

extremely complicated and outdated. Even though the 

amendments in section 31 will bring the laws up to date, the 

changes regarding the rejection of insufficient bids is still 

extremely complicated. So while this part of the law is being 

reformed, it is still too complex. This makes me question if the 

government carried out enough consultation before drafting this 

Bill. The government would do well to listen to the advice of 

the municipalities and the landowners who have had to work 

with the old Act. 

 

If the government had truly listened, it would have tried to 

simplify the process, not complicate it even more. Overall I do 

see the government making some positive changes to the 

municipal tax enforcement with Bill 45. And I am definitely not 

satisfied with Bill 45 as it is presented here, but hopefully the 

government can address some of the concerns I have just 

described in Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 74  An Act to 

amend The Government Organization Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I welcome 

the chance to briefly touch on this Bill before it passes to 

Committee of the Whole. Mr. Speaker, we all know that 

through improved technology, transportation, and 

telecommunications, the world is continuously shrinking. It 

wasn’t that long ago in Saskatchewan history that our 

agreements, particularly in trade and economics, were 

somewhat limited. Contracts with other provinces, the federal 

government, and particularly with foreign countries were stifled 

by the huge distances. 

 

But things have changed, Mr. Speaker. We have the capability 

to take Saskatchewan products, people, and ideas anywhere in 

the world. For a province rich in all of these, the opening up of 

world markets is infinitely exciting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan companies have a chance to make 

their mark on the world, and the opportunities will continue to 

grow. But, Mr. Speaker, companies will only be able to seize on 

these opportunities if this government starts to create a positive 

economic climate. 

 

I’m sure the members of this Assembly would all agree that 

Saskatchewan people do have the ideas. Every member in this 

Assembly can probably come up with a list of their constituents 

who are innovative, determined, and capable of expanding their 

business. I can certainly attest to these qualities, this ability, and 

this energy in my constituents. And whether the members  

opposite will admit it or not, they could probably also come up 

with a list of companies who have been smothered by 

oppressive government policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will sit there and point out 

sometimes how much they are doing for Saskatchewan. The 

Minister of Agriculture will talk about his three-week trip to 

Asia and how much the NDP government accomplished. He so 

graciously calls himself a door opener bringing producer groups 

to government and business officials. To hear him speak you 

would almost think that he was the answer to expanding 

Saskatchewan business. 

 

But what he doesn’t talk about are the restrictions his 

government places on our businesses and especially on our 

small businesses. He doesn’t talk about the high taxes 

companies are forced to pay. He doesn’t talk about oppressive 

labour legislation. And he does not talk about propped up 

government companies that force independent businesses to 

fold. And he doesn’t talk about how his government has failed 

to create an atmosphere of positive economic growth. 

 

(1115) 

 

When the members opposite do talk about economic growth, it 

is through empty promises. The Minister of Economic 

Development will insist that the government is creating jobs 

and helping businesses grow. Bankruptcy stats and slow 

business start-ups show that he is playing a bit loose with the 

truth. 

 

Still, despite the government’s lack of real commitment to 

growth, we believe that there are excellent opportunities for 

Saskatchewan businesses within Saskatchewan, within Canada, 

and throughout the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that this Bill doesn’t deal strictly with 

trade agreements on behalf of Saskatchewan businesses. I 

understand that this Bill deals with intergovernmental or 

interorganizational agreements with persons, agencies, 

organizations, associations, enterprises, institutions, or other 

bodies. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as an elected representative, I have to look at 

the implications for my constituents and for all Saskatchewan 

people. I have to take these laws and these amendments and 

extend them to situations affecting real people. That is why I am 

so concerned about trade agreements. 

 

Our society has to rely on a stable and expansive economy. So I 

want to be sure that any amendments to this Act do not harm 

business opportunities in any way whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that Saskatchewan must enter into 

local, national, and international agreements. By expanding our 

base of cooperation, we can act as a catalyst to businesses 

within our province; and though we often doubt the priorities of 

this government, we do recognize that the minister may have to 

enter into these agreements. 

 

We do have some concerns about the increase in monetary  



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

limits outlined in this Bill. Currently there is a $10,000 limit 

imposed on a minister who enters an agreement without getting 

the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. With the 

proposed amendments, this limit would be raised to $50,000. 

Mr. Speaker, we are always worried when this government 

requests more power over Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money. 

 

Not only do they reach deep into taxpayers’ pockets to pad the 

government coffers, they spend it carelessly on misplaced 

priorities. Although I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that careless 

spending is not unique to the members opposite. After having 

watched the Tories squander away money on the whims of their 

cabinet ministers, fiscal irresponsibility is not new to the 

Saskatchewan government. 

 

I suppose that this is why the NDP government has been able to 

hide its misplaced priorities for so long. But, Mr. Speaker, 

people in Saskatchewan are smart and they are wise. They will 

not be fooled by words for long. They see how the actions of 

this government are destroying their province and they are 

going to fight back. And we will fight back on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another curiosity in this Bill which I 

would like to touch on. In the amendments outlined in the Bill, 

there is a new requirement of notice placed on a minister who 

wants to enter into an agreement with the feds, other provinces 

or territories, other countries or non-governmental parties. In 

other words, ministers number 1 through 17 have to go to the 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs for permission. I’ll 

assume that the Premier can do whatever he wants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only guess about the internal politics of the 

party opposite. I don’t know if the rumours we hear are true, so 

I refuse to repeat them in this House. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

seriously wonder if the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

has the power to turn down his colleagues. As a matter of fact, 

this amendment seems to recognize that he might now have that 

power. 

 

There is a provision that states that even if a minister fails to 

give the required notice to the Minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs, it does not affect the validity of the agreement. This all 

seems a bit redundant. 

 

So if I understand this right, let’s say the Minister of Highways 

wants to enter into an agreement worth more than $50,000. He 

then goes to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs to ask 

permission. The Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs says no. 

The Minister of Highways does it anyway and the taxpayers end 

up footing the bill. 

 

Now what is the point of this notice requirement? I look 

forward to the government’s explanation of this in the 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have brought forward some of our concerns on 

this Bill which I see as mainly a housekeeping piece of 

legislation. But as I said earlier, the implication could affect the 

government’s ability to misuse taxpayers’ money. So that in 

itself means we should carefully examine these changes. 

 

This amendment is not unique. As I understand it, these 

amendments are repeated in corresponding sections of Bills 

ranging from The Correctional Services Act to The Energy and 

Mines Act to The Department of Social Services Act. 

 

Therefore we see no reason to hold this Bill up further in 

adjourned debates, but we look forward to having some 

meaningful discussion on this Bill when it is passed to the 

Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of 

Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I have with me today Drew Johnston 

who is senior health professions analyst. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr. 

Johnston. 

 

I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you about this Bill 

because I understand there is a number of concerns. I guess the 

first question I’ll ask you is: who actually has asked for these 

changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Both professions did in a way. The 

optometrists wanted an expanded ability to prescribe certain 

drugs. The ophthalmologists wanted the power to prescribe . . . 

the power to take prescriptions for lenses and dispense them 

directly. They more or less agreed among themselves that each 

would get this expanded power. 

 

So this was a bit of good work actually, done by the Department 

of Health and by the minister but more by the department, in 

reaching a consensus among these two professions which are 

joined under one Act. And each got something out of it and 

each were able to support the advancement of the other. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you estimate for 

me how many professionals you feel will be affected by this 

Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There’s a hundred optometrists and 

ophthalmologists in the province, approximately. There’s no 

way of knowing I think, at this point in time how many will 

actually make use of the expanded powers. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Do the optometrists practising here 

in Saskatchewan currently receive the proper clinical training 

needed to treat infectious eye diseases or glaucoma? 

 



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They will have to have done so 

before they will be permitted to dispense these drugs. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Does that mean there will be a requirement for 

additional training for some of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, in some cases that’s right. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What are the anticipated cost savings 

associated with changes proposed by this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s very hard to know. One gives 

the consumers a broader choice of whom they go to, and in 

smaller communities, that may be important. How much that 

will actually wind up reducing costs is anybody’s guess. We’re 

just following the general principle. The broader array of choice 

is available to the consumers, the more competitive the price is 

likely to be. It’s almost impossible to quantify it in advance. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Has there been any evidence of public demand 

to be able to have eye diseases treated by an optometrist as 

opposed to an ophthalmologist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, there has been a demand for 

this, and it was the public demand which led to the opening of 

discussions with the two professions. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Do you feel there will be an increased cost to 

the provincial health plan as a result of these changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, there shouldn’t be. The broader 

array of choices should not result in the additional costs. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How do you address the fears of those 

ophthalmologists that optometrists with inadequate training will 

be given the authority to treat eye diseases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well that of course is the 

responsibility of the profession working in cooperation with the 

department to ensure that doesn’t happen. And it’s the very 

reason why these professions exist and are given the powers 

they have. 

 

Ms. Draude:  If problems start occurring, how do you feel 

that people are going to be able to . . . who will they get back 

to? Who will have the responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well they would have a variety of 

avenues to complain. Their elected member would be one. The 

Department of Health would be another. But the most likely 

avenue of complaining would be directly to the professional 

association; that’s the very reason they exist. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I understand that this Bill promotes free 

enterprise and will encourage competition among the 

optometrists and opticians, but the safety of the consumer is 

really the main concern. And I’m just wondering how this was 

considered when you were doing your analysis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That was given some careful 

consideration before the Bill was proceeded with. The  

department, together with the two professions, spent a long time 

analysing the situation to satisfy themselves beyond any shadow 

of a doubt that the two professions could and would be 

competent to accept the expanded powers before they were 

given to them. So the department, together with the profession, 

spent a long time assuring themselves of that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Section 16(1) says a contact lens technician 

may provide other services to a person as authorized by the 

by-laws. Could you explain what other services may be and 

where the qualifications of an optician are no longer sufficient 

to treat eye ailments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m told currently there is nothing 

specified in the by-laws. So the answer to your question is, 

nothing. It may happen at a later date, and if it were, the 

regulations would be promulgated. But at the moment there’s 

no such thing specified. 

 

(1130) 

 

Ms. Draude:  This legislation will allow some optometrists 

to prescribe drugs and to treat infectious eye diseases if they 

have proper training. One of my questions is, what safeguard is 

in place to ensure that the consumer’s aware of which 

optometrists have the training to prescribe drugs and which do 

not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Two. One, they’ll be issued a 

certificate which they’re required to display in their clinic. 

 

But I think the more direct protection is the very serious 

penalties which would follow from any optometrist who 

exercised these powers without being licensed to do so. Very 

serious consequences would follow. Probably the real 

protection to the public is that the penalty for dispensing these 

services when you’re not qualified to do so are so serious as to 

deter anyone from doing it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me what 

you mean by serious penalties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The most serious consequence is the 

suspension of a licence to practice. You are without any means 

of earning a living if that happens. Penal; fines; and the fines 

are severe. The current practice is not only to fine the offending 

professional, but also to ask them to pay the costs of the 

investigation, which are sometimes very serious. 

 

I’ve not seen these, but I get the information from the law 

society, of which I’m still a non-practising member, and the 

situation will be the same. A fine may be a couple thousand 

dollars and the costs of the investigation several times that  

$10,000. So the financial penalties can be very severe. It’s 

possible . . . Although it’s very unusual, penal sanctions are also 

possible; but they’re very unusual. 

 

But those are the consequences and they’re quite harsh for  

and correctly so  they’re quite harsh for professionals who 

offend them. 

 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  I guess my concern is, regardless of the 

severity of the penalties, the actual body that is a person that’s 

in place for somebody to complain to is rather inobscure at this 

moment. I think that if I have somebody that has a problem, 

they would . . . to come to their MLA really probably isn’t the 

right person to go to. I’m just wondering is there any thoughts 

to another way, another way a person can have some coverage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well if they believe that the whole 

system isn’t operating properly, then it might be appropriate to 

complain to an elected member. If they have a specific 

complaint against a specific professional, there is a disciplinary 

body and not hard to find. 

 

Ms. Draude:  My next question is, who will actually pay for 

the expanded services. Under the current section, ophthalmic 

eye care is covered under the provincial health plan, whereas 

optometry services are not. This Bill combines services 

provided by the two professions, and who will pay what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The responsibility of the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission won’t change. They only cover . . . 

they cover physicians. A visit to an optometrist continues to be 

covered . . . it continues to be a personal expense. We’re told 

that’s about $16 and that’s thought to be an affordable expense 

by people. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, what is the plan to implement 

these changes? Are there classes to train optometrists to 

dispense topical eye treatment going to be available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, the training for this is already 

in, virtually, in place. The curriculum has been expanded, I 

gather, at Waterloo, where this training takes place. There is a 

national exam, and thereafter when the training is completed, 

the exam is passed, the licence would then be endorsed with 

this additional right. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So where will they be able to take the training? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The University of Waterloo is where 

the training is provided in Canada. I gather they have also . . . 

there is also schools and universities in the U.S. (United States) 

which give the training which the Canadian authorities 

recognize. 

 

Ms. Draude:  And whose expense will this training be at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The professionals. 

 

Ms. Draude:  When do you feel that these . . . with the extra 

training, when do you feel that they’ll be able to implement the 

changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m told the regulations must be 

completed. They must discuss it with the profession; they must 

be passed and the Acts proclaimed; and they can go take the 

training. 

 

I’m told they expect that whole process of consulting, 

regulation making, and so on, to take a couple of months after  

the end of the session. So I guess one might look for early fall, 

perhaps at the earliest. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. Is the range of topical drugs 

that are to be distributed by the optometrists going to be made 

available to the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, that’s specified in the by-laws, 

which are of course available to the public. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

could you just summarize for me the consultation process that 

your department has had with different groups, naming those 

groups, and the areas that have been studied to ensure safety 

and cost and all those things are going to be met. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The consultations with the . . . the 

primary consultations were with the two professions  the 

optometrists and the ophthalmologists. There is consultation as 

well with the senior medical professions, the college and so on, 

on all of these matters. And that, plus the resources of the 

Department of Health, which have their own policy and 

planning capacity, all of that was pooled and out of it came a 

general agreement by everyone that these Acts would make 

sense in the circumstances. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you talked 

about the professions involved, was that limited to the province 

of Saskatchewan or did you go outside the borders of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No. Now they’re part of national 

organizations and the advice and the  I was going to say 

consent; that’s not quite accurate  but the advice and the . . . a 

consensus was sought not only among the provincial 

organizations but also from the national organizations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  And the professions involved in 

Saskatchewan were in full agreement with all parts of this 

legislation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m not sure the SMA (Saskatchewan 

Medical Association) are entirely in agreement. The 

ophthalmologists and optometrists are. I’m not sure the SMA is, 

and that’s not a new problem. Without delving into a delicate 

area, some of the professions  one might mention 

chiropractors being one  have sometimes had a difficult 

relationship with the SMA which has been protective of its turf. 

I don’t think that’s being critical, that’s . . . So the SMA is not 

signed on, but the other two are. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you elaborate 

a little bit more then what the problems might be with the SMA 

in relationship to this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  You can read into it what you want. 

Their reasons they put forth are that the services could be better 

provided by their members, which are the physicians, and that 

their members are better trained and better able to provide these 

services. 

 



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. And the college of physicians and 

surgeons, where do they stand on this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They support this. 

 

Mr. McLane:  You mentioned that the groups in the 

province were fully on board with this, and yet there’s a 

headline here from the Leader-Post saying that the 

“Ophthalmologists seeing red over proposed legislation.” Could 

you indicate to us what those concerns might have been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To some extent that view comes 

from the same source  indeed it’s part of the same 

phenomenon  that their members are better trained and 

therefore better able to provide the service. This is not a new 

problem within this profession. The college again agrees that 

the people that would be licensed under this Act are quite 

competent to perform the service. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Do you not think, Mr. Minister, that it would 

be better before proceeding with this to have agreement from 

these groups, sitting down with them and trying to come to a 

consensus on the issue, as opposed to having articles in the 

paper and individuals writing letters . . . creates some sort of 

confusion, I would think. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Those talks will continue to some 

extent. No resolution of these problem except to . . . To some 

extent there’s an awful lot of turf protection here which we 

don’t want to encourage and which is very, very expensive for 

the taxpayer if you give it full and free rein. 

 

So to some extent the problems probably aren’t capable of 

resolution. And when you consider that our first responsibility 

is to the taxpayer, it’s probable that we shouldn’t be slaves to 

these kind of approaches. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I certainly agree that our attention should be 

put toward the taxpayers of the province, and that’s exactly my 

point. To ensure that they are being protected, I would think 

you’d want these groups to be more onside and come to some 

sort of a consensus. 

 

You mentioned that you hadn’t or the department hadn’t 

discussed this issue outside the boundaries of the province. 

 

An Hon. Member:  No, I said the opposite, Harvey. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I misunderstood you. 

Maybe you could clarify that then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The official, in addition to what I 

said, we had contacts, somewhat informal perhaps, who had 

contacts with the national organizations. We also had contacts 

with Alberta and New Brunswick. And New Brunswick has 

actually exactly the same Bill going through the legislature at 

this same time with exactly the same play of forces in the 

professional community. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Since you raised New Brunswick, Mr. 

Minister, then are they experiencing encountering the same  

sorts of opposition from certain groups within the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, by and large. The New 

Brunswick Liberal Party doesn’t have the historical relationship 

with the medical profession which the NDP does in 

Saskatchewan, and that may . . . I think that probably accounts 

for the difference. 

 

But at the end of the day the positions are the same, perhaps a 

little less vociferously put forward in New Brunswick, but the 

positions of the professions, I’m told, are the same. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I think, Mr. Minister, when you refer to your 

relationship, your government’s relationship with the medical 

professions, that some of your recent decisions in health reform, 

I think that relationship could be getting just a wee bit frayed. It 

will probably move farther from there. 

 

However, the question I guess in response to a letter from the 

ophthalmology society of Alberta where they raise some issues 

about wanting to ensure that there’s proper training, a cost 

savings, of course demonstrating the need which will be for the 

benefit of the taxpayer to the province, public demand and 

public safety. What’s been done to ensure that all those things 

have been met, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well the primary authority in 

Saskatchewan is the college of physicians and surgeons. I will 

make a copy of this letter when I am finished and I’ll give you a 

copy  I won’t table it  I’ll give you a copy. I’ll just quote 

the second last paragraph: 

 

Primary health care professionals provide first contact 

health care. In respect to eye care citizens may consult 

either an optometrist or primary care physician. Both 

professions are well qualified to evaluate eye health status 

and detect eye disease. 

 

So in Saskatchewan our primary reliance is upon the college. 

The college has said they’re competent to do it. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess maybe I’d 

ask the question then, why would you think that there’s such 

opposition to this legislation from this group in Alberta, and 

having noted it to Dr. Kendel with the college, to the Bill? They 

cite many reasons  that they don’t have the proper evidence 

that proper clinical training to treat the infectious eye diseases 

or glaucoma . . . they haven’t documented any cost savings, or 

the public need or the public demand. What would their 

concerns be, and why has somebody not talked to them and 

tried to get an understanding of what they’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m not entirely sure I understood the 

member’s question. Was the member’s question about why the 

opposition was ongoing in Alberta? Is that your question? 

 

Perhaps you better restate your question. I’m afraid . . . I’m not 

sure which province we’re talking about. Are we talking about 

the opposition in Alberta? Are we talking about the opposition  



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. McLane:  We’re talking about opposition that’s coming 

from the ophthalmological society of Alberta, Mr. Minister. 

And the question would be: why would this group have such 

opposition to this legislation and bother to meet the college of 

physicians and surgeons and then respond to Dr. Kendel of the 

college? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well I think their concerns are no 

different than the concerns here. They claim they are better able 

to provide the service. The college does not agree, and it’s very 

difficult to escape the conclusion that they’re, at least in part, 

motivated by an element of turf protectionism. They’d be less 

than human if they didn’t. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, did the department have contact 

with this group? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, they had extensive contact. 

 

I received an indication, Mr. Chair, from the opposition that we 

should report progress on this and go on to the next item. 

 

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me my 

deputy minister, Stuart Kramer, to my left; to my right, Dennis 

Sherratt, the director of the wildlife branch; and behind me, 

Doug Kosloski, legislative analyst of the policy public and 

public involvement branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

welcome your officials today, Mr. Minister, and just have a few 

questions in this respect. What guidelines are in place, Mr. 

Minister, to refer to when you’re changing the permit fees to 

reflect municipal taxes? Do you understand what I’m getting at 

here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The tax fees are set by SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) in the RM 

(rural municipality) and what this amendment proposes is that 

we will be collecting the lease fees and taxes, and forward them 

to the RM according to whatever the rates are, usually 2 to $3 

an acre, in the form of a grant in lieu of taxes. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. These 

increases, are they supposed to take place . . . is this going to 

happen all at once or you going to put this in over a period of 

time or are you going to do it just bang, and there we are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I wish to inform the hon. member that 

there’s no increases involved here. The rates are staying the 

same. What has happened in the past . . . let’s use a hypothetical 

case, that there’s a quarter section of land and say $100 owing 

to the RM in the grant in lieu of taxes. And an  

individual is perhaps cutting hay on five acres of that quarter 

section, and for the value of $50. And what has happened in the 

past, that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) would get $50 from us and they’d have to go 

after the person that cut the hay to get the other $50. What this 

amendment does is that we collect the $50 from the person that 

cuts the hay and we forward $100 to the RM, and SARM has 

asked for this amendment. So it makes a lot less work for 

SARM; they don’t have to go out and collect bits and pieces of 

money here to make up for grants in lieu. We will do all of that 

and simply forward a cheque directly to the RM affected. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay. So, Mr. Minister, so this actually 

would even off. If there was no change and the RM was 

charging taxes on that land, the amount of taxes received by the 

RM would be identical to what . . . if they were doing it 

themselves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  That’s correct. There’s no more or no less 

money. It’s just getting it to the RM in a much easier formula 

for the RMs. And we look forward to working with the RMs in 

this process. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 

I’d like to go back and I had in my mind that the grazing fees 

and the haying permit fees and that, would be increasing in 

cost. And are you saying that this is not the case? There will be 

no increase in costs for the farmers that are leasing this land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The answer to that is that the RM has in the 

past had to try to collect the taxes say on the five acres that the 

hay was cut and the haying fees. And we will look after all of 

that, and then send the RM one cheque and they will get the 

same amount of money. In fact in some cases they’ll get more, 

because if there was only $20 or something in haying fees the 

RM wouldn’t bother with it. 

 

So we have to deal with the lessees cutting the hay anyways, 

and we’re going to help the RMs out by collecting any money 

due and then forward a cheque in the full amount to the RMs. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, does 

the minister have the . . . Can the minister increase the fees if a 

landowner is in arrears in his taxes to the RM? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I believe I understand the question, hon. 

member. If a farmer was in arrears on taxes on some deeded 

land, there would be no connection between us collecting 

arrears or lease fees or additional taxes, money through the 

wildlife development fund lands, and forwarding it to the RM. 

Have I got that straight? Yes, there will be no connection there. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the amendments 

to this Bill, it talks about the minister may recover payments, in 

whole or in part, by increasing fees or charging additional fees 

for haying and grazing permits during the year in which the 

payment is made. How are those additional fees set? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  We use the same formula as established by 

the Department of Agriculture. And it varies, from area of the 

province, to the price of the cattle, and a number of other  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

factors. So we use the same formula as the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are these fees 

something that are set in the regulations? I’m not sure I’m 

understanding you there. It’s set by a formula, but is that 

formula . . . is it able to be changed, I guess, by the Minister of 

Agriculture then, through the regulations, which would affect 

what you’re doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, again I just wish to state that we use 

the Department of Agriculture formulas, and we believe that 

they’re the most accurate that we can get. And they’re market 

driven, depending on area of the province and the price of 

cattle. So the fees may vary a little from one year to the next. 

Some years they may go down, some years they may go up. But 

we use the standard formula as set out with the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to confirm 

then, I’m not sure where that formula sits in the Act, in the 

agriculture Act. Is it in the regulations or is it in the Act itself, 

and where does it come into under this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I believe, hon. member, that the formula is 

in policy, because it does change probably every year. So it’s 

within the Department of Agriculture policy, and that is looked 

at and arrived at based on a number of factors. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If that’s the case, 

then maybe you should explain a little more detail and the 

process of how that formula was arrived at, who has the ability 

to change an element of the formula, which would certainly 

increase the costs for grazing leases. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Because this question does entail some 

information from the Department of Agriculture, we would be 

very pleased to provide you a written response as to how the 

policy is derived at, and that would tie in with these lease 

policies, if that would be acceptable to the hon. member. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the 

response could have led to a couple of more questions, 

depending on what the answer was. So that would be good if 

you would do that. 

 

I guess one of the questions I might ask  and more generic  

would be, how do we ensure that the ranchers or the farmers are 

protected from the leases going too high? What is there is in 

there to prevent that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Although this Bill deals specifically with 

the collection of grants in lieu to go to the RM, in response to 

your specific question, I think government or any other 

individual who was way out of line with their fees for grazing 

or haying would soon be brought into line simply through 

public pressure. 

 

Again, when we respond to you in writing, we’ll try to . . . we’ll  

get the details as to how the policy is set. 

 

But this is simply assisting SARM and RMs in collecting taxes 

or grants in lieu in this legislation. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, my 

question is around wildlife land that has been purchased or 

donated to the wildlife resource fund. Is your department 

responsible for having the fences removed, because in many 

times this land that has been turned back into natural resource 

land has been pasture land. And as a result, in my area I’ve 

noticed that there seems to be projects that occur in different 

locales where fences are removed as soon as this land has been 

sold or donated. Is this through responsibility of your 

department under this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I thank the member for the question. Of 

course every particular parcel of land has different 

circumstances. In some cases when we purchase a quarter of 

land, we sign a leaseback for five years to the current owner. So 

in that case the fences would be maintained. 

 

In other cases, fences have been removed for road construction. 

Perhaps the landowner himself — maybe the posts are fairly 

new and the wire is good — has gone out, and with permission 

from us after we’ve purchased the land, to remove the fence to 

use it elsewhere. 

 

Our general policy is that there is not grazing allowed on 

wildlife development fund lands but there are exceptions 

through purchase agreements. And we’re also moving towards 

looking at limited grazing as a management tool on these lands. 

 

So there’s various circumstances. Certainly in some areas the 

fences have been removed or at least on partial . . . or on one or 

two sides of the parcel of land. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Two questions then, Mr. Minister. Who 

determines whether or not that land should stay as possible 

grazing land? That’s the first question. 

 

The second question, is the local wildlife federation involved in 

deciding that that parcel of land is no longer going to be grazed 

by anyone, and therefore there is a determination that  you 

know, half mile by four sides, there’s usually two miles of 

fence involved  is it decided upon by the local group that that 

fence be removed, and then who pays for removing of that 

fence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  As the member may know, the wildlife 

development fund was first started back in 1970, and up until 

very recently, grazing has not been considered an option, but we 

are looking at possible grazing contracts as a management tool 

on some of these lands. 

 

We certainly do work closely with the local wildlife federation 

branches, and more importantly, with our regional biologist 

who goes out and examines the area to determine if some 

controls are needed, whether it’s cutting hay or perhaps some 

limited grazing. 

 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

So there’s a number of factors to determine what management 

and what activities will occur on these lands. 

 

Basically if the department sees fit for the fence to be removed, 

we would pay it or use our own manpower. If the farmer 

wanted the fence and posts, I’m sure, for his own labour, we 

would just give it to him. Sometimes a local branch of the 

wildlife federation may want to also use the material for 

something. And so there isn’t much cost involved. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

when land is donated or purchased by wildlife, is there 

consideration taken into where this land is before it’s passed 

into that . . . designated as wildlife land? 

 

Why I’m asking this is we have that situation beside a main 

highway, and the problem caused, and I think part of the 

problem is . . . actually the problem is increased because of this 

wildlife land, that there’s a great amount of deer that are hit 

along that highway. And the cost, as we know, comes back to 

us, the public. 

 

And is that a consideration when looking at this land, to turning 

it into the major thoroughfares? Could even be a rural road 

even, that’s very heavily travelled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The purchase of wildlife lands is generally 

a willing buyer, willing seller. And because the dollars available 

are very limited, we are confined to buying the best remaining 

habitat. Like some RMs, we don’t have any habitat — for an 

example, just south of Regina where there’s virtually no habitat 

left. 

 

So we do look at the best remaining habitat. And granted, some 

of these are along roads. We have so many roads, of course, in 

Saskatchewan that it’s hard to get away from road . . . at least 

rural road allowances within the south part of the province here. 

 

So that is certainly a consideration, and I recognize what you’re 

raising here. And what we are finding, because of fragmented 

habitat you will find dead deer along the road upwards of a mile 

or more away from the nearest trees. But certainly, if there is 

deer collision problems along wildlife development fund lands, 

we would work with the Department of Highways to put up 

deer crossing signs. 

 

So again, it’s a willing buyer; willing seller. And there’s so few 

good pieces of habitat left that, if it’s along a main road we 

probably would buy it if it was available for sale and we could 

arrive at a price on it. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think . . . like in 

this case I know it has created a much bigger problem along this 

highway. They have to cross the railroad tracks  the train has 

been hitting a large number of them  but along that stretch of 

highway, probably for 10 miles, it’s nothing every day to go up 

there, and you can go every day of the week, and see two or 

three new carcasses up there. 

 

Another question, and to do with the same thing, when land is 

also turned in . . . I have a case in mind where there’s a large  

feed lot  but I know there’s other problems where farmers are 

situated and all of a sudden we have a wildlife quarter near 

there and it affects their yard  is this another consideration 

that’s taken in before it’s granted to go under the wildlife? 

What it will do to the farmers . . . like their feed, the disruption 

with the extra amount of wildlife that are brought into that area, 

the problem it causes for farmers  and in my case about a 

2,000 head feed lot  and it’s causing them all kinds of 

problems this last two years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again to the hon. member, our policy is: 

willing buyer; willing seller. 

 

And being we want to remain good neighbours with people 

who we do purchase land next to, we will do what we can to 

maintain weeds and what have you. And I guess we would view 

that buying a parcel of land in an area where most of the 

remaining land has been cleared as perhaps helping the 

neighbours out and at least providing some cover and food 

supply for wildlife, which goes far and beyond white-tailed 

deer. 

 

But certainly with the increased deer population in the last few 

years and also the different farming practices  farmers 

growing crops which deer really like  we are having some 

management problems. And we are looking forward to working 

with landowners and RMs and wildlife federation branches to 

resolve these conflicts. So we try to be good neighbours when 

we do purchase land and like we’d ask anybody else to be. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand what 

you’re saying, but as RMs out there I know from our end of it 

we’re trying to be environmentally friendly and go along with a 

lot of the things you’re doing, but we have a hard time with this 

when it’s creating problems for us out there. 

 

And Ducks Unlimited is probably another example of land 

that’s being set aside for stuff like that, and then the wildlife 

land. And the more of this that comes on stream, our problem is 

bigger and bigger and bigger. Do you have any control over 

land to . . . or do you have to okay it were Ducks Unlimited are 

setting aside land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  With response to that, whether its the 

wildlife federation, Ducks Unlimited, or the wildlife 

development fund, what we are trying to do is secure and 

preserve sort of remnants of the wildlife habitat. And as the 

habitat disappears, wildlife will concentrate in some of the 

areas where there is habitat. And I guess the alternative is to 

sort of clear it all and we wouldn’t have wildlife, which none of 

us want to see. 

 

Ducks Unlimited, for an example, has to go through the Farm 

Ownership Board to acquire lands. And although in a particular 

area it may seem as though there’s a lot of wildlife lands, in 

southern Saskatchewan less than 1 per cent of the land base is 

set aside either to Ducks Unlimited, wildlife federation, or the 

department. So when you see a section of land set aside for 

wildlife it may seem like a lot, but on the provincial scale it’s a 

very small amount. 

 



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report considerable 

progress, Mr. Chair, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 24 and Bill No. 

49. 

 

(1215) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Beside me I 

have Brian King, who is the deputy minister of the Department 

of Labour. To my right is Noela Bamford; she is the executive 

director of the labour services branch. And behind me is Jeff 

Parr, who is the executive director of occupational health and 

safety. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When we left 

off some time ago, we were talking about the reorganization 

and the changes, downsizing in your department. And I believe 

there were something like 13 full-time equivalents that had 

been reduced in your department. And I think we were talking 

about how this organizational change was affecting your 

department in terms of a general sense and, you know, how you 

were managing this downsizing and what impact that was 

having on your staff, the morale, the anxiety, and how it was 

being handled. Would you bring us up to date on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well we’re still short 13 people from 

what we had before, mainly budget driven, or totally budget 

driven. Organizational review will be ongoing within the 

department, I would think, over a period of the next few 

months. And we expect that the department will be working 

with other agencies that they come in contact with, other 

departments, in finding the best ways in which to deliver the 

programs that we’re responsible for. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. In regard to this 

organizational review that you’re conducting, are you 

conducting it in terms of re-jigging your department structure to 

recognize there’s 13 people missing, or are you looking at an 

overall analysis of the efficiencies of your department that 

could indeed lead to further full-time equivalent positions being 

cut into the future? Is your review broader than just the 13 

positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The review is much broader than the 13 

positions. The review though is not finding any further 

efficiencies, so to speak, within the department. 

 

We have a relatively small staff compared to most departments 

within executive government. And the review that we’ll be 

doing is looking at how we can best deliver the program that  

we’re expected to deliver to people within the province. It may 

mean some changes in responsibilities. It may mean a 

new-looking organizational chart. It may mean that we find 

ways in which we can deliver a program better. 

 

But it’s certainly not any view of further positions being lost 

within the department. We already have a bare minimum of 

staff, and we have to find ways of focusing on the programs 

that we’re responsible for, so we can deliver good quality 

service into the future. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Would you also have available, or could 

you make available, how many managerial positions you would 

have, as compared to how many in-scope positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  We can make that available to you now. 

We won’t be able to project what that will look like into the 

future. But at such time as we’ve had a look at various things 

that we can do within the department, we can provide you with 

an updated organizational chart at that time. And it would set 

out the management . . . or in-scope and out-of-scope 

employees in the department. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Of the 13 full-time-equivalent positions that 

have been lost, have you decided or has it been decided how 

many of those positions would be in scope and how many out 

of scope? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Six were in scope . . . it was 12.5 

positions actually. I’m informed there were six in scope, six out 

of scope. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Point five just went missing. 

 

Minister, your department, I believe, is also responsible for the 

provincial mediators? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Would you mind outlining how many you 

have; how they’re chosen; and what their mandate would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  We have four people that are in-house 

that perform that role. One is on sick leave at the moment. The 

other three people would be Terry Stevens, Michaela Keet, and 

Peter Suderman. They have mediation skills and that’s the type 

of skill we’re looking for to work within the department in a 

mediation role. Their backgrounds . . . I know Mr. Stevens quite 

well and have for a number of years; I’m not as familiar with 

the backgrounds of Mr. Suderman and Ms. Keet. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Is there a requirement, a professional 

requirement, in terms of background, university education, or 

things of that nature that are sort of prerequisite in terms of 

these type of people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  There’s no designation at any 

post-secondary educational institution as far as I’m aware 

anywhere in Canada, that designates somebody is there, a 

trained mediator or conciliator. There are various classes and 

workshops that the employees within that branch would take  



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

from time to time to improve their skills and look at new 

methods that have been used in mediation. 

 

Michaela Keet I believe has a Bachelor of Laws degree and a 

Bachelor of Arts from the University of Saskatchewan. I don’t 

know that I have Mr. Suderman’s qualifications but I’m quite 

certain he has a university degree as well. Mr. Stevens, although 

I don’t believe he has a university degree, he was involved for 

many, many years as a representative of the steelworkers and 

has worked in that role very effectively. And we feel that all 

three of those people who are currently in the field for us have 

very effective mediation skills. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, you mentioned one of the 

mediators has a background from the steelworkers and 

experience through labour negotiations and things from that 

perspective. 

 

Is that the kind of person . . . It just strikes me is, that this is the 

kind of person perhaps that would be more biased or perceived 

to be more biased towards one of the parties perhaps that might 

be in need of mediation rather than an independent, impartial, 

sort of non-biased person. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Our conciliation mediation is voluntary 

and the parties ask for these people to come in. And I’m not 

accustomed, as the Minister of Labour, of having someone go 

in in a mediation, in a conciliation role, that would be 

unacceptable to either party. So although there could be some 

perceived bias from time to time, it’s the parties who are in a 

dispute that actually ask for the people to come into the 

situation. 

 

So I can see where there might be a perception there, but in 

reality it does not have a negative effect on the work because 

they are requested to come into the dispute. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, if they’re requesting mediation, do 

the two parties agree and request a specific mediator or do they 

just request from your department mediation services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Both. There’ll be some times where 

they would request mediation, not knowing who they’re looking 

for, and other times the parties may ask for a specific 

individual. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I want to switch a bit now into the 

area of administration. And I see in the descriptive paragraph 

that indicates some of the services that are provided, that part of 

the services are to the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat. 

Would you mind outlining for us, please, what services your 

department provide to that Secretariat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Administrative services. It would be in 

the area of doing their accounting and their human resources. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Can you indicate approximately how much 

those services . . . or how much of your department’s budget 

those services would entail? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  We provide that service. There’s not a  

dollar figure attached to it but it would take about 10 per cent of 

the time. I should also say, in addition to human resources and 

accounting functions, they also do payroll for that organization. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  It also indicates in that descriptive 

paragraph that you provide services to the Women’s Secretariat. 

Would they be similar services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Pretty well exactly the same services, 

yes. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I also see in the back of the Estimates book 

that there is a Women’s Secretariat with 13 full-time equivalent 

positions. How is it that you provide some of the services and 

they’re not all rolled into the Women’s Secretariat? 

 

(1230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well it’s a matter of efficiencies. Both 

the Women’s Secretariat and the Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat, I think those are the only two we perform the 

administrative, human resource, and payroll functions for. 

They’re small entities and they wouldn’t, I think, be well served 

with full-time people performing those roles both within the 

Women’s Secretariat and with the Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat. So we have the pleasure and responsibility to do 

those three functions for the two agencies. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Under accommodation and central services, 

I notice approximately 125,000 decrease in that budget 

category. What’s the reason? Are you . . . and that, as it says, 

payments to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) for office space, etc. Are you using less office 

space or how do you explain the decrease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No, we’re not using less office space. 

We negotiated a rent reduction. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I would like to move briefly to another area 

 and I’m pleased to see your official is here this morning, so I 

think it’s quite effective  and that is occupational health and 

safety. There was a number of changes to the regulations and 

things of that nature awhile back, I understand. Would you 

mind outlining the nature of those changes and regulations and 

how you led to the KPMG report that evaluated the impact of 

these. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  We don’t have time today to get into all 

the changes. The regulations are quite comprehensive. You 

would have inches of paper that outline all the regulation 

changes. 

 

But basically the intent is to make sure that workplaces are as 

safe as they can possibly be. You’ll find provisions within the 

occupational health and safety regulations that deal with having 

occupational health and safety committees, having training for 

those committees in the workplace. 

 

And hopefully in the final analysis when all is working as we 

envisage it working, we’ll have safer workplaces whereby 

there’ll be some view of self-regulation within the workplace  



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

because you’ll have management and workers working 

together, because I think we all want to, regardless of our walk 

in life, to have safer working places for the men and women of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, you had a report on these changes 

done by KPMG that . . . I have a copy that you were kind 

enough to provide some time ago, dated November 23. In it, it 

outlined that if all the changes were implemented, there would 

be an industry cost impact of some $18.3 million. And I believe 

that the clippings or the press reports, when you received that 

report, was that you were going to review it or study it or take it 

under advisement. Could you please advise as to where the 

response to this report is in your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, I’m sorry; I should have responded 

to that when I on my feet for the last answer. But the KPMG 

report, we must remember, was on draft regulations. They 

weren’t finalized. And also it was a draft report from KPMG 

that was given some degree of press coverage when it was first 

released. 

 

And you’re accurate. They took the extreme situation and 

determined that it could cost as much as about eighteen and half 

million dollars to implement the occupational health and safety 

regulations. 

 

This has been part of the hold-up in the regulations not having 

been brought through the process yet. We’ve tried to find ways 

and I think we have been effective. We’re getting into the final 

stages of keeping the costs of the implementation of the 

regulations down while at the same time not compromising the 

intent to make sure that workplaces are safer by having the 

regulations come into place. 

 

One of the items for example, would be training. Training can 

be a very costly item. We think we’ve found some effective 

ways to enhance the training program, have it consistent, have it 

certified, and a delivery mechanism that we think will serve us 

well and keep the cost down. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, there are some . . . in reading the 

report, there’s a great many of the changes to regulations that 

are very welcomed. That seemed, although they may have 

common impacts to business and employers, they’re very 

supportive of them and they’re just very common-sensical kinds 

of things that indeed are going to go a long way to improving 

the workplace safety. 

 

There are also some though that have some concerns raised that 

I would like to address briefly, and I certainly don’t want to get 

into all the regulations and details. One of the areas that was 

outlined as questioned in terms of it’s appropriateness is the 

harassment policy. There was a cost of approximately . . . or 

almost $1.5 million, and the question is really, where is that 

section of the proposed regulations at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The item that you refer to, in terms of 

harassment in the workplace and the cost attached to it, that’s a 

very soft kind of cost action. What I mean by that is that there’s 

a duty of employers to consult and communicate with their  

employees. 

 

Harassment in the workplace has become a very large issue and 

a very large problem for all of society, and something that needs 

to be dealt with. Over time we need to, first off, make sure we 

have enough resources to do investigations and to do the 

training to make sure that people are not harassed in the 

workplace either sexually or physical harassment. 

 

And so the dollar item you’re referring to has to do with an 

obligation of employers to consult and discuss and try and put 

into place a harassment policy within each workplace. 

 

Many workplaces currently have harassment policies, both 

sexual and personal harassment. And it’s unfortunate that, 

although the basics would be the same in each place, there are 

likely situations that differ from workplace to workplace, and 

the employers have to be obligated to figure that out with their 

employees. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, is there not a duplication or an 

overlap between your department working with these 

harassment policies in the workplace and things like the human 

rights guidelines maybe, working out of Justice. I wonder how 

you reconcile those two things, and are they being coordinated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well our focus, our focus has an 

element to it that the Human Rights Commission and others 

would not have. We’re into prevention; we don’t want to be 

reacting to areas where there’s been a crisis situation already. 

 

Part of what we want to do through the occupational health and 

safety regulations is to make sure that people are 

knowledgeable, people are trained, people have all the tools 

they need to work in a harmonious workplace or develop a 

harmonious workplace if it doesn’t exist at the current time. So 

we’re more into the prevention side than we are in the 

complaint driven, or we certainly want to move in that 

direction. 

 

On the other hand, if there’s a harassment issue, we are 

sometimes called in to try and remedy the situation. I think the 

best example of that is a situation at the Prince Albert laundry, 

where there were allegations of personal harassment of the 

employees by a management person and eventually . . . it took 

several months and several thousands of dollars but there was a 

resolve to that situation. So we do go in and act, but we want 

our focus in the long term to be one on training and prevention. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, another area of concern that was 

expressed was the whole area of record keeping and the paper 

trail on all this area. And I believe it said that it could cost 

companies up to two and a half million dollars for this 

increased record keeping. Could you tell me what you anticipate 

is going to happen with this area and is it going to be changed 

and moderated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’m informed by the officials that there 

are many changes in that area. We’ve had a very strong focus 

on reducing the paper burden. Some of the items, for example 

equipment that could possibly fall from a location, it was  



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

initially required to be removed and tagged every year. Instead 

of doing that, there’s more of an inspection of it so that both the 

management and the employees know that it’s a safe workplace. 

And I think you’ll find when the regulations are finally 

proclaimed, that there’s a great reduction in the paper burden to 

employers but at the same time, not compromising the integrity 

of safe workplaces. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. Another area that 

seems to have caused some concern is this shifting of the 

requirements in terms of sound levels from 85 decibels, I 

believe, to 80 decibels in the workplace. The cost is again quite 

high. Could you tell me on what scientific or subjective type of 

. . . objective type of information that you move from 85 to 80 

decibels? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  What we basically looked at was what’s 

happening in other jurisdictions, and I think moving to the 80 

decibels is not out of line with other jurisdictions. 

 

The other thing to remember in the development of the 

occupational health and safety regulations, there was extensive 

consultation with employers and employees. They got together 

and there’s a fairly wide acceptance. In fact I would think that 

most of the occupational health and safety regulations come 

from a consensus position. And it’s my understanding, or at 

least I think it is, that this was something that there was 

consensus on between employers and employees that were 

represented on the committee. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Another area that seems to be of great 

concern is that this whole process is going to require a great 

deal of discussion and consultation, and it indicated that in year 

one it could be something as high as $6.2 million. Has the 

process of this consultation about these regulations been 

thought out, and has that been streamlined so that that cost can 

be minimized? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The answer to that is yes. This is one 

example where I think I mentioned earlier, KPMG in some 

cases took an extreme example. You’d have to be consulting, I 

think, more than what anyone had in mind to actually run up 

that kind of a bill on the consultation and meeting expenses. So 

there’s been some work done on that, and we don’t think that 

it’s going to be as onerous a cost as what was initially put out. 

We think we’ve come to grips with that. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I certainly don’t want to 

necessarily be defending KPMG, although my son-in-law works 

for them in Calgary. But it says in the report, if consultations 

with all workers were accounted for, the cost would likely be 50 

per cent higher. That doesn’t seem to me that they were 

overstating it if they allowed that extra 50 per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well what they’re saying is that if you 

had to consult with every single worker in the workplace, that 

may be so. 

 

But I believe, at least in my mind, the way that this will work 

out is that in the workplace, you’ll have an occupational health  

and safety committee. The occupational health and safety 

committee will then be responsible for disseminating 

information and doing consultation with the rest of the people 

in the workplace. So the time consumption, as far as 

management would be concerned, would be more with the 

actual occupational health and safety committee itself in the 

workplace which would be co-chaired by a management and a 

non-management person. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  And when you speak of the chairs of the 

occupation health and safety committees, one of the comments 

that were made in the report as well is that these new 

regulations are going to make that workload very large. The 

quote here is “becoming overwhelming.” And companies 

anticipate the new regulations will require half- to full-time 

commitment by co-chairs. 

 

Have you again looked at that, and would you define or tell me 

the role of these co-chairs  who pays for each of them, where 

they come from, and give us a little background on these 

co-chairs of these committees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  In your larger workplaces in 

Saskatchewan, they would already have occupational health and 

safety committees. So they’re working there effectively now, 

but there are many workplaces in Saskatchewan that do not 

have an occupational health and safety committee in the 

workplace. 

 

The payment would be the responsibility of the employer, of 

management, and it depends on the size of the workplace, to be 

quite frank about it. If you had the largest employer in 

Saskatchewan, that might be true  the statement you made 

about it requiring that amount of time to perform the duty. On 

the other hand, if it’s a workplace where you have 25 

employees, it would take nowhere near that amount of time for 

the committee to perform their role. 

 

How are the committees chosen? The committees are chosen 

. . . the management co-chair would be chosen by management 

by some process and the employee co-chair would be chosen by 

the other employees by some process that they would put in 

place within their own workplace. And anywhere where you 

have a good deal of harmony within a company, between 

management and the employees, you’ll find that these 

committees will work very, very effectively. 

 

In some cases where there’s strained relationships between 

management and the employees of a company, we’re willing to 

help in that regard. That’s where you can have some proactivity 

in terms of mediation, conciliation; also drawing on the 

resources of the occupational health and safety branch to come 

out and put together a system that would be hopefully 

acceptable. 

 

But in the vast majority of cases, occupational health and safety 

committees work quite well and it’s not a cumbersome cost on 

them. 

 



May 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, you indicated that you’re 

reviewing these regulations and finding ways to make them less 

costly and things of that nature. Would you indicate who’s 

involved with that process. Is that entirely internal to the 

department, and if it is, would you consider opening that up so 

that the employers and perhaps the more public discussion 

could happen in terms of the actual implementation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Discussion has already happened. And 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act came in; in 1993 it 

was passed. That’s getting on to three years ago. 

 

I’m not taking the regulations again out for public consultation. 

There’s been, in my opinion, adequate consultation. The review 

that’s being done now is internal. There’s work being done by 

Mr. Parr, who is here today, amongst his other duties that he 

has. 

 

Workers’ Compensation Board would have a special interest in 

this. And as you know, the Workers’ Compensation Board is an 

organization that is funded by employers’ premiums so they 

have an interest in this as well. 

 

And I think the process has been open in the past and it gets 

more confined as you get to the finalization of the regulations. 

 

And I think that opening up to another round of public 

consultations would delay the regulations to the point where I 

would feel very uncomfortable that I wouldn’t have got the 

regulations proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I guess the point I’m leading to is 

we have in the public mind, now that the implementation of 

these regulations are going to be something in the order of 

$18.3 million as per the KPMG report, as part of this review, 

are you going to then sort of re-establish or re-identify and 

answer the issues that were raised in the KPMG report; and 

secondly, put actual costs . . . or updated estimates as to what 

this is actually going to cost employers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, we’ll be providing that. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Can you indicate to us what the time line is 

on this? Are we looking for this very quickly or very soon, or 

are we looking forward to it two or three months down the line? 

Or what’s your time line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I rise with some deal of 

embarrassment to answer that question. I’ve been telling people 

ever since I was appointed as Minister of Labour that they’re 

just around the corner. It’s obviously gotten to be a very, very 

big corner, and I haven’t gone around it yet. 

 

I expect that very soon is the best I can say, and I ask Mr. Parr 

and I ask Mr. King, get these regulations forward. And I say 

that again today, and you can tell me and I’ll tell them again, 

but we’re working together as expeditiously as possible. Is that 

right, Mr. Parr? Mr. King? Yes we are. So it’ll be soon. 

 

And you understand the process is that once we’re done with 

the regulations, looking at them internally, they’ll go to the  

Regulations Committee; from Regulations Committee from 

cabinet; and then they’ll be proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I’ve come to be very suspicious of 

definitions of soon or around the corner in politics, because 

even a week can seem like a lifetime in this profession. Are we 

looking like . . . potentially midsummer or mid-fall, or months, 

weeks, what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Soon equals July. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. And I assume that 

we’ll have copies of all those regulations, or could we have 

them sooner to look at where they’re at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  They’re actually gazetted. The 

regulations are always gazetted in the Saskatchewan Gazette, so 

I mean anyone who subscribes to the Saskatchewan Gazette 

would see what the regulations are. And I suppose that if there 

was some particular concern you had, if you could express that 

to us, we could try and provide you with some information 

during the process as to what’s there. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Well I guess, Minister, what I’m thinking of 

are the ones that are particularly being reviewed in terms of 

maybe adjusting them, changing them, modifying them to get 

this more cost-effective and more efficient as you’ve indicated 

this review process was intending to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, people have 60 days during which 

they’re gazetted to offer comment and things that they think 

should be corrected or changed. The items in the process where 

we’re going to keep the cost down, I think, you’ll have to rely 

on KPMG when they do their final report. 

 

And I think that the validity of their numbers, you would have 

some degree more trust for, than me telling you in the House 

what the figure would be. And I think that’s likely the best way 

to establish how much we’ve able to keep the cost down, is by 

the KPMG final report. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Will the KPMG final report then sort of be 

as a result of the modifications and changes that you’ve made 

within your department and will then really be a report that 

updates the final cost impact of these changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  And that, as well, anticipated in July, or 

soon, or sooner or later? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I would anticipate that sooner, because 

there’s no use in having the proclamation and then have the 

report come out after and say that these are even more 

expensive than they were before. I’d find that to be bad politics, 

even for the judgement that I show sometimes. So definitely the 

final report would be prior to the proclamation of the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I want to move to 

another area and just start it briefly, because I know that we  



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1996 

won’t have time to get into any detail. But I would like to ask 

you, in terms of the Workers’ Advocate that’s part of your 

department’s responsibilities, would you also . . . would you 

please outline what the responsibilities and the role of that 

department or that individual is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the normal role that’s set out for a 

Workers’ Advocate, if someone has made application to the 

Workers’ Compensation Board, the Workers’ Advocate would 

help them through the steps to people who understand the 

Workers’ Compensation system quite well. 

 

Some injured workers, unfortunately, feel a bit intimidated by 

the process. In other cases, they may be turned down and need 

to appeal. The Workers’ Advocates are very good at helping 

people through the process with Workers’ Compensation. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  What percentage of your department’s 

funding is involved with that department or that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I don’t have a quick percentage, but the 

total for the Workers’ Advocate is $267,000. And that would be 

out of a budget of $9.1 million. So $267,000 is the total for 

Workers’ Advocate out of the $9.1 dollar budget that we work 

with. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1339 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1340 

  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1340 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1340 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1340 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1340 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1340 

  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1341 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1341 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1348 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Lottery Winner 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1341 

 Project Promotes Healthy Lifestyle 

  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1341 

 Sisters of Providence 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1341 

 Arbor Day 

  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1342 

 Lanigan Gators Tier 1 Bantam Women’s Provincial Champions 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1342 

 Saskatoon Diocese Names New Bishop 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1342 

 Dress-A-Champion Program 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1342 

 Poland’s Constitution Day 

  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1343 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Rural Health Care 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1343 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1343 

 Funding for Providence Place 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1344 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1344 

 Funding for Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1345 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1345 

 Kerrobert Court-house Closure 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1346 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1346 

 Firearms Regulations 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1346 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1346 

 Funding for Planned Parenthood 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1346 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1346 

 



 

 Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1347 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1347 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1348 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1348 

 Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a consequential amendment to The Provincial 

Mediation Board Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1350 

 Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government Organization Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1351 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1352 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1352 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1354 

 Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1356 

  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................1356, 1358 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1356 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1357 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour  Vote 20 

  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................1359 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1359 

 

 


