













































April 23, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1085 

 April 23, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of extremely concerned citizens concerning the closure 

of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on this petition are from Melville, from Regina, 

from Glenavon, from Balcarres, Grenfell, and a number of 

small communities in rural Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Some of the communities where people have signed from are 

Rocanville, Wapella, Moosomin, and Maryfield, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present names of concerned citizens about the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Carnduff, Moosomin, Rocanville, Esterhazy, and 

throughout southern Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Weyburn and Regina, but also some smaller 

communities like Ceylon, Ogema, and Milestone. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on the petition are all from Regina, and I suspect 

from Regina South. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from La Loche, 

from Wynyard, from Moose Jaw, Indian Head, and all over 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

too, to present petitions of names from people throughout 

southern Saskatchewan, including Regina, regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from people and concerned 

citizens from Regina, and in particular the southern part of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from across Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Vanguard, Pambrun, Hodgeville, all in my constituency, as well 

as Eastend, Swift Current, and many from Regina. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we rise 

today to present petitions of the undersigned people of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have primarily signed this petition, Mr. 

Speaker, are from the city of Regina. And I wish to present this 

to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, day 

number 36 of the legislative sitting, the 36th day I’ve stood with 

my colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan in trying to  



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

save the Plains Health Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition I see are 

from . . . many from my own constituency, Wood Mountain, 

Assiniboia, Killdeer, Rockglen, many from the Weyburn and 

Ogema areas, and of course from Regina Albert South, 

Dewdney, Elphinstone, and it looks like most of the 

constituencies right here in Regina where they’re trying to get 

their members to stand up for the Plains Health Centre. 

 

The Speaker:  I want to remind the member, as he already 

knows, and I know that, that it is not permissible to have debate 

when presenting petitions. And I’ll simply ask for his 

cooperation on that. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

petitions to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 

that were given to me last weekend in Vibank. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to: (1) challenge Bill C-68 in 

court; (2) refuse to allow the federal government to take 

over enforcement in Saskatchewan; (3) and not allow the 

implementation of Bill C-68 in Saskatchewan while the 

Bill is being challenged in court. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners come from the Vibank, McLean, Francis, 

Balgonie, Regina, Odessa, Qu’Appelle, Riceton, Lipton, Kelso, 

Maryfield, all across the south-east corner of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize in your 

gallery some very important guests that are here today, and on 

behalf of the official opposition I would like to welcome the 

students from the Regina area, from here. 

 

And I’d also like to welcome the international guests that we 

have from south of the border that are here in your gallery as 

well today, Mr. Speaker. And we welcome them and I hope all 

the hon. members here will join me in welcoming these very 

fine young people to our Assembly, and I hope they enjoy the 

proceedings this afternoon. Thank you. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. On behalf of 

the Deputy Premier who is delayed returning from a noon 

engagement, it’s my pleasure to welcome to the Assembly and 

to you, Mr. Speaker, 16 students in your gallery, on the 

government side of the gallery, 16 students from the Kitchener 

Community School. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 

Cheryl Ball and Allen Wills, and by a chaperon, Gary Shore. 

 

I hope the members find today’s proceedings interesting and 

informative. And it is to be hoped that your member, the 

Deputy Premier, will be back in time to meet you after the 

question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If there are no other introductions, the 

Speaker would like to introduce a guest to the Assembly who 

are visiting from the Speaker’s riding today. In the Speaker’s 

gallery you will see 16 students from Wheatland Christian 

School who are visiting here today. They’re from grades 1 to 7 

and they are accompanied today by their teachers Jeff Milmine 

and Sandra Godsoe, as well as chaperons Tami Gadd, Brenda 

Ilchuk, and Carol Lewis. 

 

They’ll be staying in the galleries today until 2 o’clock to watch 

proceedings of the Assembly and then they’ll leave for a tour of 

the building, and with the help of the Deputy Speaker, I hope to 

be able to meet with them at 2:30 for a visit and refreshments 

and also a chance for a photo. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly, I would ask that you 

would extend a warm welcome to these visitors from Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Wakaw Warriors Win Volleyball Championship 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased and honoured to 

rise today to present to this Assembly and especially to my 

colleagues  I guess my colleagues over on the left  the 

weekly sports report from the Humboldt constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Wakaw Warriors 

midget boys volleyball team who recently won the provincial 

championship held in Prince Albert. They will now take part in 

the western Canadian championships to be held in Victoria, 

B.C. (British Columbia), from April 26 to the 29, competing 

with the teams from Vancouver, Edmonton, Calgary, Winnipeg, 

and Victoria. 

 

Wakaw previously won this championship in 1980 and 

garnered a silver medal in 1981. The present team has won 

many previous awards. They won peewee provincial titles in 

1992 and ’93, and bantam A and B provincial titles in 1993 and 

’94. And now they succeeded in winning a provincial title at the 

midget level, a remarkable feat for a small school and town. 



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

Congratulations to their coaches, Morris Nemish and Michael 

Romanchuk. And congratulations, Wakaw Warriors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

April Petroleum and Natural Gas Rights Sales 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, for myself and the member from 

Kindersley, I want to call the House’s attention to a recent 

announcement that contains good news for our two 

constituencies and for Swift Current, Estevan, Weyburn, and 

Lloydminster constituencies. Good news for us in this case 

means good news for the whole province. 

 

The April sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights netted 

$13.4 million in revenue for the province. Combined with the 

first sale of the year in February, the total so far this year is 25.8 

million. That compares quite nicely to the 16.7 million from the 

same two sales last year. 

 

As a member from the north-west, I am particularly pleased to 

note that the majority of the lands sold for exploratory permits 

were in the heavy-oil area south-west of North Battleford. This 

means increased exploration activity in my area with the 

potential for development of new reserves. Exploration and new 

reserves mean new jobs, Mr. Speaker. The next sale will be in 

June and I expect this high interest level will be maintained. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan War Brides’ Association Reunion 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend 

marked the gathering of a very special group of ladies in 

Saskatoon  the Saskatchewan War Brides’ Association held 

their annual reunion. This event is near and dear to me because 

my mother was a war bride. When she came over on a boat to 

join my father in Canada, she was a frightened young woman. 

She’d left behind her family, her homeland, and most of her 

friends, to start a new life with her Canadian husband. The only 

people she knew here were the other war brides that had also 

made the journey. 

 

Throughout the years, many of them maintained strong 

friendships. My mother and other war brides faced unique 

problems that they helped each other through. Many of them 

could not afford to travel back to Europe to visit their families 

so their friendships became an important link to their roots 

overseas. 

 

Each year, the Saskatchewan War Brides’ Association has a 

reunion. While many of them have moved on or are unable to 

make the trip, those who do find the time to be there, find it to 

be a gathering of their own special little families. 

 

I would like to recognize all the Saskatchewan war brides and 

the contribution they have made to Saskatchewan and Canada 

over the years. I thank them for their strength and their courage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

North-west Saskatchewan Drought 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two weeks ago, 

members in this House noted that the Easter holiday is directly 

connected to the feeling of optimism that comes with the first 

warm air and the first sighting of something green. Especially 

this year when winter seemed to have a permanent grip around 

our throats, we have hung on because we know that spring and 

the rebirth will come eventually. 

 

But like the harsh winter before it, spring this year in 

Saskatchewan is delivering something less than its promise. I 

will let other members talk about floods. In my part of the 

province, we are facing a different problem  the reverse. As I 

drive around my constituency, I am saddened to see how dry it 

is. 

 

We have had seven consecutive years of below average rainfall. 

This has caused drought conditions not seen in the north-west, 

not even in the ‘30s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our area produces a quarter of Saskatchewan’s 

cattle and our pastures are tinder dry; hay is in short supply and 

feed is expensive. Our grain and cattle producers are facing a 

tremendous challenge. Crop insurance will be a help, but rain 

would be a godsend. 

 

I want members to be aware of our situation. As so often has 

been the case in Saskatchewan’s history, we’re having trouble 

finding the balance between too much and too little water. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of George Abel 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to draw 

to the attention of all hon. members, the passing of a great man 

in the city of Melville. Anyone who is near to my age and a 

great hockey fan will know the name of George Abel who 

passed away on April 16 at the age of 80. 

 

Mr. Abel is perhaps best known as a member of the Edmonton 

Mercuries who represented Canada at the 1952 Winter 

Olympics in Oslo, Sweden. Mr. Speaker, this was the last 

Canadian team to win the gold medal at the Olympics. In 1993, 

Mr. Abel was inducted into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of 

Fame. George Abel contributed to Melville throughout his 

entire life, operating a business there until his retirement in 

1971. 

 

He was a devoted sportsman. As well as hockey, Mr. Abel 

enjoyed curling, hunting, and fishing. He was also a devoted 

family man, leaving to mourn his wife Joyce and three sons, as 

well as many other members of his family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole of Melville is saddened by the passing 

of this great man. However, his dedication to his sport, to his 

family, and to his community, will live long in our memories. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

La Loche Road Construction Training 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was pleased to 

speak about another example of how our training programs are 

helping to create new opportunities in northern Saskatchewan. 

This trend will continue as 20 residents of La Loche are being 

trained for employment as heavy equipment operators. This is a 

result of a partnership agreement between Future Skills, New 

Careers Corporation, and a multi-party training plan, the 

northern training program, Northlands College, Woodland 

Institute, the village of La Loche, local contractors, and the 

mining industry. 

 

It is quite evident, as we announced in our Partnership For 

Growth strategy, that the skills training and education must be 

linked with these kinds of partnerships to create jobs for 

Saskatchewan people as we head into the new century. 

 

This agreement in the La Loche region involves classroom 

training and practical experience during the construction work 

on the La Loche road to Garson Lake. After they have 

completed the program these trainees will have the opportunity 

for employment with local contractors and the northern mining 

industry. Training will be delivered by the SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

Woodland Institute of Prince Albert. 

 

Community representatives in La Loche say this agreement will 

benefit the area in several ways. Twenty people will receive 

training for gainful employment and there will be improvement 

to the northern infrastructure. 

 

Congratulation to the Department of Post-Secondary Education 

and to all the people who will be running this program. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Native Dancers 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

recognize the worldwide achievement of two Weyburn 

residents. Donetta and Trevor Ewack are quite simply two 

remarkable native dancers known throughout first nations and 

increasingly around the world. 

 

As a recent newspaper article pointed out, Donetta Ewack is the 

best native dancer in the world, and Trevor is not far behind. 

Although they live in Weyburn, they dance and compete 

worldwide. Last September Donetta won the junior adult 

women’s world championship in fancy dancing in 

Mashantucket, Connecticut. 

 

Last year they also danced in many European countries, at the 

Goodwill Games in Russia, at half-time at the Hula Bowl this 

January, and of course they danced at the opening ceremonies at 

our Grey Cup celebration in November. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, Donetta’s sister is a world-class dancer,  

and her eight-year-old daughter Alisa already has 20 trophies of 

her own. 

 

Donetta is also well-known for her sewing talents. Her 

costumes are purchased by museums around the world and are 

worn by other dancers and movie stars. One of the many things 

the talents of the Ewacks prove, Mr. Speaker, is that 

Saskatchewan is wide and deep in exceptional people. I 

congratulate them on their success and wish them many more 

championship steps. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Association For Community Living 

Employer of the Year Award 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

community of Yorkton is very proud to recognize the 

Saskatchewan Association For Community Living for their 

continual assistance in employing disabled people. I am proud 

to share with this House the news that the Yorkton repair shop 

of the Department of Highways has been awarded the Employer 

of the Year by the Saskatchewan Association For Community 

Living. 

 

For almost a year now, the shop has employed a disabled person 

as an assistant. The shop employees have worked very hard to 

make this initiative a success by providing coaching in basic 

work skills and transportation to and from work. 

 

A unique feature of this initiative is that the client from the 

Yorkton community living association is employed on a 

contract basis based on the department’s pay scale. This offers 

the contract employee the opportunity to earn a full living wage. 

 

I would like to commend Mr. Al MacLeod and all of the 

employees of the Yorkton highway shop for their hard work 

and their dedication. They have set an excellent example for 

others in both the public and the private sector. And I know, 

Mr. Speaker, that all members of the House will want to join 

me in recognizing the accomplishments of this fine award. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker media 

reports this morning and yesterday indicate that the farmers are 

not prepared to allow this government to get away with 

breaking promises any longer. There are indications that 

farmers are prepared to take legal action to ensure that the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government is held to a promise not to 

collect on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

wind-up. 



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

Will the Acting Minister of Agriculture explain why he and his 

government are backing farmers into a corner, leaving them 

little choice but to pursue legal avenues to force this 

government to honour a commitment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, we’ve said it many times in this House that if the 

farmers owe a bill, basically from the 1993 overpayment in 

GRIP, and the 1994 premium, that they have to pay the bill. I 

would like the member opposite to quite causing confusion 

with the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. We have 

farmers now that think the Liberal caucus are going to pay those 

bills, and I don’t think that’s their intention. So quit confusing 

the issue. The farmers owe the bills; they will pay the bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what the 

minister is mistaking is that the farmers want the government to 

look after the bills and commit to a promise that they made last 

March in this House. 

 

The day that Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, have to go to 

court to try and hold a government to a promise is truly a sad 

day and will reflect badly on each and every member opposite. 

The fact that this government has gone to such lengths to avoid 

honouring a commitment demonstrates what contempt they 

have for the farmers of this province. 

 

Will the Acting Minister of Agriculture demonstrate that he has 

some integrity and honour by making a commitment in this 

House today to honour the promise that his former predecessor 

made? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try one 

more time. I’m going to tell the member opposite that he should 

be advising the farmers that if they owe a bill, that the intention 

is that they should pay that bill, and not confuse the issue. 

 

He states that this government breaks promises, yet his federal 

counterparts, who promised to do away with the GST (goods 

and services tax), Mr. Speaker, is now forcing a GST on all the 

provinces. It’s a very sad day. What the member should do, Mr. 

Speaker, is talk to the farmers that are sending him their bills 

and tell them directly that no, the Liberal caucus has no 

intentions of paying those bills for the farmers and that they 

should indeed go to the corporation and make arrangements if 

they are having difficulty making those payments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Worker Severance Payments 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Health speaks regularly about how every health dollar and 

decision under his department’s control is being made in the  

best possible interest of health care. Unfortunately this is not 

the case, and every resident of Saskatchewan, particularly those 

in rural Saskatchewan, know this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to use one example, Grant Rathwell was laid off 

from the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District Health Board early 

this year. He was then quickly hired by the Department of 

Health in the northern health services branch. 

 

Of course we wish Mr. Rathwell the best of luck in his new 

position. However, I wonder if the Minister of Health can tell 

this House if Grant Rathwell returned the severance package he 

was awarded, ensuring that valuable health care dollars in the 

Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District system remain in the 

district to provide valuable care for the sick and the elderly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Actually, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s sad that 

the member would suggest that this individual, who I don’t 

know, who apparently lost his job in Moose Jaw, should not be 

able to go out just like anybody else and get another job. 

Apparently the Department of Health, probably through the 

Public Service Commission, gave this man a job after he lost 

his job. 

 

I don’t think it’s fair for the member to suggest that this man 

shouldn’t have been able to go out and get another job; that he 

wasn’t entitled to whatever kind of arrangement he made with 

his former employer, the Moose Jaw Health District; or to raise 

this man’s personal circumstances in the House. That’s my 

view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the sick and 

elderly in the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District, I will 

allow the minister to make another attempt at answering these 

sorts of questions. 

 

I do have another example to demonstrate that this isn’t an 

isolated incident. This case involves Bert Linklater who was 

also laid off by the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District Health 

Board. Coincidentally, Mr. Linklater was also hired back rather 

quickly to serve in the Department of Health’s district support 

branch. 

 

Again I believe the public would be interested in knowing if 

Mr. Linklater returned the severance package he was awarded. 

Will the minister explain how many severance packages the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan can afford, given his government’s 

propensity to rehire these same people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well just so the House and the people 

watching this understand, Mr. Speaker, the member is giving 

misleading information. He’s suggesting that the Department of 

Health laid off these two people, or fired them, and gave them 

severance, and then rehired them. This is not true. 

 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

The Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health Board apparently let 

these two individuals go. The member is chagrined because 

they apparently applied for jobs in the Department of Health, 

won a competition and were hired. And I say I’m glad they 

were. I wish them all the best, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They lost their jobs in Moose Jaw. They competed for jobs in 

the Department of Health. They got the jobs. I wish them the 

best of luck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grid Road Maintenance 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again this 

government appears to be taking action which will have a 

negative impact on our rural people. According to a CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) news report, this 

government is refusing to cost-share grid road rebuilding 

projects and is instead directing these monies back into 

government coffers. 

 

The Highways minister told reporters yesterday, and I quote: 

 

Grid roads are very important and will be more important 

given the changing transportation needs. What we have to 

do is work more closely with rural municipalities to better 

plan transportation needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the grid roads across this province are in 

need of major repair and upgrading. Does the minister feel that 

this latest example of downloading is what he describes as 

working “more closely with rural municipalities?” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I can understand the member not 

wanting to work with municipalities, or plan better. I mean I 

think if he were government he would be increasing taxes and 

giving more services of some kind, and of course, reducing the 

debt at the same time. I’m not sure, it sounds like maybe 

Houdini. But anyway, I don’t think he’ll be over here to do that. 

 

I want to make it perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker, that there is no 

reduction to rural road construction in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We have 53,000 kilometres of rural roads, 

designated rural roads, in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. The province cost-shares between 50 and 80 per cent 

of those roads. Certainly the funding remains the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as one 

reeve so aptly put it on a CBC report last evening, the Minister 

of Municipal Government, and I quote, “hasn’t got the sense 

that God gave a goose.” And the lack of commitment by the 

minister and this government to rural Saskatchewan is clear 

evidence of this fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government refuses to hold up its end of the 

deal, local governments will have no other option but to  

increase taxes to allow for the upgrading of grid roads. Will the 

minister explain why is it that the people of rural Saskatchewan 

are forced to endure reduced services time and time and time 

again while continually paying more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I think the member may want to look in 

the mirror to find the goose. But I want to say to the member 

opposite that there is no reduction in designated rural road 

funding this year. The cost-sharing from the province is 

between 50 and 80 per cent, depending on the designation of 

the road. 

 

There are 53,000 kilometres of rural roads in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and certainly some of the RMs (rural 

municipality) have a concern with futures because they’ve spent 

into the future and now have to play some catch-up in order to 

get additional funding. But if you ask the member from 

Saltcoats, who’s got a lot of experience on rural municipal 

government, he should be able to straighten you out on this 

issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

McDowell Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, one 

of the authors of the McDowell Committee report has now 

expressed his concern that the July 1 implementation has led to 

an unintended, one-time pay hike for MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly). Art Wakabayashi says that it was the 

intention of the committee that the recommendations be 

implemented earlier, before the legislative session began. 

 

Mr. Premier, it is now clear that it was never the intention of the 

McDowell Committee to give a $4,400 windfall to MLAs. 

Would you follow the example that members of our caucus 

have set. Will you and your NDP MLAs do the right thing and 

give up the $4,400 increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve gone 

over this several times in this House. And given that the 

member opposite was present at the meeting where we 

discussed it and voted in support of both the report and the 

implementation date, it’s passing odd that he chooses to 

grandstand on this issue at this point. But I guess he wants to 

distract us from other matters that lay within his own backyard. 

 

At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I would say that clearly all members 

of this legislature, over their term of being elected, will take a 

substantial decrease in pay. Even considering the amount that 

he refers to, it’s a net decrease of approximately $4,000 over 

the term of our election for every single member of this House. 

And I don’t know why the member continues to portray it as 

otherwise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, this is 

now day 36 of the legislative session. If you check with the 

Clerk’s office, you will find that the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) MLAs didn’t claim one cent in per diems for the 

first 28 days of this session. That means that we’ve already 

given up the pay hike. We didn’t need to have a Board of 

Internal Economy meeting to do it. We didn’t need any further 

clarification, like the Liberals are using as an excuse. We went 

right ahead and gave this money up because it’s the right thing 

to do. 

 

Mr. Premier, I challenge you to show some leadership and do 

the right thing. Mr. Premier, one of the very people who sat on 

the McDowell Committee has said that there was never 

intended that the MLAs receive a pay hike. Will you give it up, 

or do you intend to keep this $4,400 bonus while you continue 

to impose sacrifices on other Saskatchewan residents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what 

to do with this member’s continual attempts at creative 

bookkeeping. As you know and as other people know, and 

people who I have explained this to understand when I explain 

it, our pay is not the same month by month by month. So what 

he’s done is he’s taken the two highest end months and lumped 

them in with the beginning of the McDowell, and he’s 

misrepresented it as an increase. 

 

It is clearly a decrease. All the figures we’ve received on the 

matter show that it’s clearly a decrease. And not only is it a 

decrease now, but it follows a 5 per cent decrease in cabinet 

pay; no increments of any kind to any elected members since 

1991; a 2 per cent permanent decrease in pay. And I guess if 

any other people who are working anywhere would like to line 

up for these same benefits, a permanent 2 per cent decrease in 

pay is what we’ve got, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grid Road Maintenance 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister for Municipal Government about sacrifices 

being made by rural municipalities. Madam Minister, people in 

my riding and indeed across this entire province are extremely 

concerned about the rapid deterioration of our grid road system. 

 

The province is supposed to be cost-sharing the maintenance 

and upgrading of this road system. But your efforts to download 

everything onto the municipalities, in doing that you have 

abandoned your responsibilities. You have lowered the cap on 

the RM construction for this year. And that leaves many RMs 

without enough money to compensate them for previous road 

construction, and no money at all for this year’s construction. 

 

The Minister of Highways talks about futures. Those futures are 

monies that have already been paid out by the RM and are 

supposed to be compensated by the provincial government. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you abandoning this important 

responsibility? Isn’t it simply another case of an attack on rural 

Saskatchewan by your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I wish the member opposite would 

talk with his rural municipalities and with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and talk 

about futures. Certainly there are some rural municipalities that 

have gone into futures to upgrade their roads; some have not. 

So some can construct roads this year, some cannot. But the 

funding from the province has not decreased. We still fund 

between 50 and 80 per cent of the designated road system, and 

there are 53,000 kilometres of that system. 

 

The system is certainly under attack by the change, the federal 

government deregulation to transportation. Mr. Goodale allows 

railways to abandon branch lines. The grain elevator companies 

are rationalizing their system. Certainly there is a lot of concern 

on our rural roads. 

 

But by working together, rural municipalities and the 

Department of Highways, hopefully we can address, as best we 

can with the limited funds that we have, those concerns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

reiterate that the futures have dropped from $60,000 a year to 

$24,000 a year for this RM. And that’s money that the RMs 

have already spent that you’re supposed to be repaying them. 

 

My RM administrator in my riding has said that under this new 

cap they will only be able to afford to replace roads every 30 to 

40 years, instead of the 15 to 20 years that is needed. And many 

of the roads in my constituency, and indeed a number of the 

constituencies across the province, need to be replaced right 

now. 

 

Where are the RMs supposed to get the money with a 25 per 

cent revenue-sharing cut looming next year. In fact the reeve of 

the RM of Storthoaks says that it would add another 10 to 20 

mills to address this shortfall by the RMs. And that would 

simply drive more young farmers out of the RMs. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are abandoning your responsibilities and 

destroying the rural road system, the infrastructure leading to 

our highway system. And again I ask you, isn’t this simply 

another step in your master plan to depopulate rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite. I 

explained to him a few minutes ago that there’s been some 

federal decisions in transportation. There’s some rationalization 

by the elevator companies. Certainly the economy of the 

province is growing rapidly in oil and mining and in forestry, 

causing pressure on our roads. It’s very important for rural 

municipalities and the government to work together to address 

these concerns. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite, if we had the $850 

million in interest that we pay each year by those members in  



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

the third party, Mr. Speaker, we would be able to do a lot better 

on our roads. But we have to live with the existing situation, 

and we are prepared to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Removal of Maintenance Access Easements 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, your 

government is proposing changes that would allow the courts to 

terminate conservation easements where the continuation of the 

easement would produce a severe hardship for the applicant. 

Eugene Zagrodney of the Kelvington Conservation and 

Development Authority says the authorities will need a system 

to protect and maintain their investments and the neighbouring 

landowners from future flooding if the drainage systems are 

allowed to plug up because of the removal of an easement. 

Easements are needed to allow access for maintenance. 

 

Will the minister explain how the government will address 

situations in which an easement is removed and C&D 

(conservation and development) authorities must still maintain 

their constructed works? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

want to say to the member opposite that we, on an ongoing 

basis, attempt to work with municipal governments and other 

bodies who have been put in place throughout this province. 

And I can give the member the commitment that this 

government will continue to do that with this issue, as we do 

with others, on an ongoing basis. 

 

If the member has a specific problem, I am certainly more than 

willing to have a look at it. If she would want to bring it to my 

attention after question period, we would deal with it in a very 

expedient manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Treaty Land Entitlements 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, as members of this House are 

aware, the treaty land entitlement process is creating concern 

among Saskatchewan’s conservation and development 

authorities. The concern revolves around the fact that, under 

this process, native bands can buy land that they were promised 

under treaties. And once the land is purchased, the respective 

bands can apply for reserve status. 

 

That means conservation and development authorities will not 

be able to tax such lands for the construction or maintenance of 

drainage systems. Nor will they be able to access such lands to 

ensure drainage systems are properly maintained. 

 

Will the minister in charge of Sask Water explain how the 

government plans on dealing with those concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I can assure the 

member opposite that, as changes with respect to land 

ownership and first nations people acquire land, that these sorts 

of issues will be dealt with through negotiations, as we do with 

other issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member that this government 

has been cooperating with first nations government structures. 

We’ve been cooperating with the conservation authorities. We 

work very closely with them. And on this issue we will continue 

to as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, another concern being registered 

about the current treaty land entitlement process is the fact that 

lands purchased by Indian bands and granted reserve status 

cannot be taxed by municipal governments. Mr. Speaker, the 

framework agreement signed in 1992 regarding TLE (treaty 

land entitlement) lands provides municipalities with a one-time 

compensation payment. Will the minister assure conservation 

and development authorities that they will also receive some 

form of compensation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

matter on which we’ve met several times with SARM and 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), not 

specifically related to the conservation authorities but related to 

the issue of tax laws compensation. And we are united and the 

Indian bands are united on this matter. 

 

We’ve had a little more difficulty with the federal government 

in having them meet their obligations on tax laws 

compensation. So I appreciate your comments today because 

I’ve met recently with Mr. Goodale on this matter, and all the 

support we can get is appreciated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, child 

prostitution continues to be a severe problem in Saskatchewan. 

Saskatoon City Council has now released its Task Force Report 

on Child Prostitution. Saskatoon Mayor Henry Dayday writes 

in the report: 

 

Each of the three players in child prostitution  the 

prostitute, the pimps, and the customers  need to be dealt 

with by our community in different ways. 

 

Child prostitutes are often the victims of poverty as well as 

sexual abuse at the hands of those who hire them for sex. 

 

Mr. Speaker, considering the gravity of this situation, will this 

government assure the people of this province that new and 

effective programs to assess the needs and consequently meet 

the needs of Saskatchewan’s troubled street youth be put in 

place immediately. 



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

member for that question. Our government has been working 

very closely with the group, the task force, in Saskatoon. As 

stated last week, we’ve been involved in Regina in assessing 

and dealing with a number of the issues relating to street 

youths. 

 

This is an ongoing concern of this government. We are working 

in a number of areas and it is a high priority. We have the 

children’s action plan, which has attempted to have people 

work together from different departments from within the 

community, and there are many other initiatives which we are 

working with. 

 

If there are suggestions that the hon. member has that are in 

addition to these, then we would be happy to receive them. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the law 

stands, if a child under the age of 12 is picked up on the streets, 

he or she cannot be charged or detained and is usually returned 

home to the parents. While in an ideal situation the family 

would be the ones most able to help the troubled youths, this is 

rarely the case for street kids. To add to the problems, johns 

who pick up child prostitutes are rarely charged. 

 

Will this government, this Premier, this Minister of Justice, 

promptly address these grave social concerns and not only help 

these poor children, but impose laws that charge johns not only 

with soliciting a prostitute but also with sexual assault? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question as well. The whole issue is related to federal law and 

Mr. Allan Rock and the Department of Justice. The issues that 

she is addressing relate to changes to the Criminal Code, and 

there are many suggestions in this area that have been discussed 

at various levels. 

 

But practically, here in Saskatchewan, we are working on the 

many coordinated efforts that we have, and we will continue to 

do that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

government cannot deny its influence on the courts. When there 

was a rash of stolen cars in Regina in 1994, the Justice minister 

at the time and the police department put pressure on provincial 

judges to get tough with young offenders. That was an issue 

over stolen property. Child prostitution is an issue of stolen 

youth. 

 

Will the Justice minister encourage our judges to take a hard 

line with pimps and customers of child prostitutes? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

further comment. On this issue, I would also encourage her to 

table a letter that she has written to Mr. Allan Rock about this 

issue, which is a federal concern as it relates to the Criminal 

Code. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, we are working very carefully to look at 

the total problem. It’s a complex issue. It involved Social 

Services. It involves Justice. It involves Health. It involves the 

whole community. 

 

We are in a position where in Regina and in Saskatoon, we 

have community groups who are making many suggestions 

about what to do. Now included in the Saskatoon report are 

some suggestions that will come to the Department of Justice, 

and we have been working together with these groups, and we 

will take these recommendations and use them as appropriate. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 78  An Act to enable Northern Municipalities 

to Name Airports within their boundaries 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a Bill to 

enable Northern Municipalities to Name Airports within their 

boundaries be introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 

03, An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities Act be read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 5  Post-Secondary Education 

and Training Funding 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today in support of the Saskatchewan government’s priorities 

for post-secondary education and training. Mr. Speaker, at the 

end of my remarks I will move the following motion: 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan 

government’s funding priority in the March 28 budget for 

post-secondary education and training; and that this 

Assembly condemns the federal Liberal government’s 

attack on students through the Canada Health and Social 

Transfer, CHST, and UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a parent, an educator, and a legislator, I am 

proud of our provincial government’s priority to fund 

post-secondary education and skills training institutions at the 

same level as in 1995-96  $228.8 million. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am appalled that the federal Liberal 

government would slash funding to post-secondary education. 

Yes, slash funding not only through reductions in CHST 

payments, which totalled $15.1 million in ’96-97, but also in 

unemployment insurance changes which impact on 

Saskatchewan over $31 million. That includes withdrawal of a 

number of training allowances. 

 

The direct impact on SIAST is 11.4 million. The direct impact 

on community colleges is $6 million. 

 

The federal government has also given notice that they are 

withdrawing funding from apprenticeship programs over the 

next three years  another impact of over $4 million. The 

federal Liberals, who campaigned on jobs and training, are 

slashing funding to post-secondary education and training at 

unprecedented levels. These cuts are attacking the future of our 

students and our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I first want to present more background to the 

federal Liberals’ funding cuts and their impact on 

post-secondary education and training, and then, secondly, 

explain Saskatchewan’s way of responding and setting priorities 

in funding. 

 

Canada’s social programs help to distinguish us from other 

nations, and they help to identify what it is to be Canadian. 

Federal payments or transfers to provinces have been 

instrumental in establishing the social programs currently in 

place. I think it is important for everyone to understand how 

this funding has changed and the implications it has on 

education and social programs. 

 

Federal transfer programs  in 1995-96, there were three major 

federal transfer programs in place: equalization, which was 

formally introduced in 1957; Canada Assistance Plan, CAP, 

which commenced in 1966; and established program funding, 

EPF (established programs financing), which commenced in 

1977. 

 

Taken together, these three programs help to ensure that truly 

national health, education, social assistance, and other programs 

are available to all Canadians. They ensure quality 

post-secondary education. They have been fundamental in 

enabling provinces to fulfil their constitutional responsibilities 

to deliver programs and in protecting and enhancing the social 

fabric that defines Canada. However federal funding 

restrictions on these programs during the 1980s and 1990s, and 

now the 

introduction of CHST, are drawing into question the ability of 

provinces to maintain quality, national programs. 

 

In one form or another, equalization has been part of the 

Canadian fiscal system since Confederation. The program was 

formally introduced in 1957, and the principle of equalization 

was enshrined in the constitutional Act of 1982 as a federal 

responsibility. The program was intended to ensure that 

provincial governments have sufficient revenue to provide 

reasonably comparable services without having to resort to 

excessive levels of taxation. 

 

Through a complex formula, the revenue-raising ability or the 

fiscal capacity of each province is measured and then compared 

to other provinces. If a province is determined to have below 

average fiscal capacity, it is considered a have-not province and 

receives equalization payments from the federal government. 

The level of federal payment to a have-not or recipient province 

is determined by measuring that province’s fiscal capacity 

against a five-province standard. Prior to 1982, provinces were 

compared to a more representative standard involving all 10 

provinces. 

 

Currently seven provinces receive equalization payments. When 

a province’s economy grows relative to the five-province 

standard, the equalization program responds by reducing that 

province’s payments or entitlements. Due to this feature, 

Saskatchewan’s equalization entitlements have declined 

recently. 

 

Of the seven recipient provinces, Saskatchewan receives the 

least amount of equalization payments on a per capita basis. 

This is an improvement from 1990-91, when Saskatchewan 

received $536 per capita, to today, 1995-96, receiving $381 per 

person. This improvement is due to the strength and 

diversification of the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

And so we do not complain that we are getting less funding 

through equalization because this is a sign that our economy is 

improving. Overall, it’s a good endorsement of our province’s 

economic strategy, and as we gain economic strength, we 

receive less money through equalization, so there is a balancing. 

 

We do not gain on the revenue side, but we are not critical of 

the federal government for less money through equalization, 

although we feel that it should go back to a ten-province 

standard rather a six-province standard. But what we do have a 

problem with is the replacement of CAP and EPF by CHST. 

 

CAP, the Canadian Assistance Plan, which was a program to 

redistribute income to those who are in need, and EPF, 

established program funding, a program for cost-sharing 

hospital insurance, medicare, and post-secondary education, 

were replaced with Canada Health and Social Transfer  

CHST. 

 

The 1995 federal Liberal government budget replaced CAP and 

EPF with CHST, a way to slash social programs and 

educational opportunities to our students. 



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberal government introduced 

dramatic reductions in the level of federal support for Canada’s 

social programs. This new program which delivers the federal 

government’s financial commitment to health, post-secondary 

education, and social assistance, also signifies a fundamental 

change in the manner in which the federal government will 

pursue its national equity and income redistribution objectives. 

 

Unlike CAP, the CHST will no longer provide an increase in 

federal funding for social assistance during periods of economic 

downturn when assistance is needed most. 

 

The 1996 federal budget contained further changes to the 

CHST. It introduced a five-year funding commitment, an $11 

billion cash floor that will be legislated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1995-96, Saskatchewan will incur a reduction 

in cash transfers of $114 million; in 1996-97, a continued 

reduction of 206 million, in ‘97-98 and a reduction of about 

$250 million annually over the term. 

 

When I think of a chest, I think of a chest of treasures and hope 

for the future. But the CHST created by the federal Liberals 

robs our youth and our country. It is an attack on our social, on 

our educational, programs, and on our Canadian identity. 

 

And when does this withdrawal of funding to CHST stop. 

Based on the federal government’s own projections, the cash 

transfer decline will continue to the year 2002-2003. By 

2002-2003, cash transfers will be $8 billion lower than they 

were in ‘95-96  a 48.2 per cent decline. Cash transfers to the 

province of Saskatchewan will decline from $624 million in 

‘95-96 to 377 million by 2002-3. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me just review the federal way of putting 

their finances in order and what their priorities are. Their 

priorities in cutting expenditures is to cut education and 

training, health, and social programs. Over 75 per cent of their 

redirection in spending is targeted to these programs — 

programs which account for only about 15 per cent of federal 

spending. And by 1997-98 it will . . . 79.4 per cent of the 

redirection in federal program spending will be from CHST. 

 

In addressing its deficit problem the federal government has not 

only a deficit of money but a deficit of thought and ideas. The 

federal Liberals should reduce the cost of their own government 

operations; eliminate areas of federal spending having limited 

public value. One suggestion I would have would be the Senate. 

I think it would qualify. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Ms. Bradley:  The federal Liberal government should work 

with provinces to weed out areas of overlap and duplication. 

But we do not, as a provincial government, seek revenge on our 

students, on our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to spend some time on how our 

government responded to this attack on post-secondary 

education. First, we responded by back-filling the federal 

Liberal cuts to post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, this is 

not an easy task when not only are the federal Liberals reducing 

money to post-secondary education but are cutting money to 

health, social programs, agriculture programs, unemployment 

changes, treaty Indians, policing, housing, not even to mention 

the abolishment of the Crow rate — hundreds of millions of 

dollars of less money coming to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But our government in this year’s budget, made a commitment 

to post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, I first want to 

concentrate on the universities. This year’s provincial budget 

did not reduce operating grants to the universities. But we had 

to tell the two universities that the amount of money that this 

government is able to commit to university funding would have 

to be reduced by $5 million in the next year, and by a further 5 

million in ‘98-99. Mr. Speaker, we have given the universities 

time and support to meet these funding redirections. 

 

The universities can work with it, Mr. Speaker, and they are 

busily engaged now on two fronts in order to realize the cost 

savings and the efficiencies they’re going to have to realize. 

They’re not approaching it, Mr. Speaker, as a cost-cutting, 

expense reduction exercise; they’re taking the approach that 

they will positively review their programs and positively 

restructure their institutions with a view to positioning 

themselves to be financially viable in the long term. 

 

So it’s not just purely a negative, cost-cutting exercise so far as 

the universities are concerned, but an opportunity to review 

their programing and to make the kind of changes that can be 

made and ought to be made at the university so that they will be 

relevant, viable, vibrant, renewed institutions serving the 

province of Saskatchewan and available for the students in this 

province to get a university education. The University of 

Saskatchewan Students Union expressed it well  The path is 

clear; we must reinvent our university; the time has come for 

real change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now would like to turn to the situation at SIAST. 

You may have also noticed that in the budget, that the SIAST 

funding is level for the ‘96-97 fiscal year. That is, level 

compared to the year just ended. And we have committed to 

SIAST that the funding will remain level for the two following 

years. So they look forward to three years of level funding so 

far as the province is concerned. 

 

And the reason we did that is because they’re already being hit 

quite hard by the changes to the Unemployment Insurance Act 

that were announced by Lloyd Axworthy last November. Now 

those changes impact on Saskatchewan to the tune of about $31 

million. That includes the withdrawal of a number of training 

allowances and those types of supports for individual people. 

 

But it also impacts directly on SIAST to the extent of about 

$11.4 million  $11.4 million is a lot of pain for SIAST to 

have to cope with, a lot of adjustments that will be necessary. 

There will . . . put quite enough pressure on them as an 

institution to adjust to that particular drop in financing. And so 

we maintained their funding on a level basis over the three-year 

period so that they can be secure in that funding and can turn  



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

their attention to how they’re going to cope with the changes to 

the Unemployment Insurance Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a word about regional colleges. The regional 

colleges, a matter of great interest to all of us I think, they are a 

remarkably flexible and effective instrument in this province 

and have been for a long time. They’re able to put more training 

on the ground faster than any institution, I think in the country. 

And it is their wonderful flexibility and responsiveness that 

makes them stand out above any other institution that I can 

think of. 

 

And that, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is worth preserving, and it’s 

worth building on. Their funding is going to be level for this 

year and the next two years after that. At the same time they 

have problems because of the changes to the federal training 

approach. The UIC changes will impact on community colleges 

to the tune of something like a total of $6 million. And that will 

chiefly be the federal dollars not being there to buy training 

seats or to buy training from the regional colleges. We are not 

able to back-fill behind that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention again about apprenticeship. 

Apprenticeship money is also being withdrawn over the next 

three years by the federal government. Our apprenticeship 

program in this province has been jointly funded  60 per cent 

federal, 40 per cent provincial. This withdrawal of money is a 

$4 million impact. This year the funding has remained stable, 

but we must find ways to keep a viable, workable 

apprenticeship program in our province. 

 

Work-based training is essential, and it has proven to be 

successful. We will be consulting with the affected community 

in order to work out an apprenticeship training program for the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Future Skills and JobStart programs are also 

closely linked to economic growth. They were designed to 

foster partnership with industry and small business to ensure 

skilled labour force for this provincial economy. The JobStart 

program focused on training programs for youth. And to date 

more than 2,200 jobs, training and employment positions, have 

been approved under Future Skills and JobStart. 

 

These programs have been very successful in helping those with 

the most difficulties to get training and employment. The 

programs were well received by employers, particularly smaller 

employers. The program fostered partnerships between SIAST, 

regional colleges, and employers. This resulted in new 

approaches to program delivery, and new programs were 

designed to meet the training needs of the employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is seeking and finding solutions. 

Our solution is not just to slash funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just recently read a paper that was part of a 

lecture series. The subject was “Social Dimensions of 

Economic Growth”, presented by Judith Maxwell, president of 

the Canadian Policy Research Networks, Ottawa. The lecture 

was presented at the University of Alberta at Edmonton, 

department of economics. 

I found it very interesting as it discussed the interdependence of 

economic and social policy. In summary, Judith Maxwell gives 

convincing evidence that economic growth in the long term 

depends on the investment we make in human and social 

capital, as she says it, in the resilience of Canadian citizens. She 

says that Canada has two choices, two concepts for the future: 

either polarization or resilience. 

 

The polarization scenario does not need much further 

description. It already exists to a significant degree in United 

States where the middle class seems to be congregating in gated 

communities, while the marginalized are concentrated in 

burned-out inner cities. In this scenario, the social safety net is 

gutted, and no new techniques are found to build bridges from 

bad jobs to good jobs. New pools of poverty build up around 

young families. This in turn will foster crime and other social 

pathologies which lead to greater government spending on 

fighting crime, protecting property, and combating racism. 

 

This is not a route that any Canadian would choose deliberately. 

But I believe our federal government has chosen this route. 

 

Then Judith Maxwell goes on to explain the second choice, one 

of resilience. The cornerstones of a resilient society  a 

resilient society is a learning society. Education and training are 

regarded as an investment to be financed by students, families, 

taxpayers, employers, and employees. Learning takes place 

from cradle to grave: in the home, in the school, in the 

community, and in the workplace. A resilient society values the 

caring role of the family. That role is reinforced by thoughtful 

and supportive public policy. A resilient society evaluates its 

progress by tracking outcomes, not how much it spends. A 

resilient society protects and nurtures its social capital. 

 

She then goes on to say that the straight-line cutting of the old 

safety net programs will push Canada further down the road of 

polarization, that it will take an act of political will to divert 

some of the money from program cuts into new public 

priorities, the cornerstones of a resilient society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the province of Saskatchewan has 

protected public priorities, the cornerstones of a resilient 

society, whereas the slash-and-cut policies of the federal 

Liberals will lead us to a society of polarization, a society in 

which the gaps will be larger between the have’s and the 

have-not’s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 

the highest quality post-secondary institutions that we can 

afford to have. Post-secondary education is a priority of our 

government. We understand the importance of the quality of 

education to our students, our communities, our province, and 

our country. Education is the foundation of our future. We must 

do the very best for our children, their children, and all of the 

citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have listened to the citizens of our province. 

But I am appalled that the federal government would prefer to 

listen to their big-business interests than the people of Canada, 

the students of Canada. In Saskatchewan we understand that  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

social and economic policies work hand in hand, that education 

is a cornerstone to build a more resilient, productive, and caring 

society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I only wish that the federal Liberal government 

would direct their energy to the priorities of Canadian people, 

our youth, our students, in building a better future for all 

Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now wish to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan 

government’s funding priority in the March 28 budget for 

post-secondary education and training; and that this 

Assembly condemns the federal Liberal government’s 

attack on students through their Canada Health and Social 

Transfer and UIC cuts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  And it will be seconded by Regina Lumsden. 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I’m 

pleased to say a few words in support of the motion presented 

by my colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. In 

fact I’ll be proud to do that. 

 

We all know that the federal government is facing a huge deficit 

and a staggering debt. We also realize that they must come to 

terms with that debt and that deficit, that they have to work to 

reduce those debts and eventually eliminate them in order to be 

seen as a credible and accountable government. 

 

Now we in Saskatchewan understand that problem. When New 

Democrats formed government in 1991, we too faced an 

enormous deficit  almost a billion dollars  and a huge debt. 

But here is where the federal Liberals and the provincial New 

Democrats differ. Here is where we chose very, very different 

paths. 

 

With the help and support of Saskatchewan people and the 

sacrifice of Saskatchewan people, we laid out a four-year plan 

to eliminate the deficit and to begin to reduce the enormous 

debt. And we laid out a plan to balance the budget, but we did it 

in a way that reflected the values of Saskatchewan people  

our values of caring and compassion. It wasn’t easy, but we did 

it. We delivered a balanced budget while maintaining our 

commitment to health, education, and social programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  As I said, it was not easy, but Saskatchewan 

did it. 

 

And then along comes Mr. Martin with this year’s federal 

budget, the end of established program funding, and instead we 

have Canadian Health and Social Transfer. This meant cuts in 

federal transfer payments, cuts every year for the next four years 

until, by the year 1999-2000, the cuts will be over  

one-quarter of a billion dollars a year  a quarter of a billion 

dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker  a quarter of a billion dollars less 

for health, for education, and for social programs. 

 

As a result of those cuts, the people of Saskatchewan were 

apprehensive about our provincial budget. How would we 

adapt? They understood the seriousness of these cuts and the 

potentially devastating effect on our province. But, Mr. 

Speaker, this government shares with the people of this fine 

province a commitment to education, health, and social 

programs. And in our provincial budget, delivered March 28, 

despite these Draconian federal cuts in our provincial budget, 

we provided $110 million of new provincial funding to replace 

the ’96-97 federal cuts. The budget back-filled 100 per cent of 

the federal cuts to operating funding of our post-secondary 

institutions. 

 

And Saskatchewan’s four-year financial plan will provide, by 

the year 1999-2000, a total of $242 million of new provincial 

funding. That represents 96 per cent of the announced federal 

transfer payment cuts. We will put back 96 cents for every 

dollar cut by the federal government. And we are all very proud 

of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This has required some tough choices and this has required 

some tough decisions, but we have chosen to protect our 

education system. We have chosen to protect vulnerable people 

like our students. The federal government has withdrawn from 

training programs, partly through changes in unemployment 

insurance announced last November. And as the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy said, this means a decrease in revenue for 

SIAST of about 14 per cent, or $11.4 million. And this means a 

decrease of 25 per cent for the regional colleges, or about $6 

million. 

 

But our budget maintains provincial funding to all our training 

programs this year, in addition to maintaining operating grants 

to institutions. We are committed to shielding our education 

partners from the full impact of these federal cuts. We want to 

give our education partners time to prepare for the challenges of 

the new century. 

 

To ensure that the reinvigorated post-secondary system of the 

21st century will be responsive to student needs, we are 

developing a made-in-Saskatchewan training strategy. And we 

will be doing this in consultation with students, faculty, 

industry, and other partners. We are helping facilitate the 

revitalization of our universities through the appointment of 

Harold MacKay, a special ministerial representative. 

 

The budget affirms financial support for needy post-secondary 

students through the Saskatchewan student loans program 

which has been streamlined and improved. And the budget also 

provides funding for summer employment programs. 

 

The provincial training strategy and renewal of our 

post-secondary institutions will help ensure that an effective, 

sustainable system is in place to support economic and social 

development and jobs for Saskatchewan people. They underline 

our commitment to a full employability strategy. 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people asked us in our 

consultations throughout the province to maintain our health, 

education, and social programs. They asked us to shield them 

from the federal cuts. And we have done that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we applaud the federal government’s 

resolve to reduce the deficit, we do not applaud their approach. 

We do not support their way of doing it. Their way is to make 

75 per cent of their cuts to health, education, and social 

programs. We believe this is the wrong way. We believe these 

are the wrong choices for Canada. We believe these are the 

wrong choices for Saskatchewan. 

 

The post-secondary system must first meet the needs of 

students, not compromise their ability to further their education 

by cutting funding, as the federal Liberals have done. The 

wrong choices, for the wrong reasons, at precisely the wrong 

time for Canadians. 

 

We believe in working with Saskatchewan people and our 

post-secondary partners to build a better, sustainable system. 

And we are doing just that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we are 

doing it the Saskatchewan way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  So, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to speak in 

support of this motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I feel it an 

absolute necessity that I address the member’s motion today, 

particularly because it is nothing but a desperate attempt to 

deflect responsibility. I imagine the member’s speech was 

supposed to make us feel sorry for her poor government  the 

big, bad feds are out to attack post-secondary students, and the 

provincial government is helpless to do anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have two children, and I see this same tactic used 

at home all the time. Whenever something bad happens, they 

can’t blame each other fast enough. No one wants to take 

responsibility. So they start pointing the finger at the most 

convenient target. Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that this “not 

me” defence isn’t just used by my children; it is used by the 

government as well. 

 

Since long before this session opened, the members opposite 

have been blaming the federal government for every piece of 

bad news they possibly can. Even when, or should I say 

especially when, they should be the ones taking responsibility. 

Instead they start chanting, day in and day out, blame the feds. 

Today we see they’ve even decided to make a private member’s 

motion out of the tired old song. 

 

It’s bad enough that we have to hear the same tedious refrain 

day after day. What’s even worse though is that they change the 

tune whenever it is most convenient. We’ve received more than 

one of this government’s press releases announcing a program 

that is good for Saskatchewan people, funded by the federal 

government. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring to the attention of the House that 

in my own constituency, the renovation of the Norquay Health 

Centre is taking place, a health centre that used to be a hospital 

and was one of the 52 closed. And I note that the cost of this 

renovation is in excess of $600,000, and I note also that the 

federal government is contributing $150,000 to this project  

great cooperation between the village of Norquay, the 

provincial government, and the federal government. 

 

They’re certainly willing to share the spotlight with the federal 

program in this case. But when it comes to cuts to 

Saskatchewan programs made by the NDP government, the 

members opposite quickly step off the stage and resume their 

“not me” chants. That’s a cowardly way to govern, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan deserve so much 

more. 

 

Seniors who are losing access to health care in their 

communities because this government has hacked away at 

hospitals deserve more. Rural residents who are forced to watch 

as the government closes Crop Insurance offices, rural service 

centres and Highway offices deserve so much more. School 

children, teachers, and parents, who will see school programs 

and resources disappear deserve so much more. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the very students the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy just talked about deserve so much more. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at the wording of the 

member’s motion. The first part says we should: 

 

. . . commend the Saskatchewan government’s funding 

priority in the March 28 budget for post-secondary 

education and training . . . 

 

Do they really want us to give them a commendation when only 

37 per cent of the people in this province say they approve of 

the way Saskatchewan’s provincial government is managing 

post-secondary education? Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a 

statement from the government’s own public opinion poll 

released a couple of weeks ago. Only 37 per cent approve of 

this government’s handling of post-secondary education. That’s 

not something our caucus or anyone in this House should be 

proud of. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gets worse. The same public 

opinion poll states that parents of children currently enrolled in 

elementary or secondary school are somewhat less likely than 

other residents to approve of the provincial government’s 

management of post-secondary education. That doesn’t bode 

well for our future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The very people who 

will see their children relying on post-secondary education are 

the most pessimistic. That’s something this government should 

listen to. 

 

I don’t know if the members opposite read the poll, so let me 

emphasize that these people disapprove of the provincial 

government’s management. Now what are the members going 

to do? They’ll probably try to chant their “not me” song. But 

I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just doesn’t wash. 

 

This government, the provincial government, is the one who  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

put together the budget for both K to 12 and post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan. Still, they want us to commend 

them. 

 

Wait. Maybe they want us to commend their priority of creating 

more government bureaucracy. Maybe they want us to applaud 

because they split Education into two departments and gave 

Post-Secondary its own complete minister, complete with staff 

and expenses, all from the taxpayers’ pockets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we would be hard-pressed to support this 

when we see our own constituents losing their jobs, their access 

to health care, and the lifeblood of their communities. No, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we can’t commend this government’s 

priorities when we see government waste everywhere, and 

post-secondary education is no exception. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we must deal with the second half of the 

member’s motion which states that we should condemn “the 

federal Liberal government’s attack on students through their 

Canada Health and Social Transfer and the UIC cuts.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased to have a chance to address 

the numbers that the NDP government has been carelessly 

tossing out to explain every bad decision they make. The 

government’s “not me” refrain includes numbers, and the 

members opposite make every effort to manipulate 

Saskatchewan people with those numbers. 

 

(1500) 

 

Before session even began, the Social Services minister, the 

Health minister, the Education minister, and possibly even all 

the other ministers, were all claiming that their own 

departments would be taking a $106 million cut. If you believe 

the advertisements in the newspapers and the ministers’ own 

comments, it sounded like the provincial government was 

indeed hard done by and that they were each taking $100 

million losses this year alone. 

 

Well, that’s just not true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’m not denying that the federal government cut federal 

transfers to Saskatchewan, but let’s get the figures straight. In 

‘96-97, transfers will decline by $61 million. In 1997-98, 

transfers will be $60 million less. But in 1998-99, transfers will 

go up by $15 million. 

 

That means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that between this year and 

1999  that’s three years  Saskatchewan will see a total 

difference of only $106 million. That’s one total. That’s one 

total, Mr. Deputy Speaker, passed from the federal government 

to this provincial government. 

 

This means that all of the ministers claiming to single-handedly 

take the losses are deceiving the public. Why? It was a 

convenient excuse to pass the buck, I guess. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the buck has to stop somewhere, and in this case it 

should stop with the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most ridiculous argument that comes  

out of the NDP government’s finger-pointing defence was from 

the Finance minister. She seemed to think that if Saskatchewan 

becomes a have province, that’s a bad thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we think it would be a wonderful 

thing. And if this government would take action to encourage 

economic growth instead of just paying it lip-service, we might 

be much further along the path to prosperity. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to deny that this 

government was faced with problems when they took office in 

1991. I’m fully aware that the Tory administration of the ‘80s 

dragged our province down with their irresponsible spending 

policies. And I know that digging out from under the mountains 

of old debt will not be easy. But at some point, the NDP 

government has to start taking responsibility for the decisions 

made in the past five years. 

 

They have to admit that they chose to shut down 52 rural 

hospitals and that they will choose to close down the Plains 

Health Centre. They have to own up to the people of this 

province that the NDP government decided to shut down Crop 

Insurance and Agricultural Credit Corporation offices. If rural 

municipalities are forced to amalgamate, the government must 

step forward and acknowledge that this was their choice. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if post-secondary education loses 

resources, staff, and programs, it must be the provincial 

government that takes responsibility. Yes, SIAST students were 

relieved this year. They were told to expect the worst but then 

the government gave them a break. It was a vicious game that 

this government chose to play. They spread a thick fog of 

threatened cuts over the education system and then played hero 

when the budget lifted that fog for this year at least. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our education system is too important to 

fall victim to intimidating government games, and although this 

year post-secondary was spared, I have little confidence that it 

will continue to be spared in the future. Unfortunately it will be 

our young people, the very young people who want to learn and 

to take our province into the next century, that will suffer. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our caucus wants to see Saskatchewan 

prosper. We want to see the economy grow. We want to see an 

abundance of jobs, a strong business climate, and healthy 

competition in all industries. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

want to see the youth of this province face a future full of 

promise, hope, and opportunity. I can’t emphasize enough how 

important education is to our future. 

 

The Premier’s words of 1990 will continue to haunt him 

because for once, we strongly support him. He said, increased 

education is a priority; all I can say is we will simply have to 

find more money. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier said that 

when he was in opposition. Now that he’s in government, he’s 

in a position to do something about it. I hope for the sake of our 

young people, that he hasn’t changed his mind. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time to stop playing the blame game. 

It’s time to stop pointing the fingers down east. The decisions 

are made in this building here by the members on that side of  



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

the floor. The member’s motion is nothing but a ridiculous way 

to give the members opposite a fed-bashing free-for-all. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, introducing a motion like this is cheap 

politics; and whether the member came up with the idea on her 

own, or whether it was a directive from the NDP powers that 

be, it is a motion that does not deserve the time or energy. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s bad enough that every day we have to listen to the 

government members chide us for supporting our federal 

cousins in Ottawa, now we have to listen to it . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: Now we have to listen to it on the afternoon 

of private members’ day. I would like to ask the members 

opposite to ask themselves, if the federal government is so 

awful, why do they have such a wide base of support across the 

country? Five of six by-elections just went to the Liberals. I 

don’t recall any of those seats going to the NDP. In fact the 

only NDP stories we read in the paper involve the words 

“bingo” and “scandal”. 

 

So maybe we defend our federal cousins because they’re worth 

defending on many, many issues. Maybe we defend them 

because we listen to our constituents, and that is what our 

constituents want. Mr. Speaker, when we were elected, we 

made a commitment to represent our constituents on every 

issue, and that is what we will continue to do. 

 

For the reasons I’ve just outlined, there is absolutely no way our 

caucus can support the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy on 

her statement. In fact I would propose that the Assembly adopt 

the following amendment to the statement which we feel more 

accurately reflects the situation of post-secondary education in 

our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member 

from Humboldt: 

 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following words substituted therefor: 

 

condemns the provincial government for failing to accept 

responsibility for post-secondary education and training in 

our province and for continuing to blame the federal 

government for a situation that is wholly under the control 

of the provincial government. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise this afternoon to take part in this debate concerning the 

federal government and its Canada Health and Social Transfers. 

We have all been sitting in this House over the past month and 

a half listening to members opposite condemn the federal 

government for cuts to health care, education, and social 

programs. These condemnations come for the most part during 

question period when the members opposite rely on blaming 

tactics, particularly targeting the federal government rather than  

taking responsibility for their own ineptitude and inability in 

priorizing the needs of the people of this province. 

 

The money is there. The money is there. It is simply obvious, 

however, that the present NDP government and the Premier, for 

reasons unbeknown to us, choose not to use this money 

extracted from the taxpayers and the federal government for the 

well-being of the people of this province. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to lend some advice to 

members of our provincial government when it comes to 

allocation of finances from the federal government. We on this 

side of the House are often told by the NDP that we contradict 

ourselves. You accuse us of saying, spend more; then you’re 

saying, spend less. But the real message we give to the NDP is 

straightforward and it is this: get your priorities straight. 

 

We will never say don’t spend at all, but we will tell the NDP to 

spend money wisely and to have a long, hard look at how your 

detrimental policies are affecting the health and well-being of 

the people of this province. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have had enough of the continual 

fed bashing. We ask you to reveal the complete truth regarding 

the finances available to you and get on with rebuilding this 

province in an effective and equitable manner. 

 

The fiscal responsibility that has been demonstrated by this 

provincial government to date is the fault of the provincial 

government itself and no one else. The federal government is 

doing its part to secure Canada’s health system and social safety 

net. 

 

This year, the federal government is transferring 1.211 billion to 

Saskatchewan in total. Why is this government complaining 

about a reduction of less than 1.5 per cent to the province’s 

total annual revenues? The 1.2 billion can be used at this 

government’s discretion. If they choose to cut health, education, 

and social programs, it shows where their priorities are. 

 

We, as the official opposition, urge this NDP administration to 

readjust your priorities to reflect the priorities of the people of 

Saskatchewan. In doing this, you would truly show that you 

care what happens to the people of this province. 

 

The priorities of the people of Saskatchewan are not a bloated 

cabinet and record levels of political patronage. The people 

want a government that is responsible, that will not offload onto 

third parties and then blame the problems on the federal 

government. 

 

I urge the members opposite to move their focus off of this one 

and a half per cent and onto the $1.2 billion that are being 

transferred from the federal government to Saskatchewan this 

year alone. The funding from the federal government continues 

to arrive at acceptable levels, and it is up to the provinces, on an 

individual basis, to make their own decisions on how to allocate 

federal funding in a fashion that will best meet the needs and 

priorities of the provinces. 



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

The federal government is acting in ways to ensure the 

restoration of confidence of Canadians in our old age security 

system and to provide secure and growing support for medicare, 

social programs, and education. 

 

Well I urge this government to change its focus. I ask them to 

focus on the windfall revenues that are coming out of our 

thriving oil and gas industries and our natural resources. Focus 

on the potential profitability of small business in rural 

Saskatchewan, and their potential impact on sustainable job 

creation in our province. Focus on your responsibility to 

allocate the resources that have been made available to you in a 

responsible way that reflects the priorities and needs of this 

province. 

 

The federal Government of Canada continues to provide for the 

people of this country in a fiscally responsible way. One of the 

federal government’s most important goals is to preserve and 

strengthen the social programs that the people of this country 

and this province have worked so hard to maintain. 

 

Due to the rising age of the Canadian population, we all must 

work together now in order to ensure the sustainability of our 

social programs. The senior citizens of this province are our 

backbone and they deserve to be treated as such. How can we 

justify threatening to take away benefit programs and packages 

from the very people that founded this great province? 

 

(1515) 

 

The Saskatchewan Seniors Association in this province has 

time and again told this government how they would like 

money allocated for senior citizens to be spent. And time and 

time again, these people have been ignored by the Government 

of Saskatchewan. Social programs should not be viewed as 

costs. They are investments in the people and communities of 

this province. 

 

What is the concern is the way in which this government makes 

changes and the way in which it blames the federal government 

when these changes end up costing the people of this province 

more in terms of the lack of job creation, the lack of adequate 

social programs for the people who need it, the lack of 

responsibility by the government of this province. 

 

For seniors of the future, the federal government is ensuring 

today that benefits will be better targeted by providing more 

assistance to low income Canadians, and reducing assistance to 

those seniors with higher incomes. A new seniors’ benefit will 

replace the existing Old Age Security and guaranteed income 

supplement beginning in 2001. This new system will be 

tax-free, paid out monthly, and will provide larger benefits for 

low income seniors. This system will be phased in in such a 

way so that today’s seniors will not be caught in the middle and 

risk losing benefits. The new seniors’ benefit will make the 

public pension system more affordable and sustainable. 

 

The federal government is not only looking after the seniors of 

this province; it is also looking after the children. By 

implementing a new child support and maintenance system, as 

well as the working income supplement, the federal government  

is working hard to eliminate child poverty in this country. As 

stated in the Poverty Profile, 1994, that was put out by the 

National Council of Welfare this spring, the percentage of 

children living in poverty from all family types across Canada 

in 1994 was 19.1 per cent. The percentage for the same children 

in Saskatchewan was 22.4 per cent for 1994. 

 

The numbers are too high, anyway you look at it. But this 

government should be working with the federal government to 

lower these numbers even further. There is no reason at all why 

Saskatchewan should have a higher child poverty rate than the 

national average. In fact in 1994, Saskatchewan’s child poverty 

rate was one of the highest in Canada, second only to 

Newfoundland. There is no excuse for a province as rich in 

natural resources as Saskatchewan is to have such a high level 

of child poverty. 

 

In the 1995-96 federal budget, the Canada Health and Social 

Transfer was created to consolidate federal transfers to the 

province in the form of tax points and cash. This new system, 

the system that the provincial government in this province 

complains bitterly about, provides the provinces more flexibility 

to better deliver social programs. Through the Canada Health 

and Social Transfer, stability and growth will be restored to 

transfers to provinces with a stable system of long-term funding 

for health care, education, and social assistance. The federal 

government will legislate a five-year CHST funding 

arrangement that is to begin in 1998-99. This system will 

reduce the current per capita disparities in funding that exist 

among provinces. 

 

Over the past few months, concerns on the part of my 

constituents regarding this government’s ineptitude in dealing 

with provincial issues have been pouring into my office. To top 

the list are concerns with health care, the future of care for 

seniors, and taxes. The people of rural Saskatchewan are being 

downtrodden by the lack of concern and poor choices that have 

been made by this provincial government over the past four 

years with regards to rural Saskatchewan. This NDP 

government by and large hails from urban centres and they have 

no concern for the people outside of these cities. 

 

This government blames the federal government for cutting 

funding  that is, for cutting less than 1.5 per cent of the 

money that is available to this province for health care, social 

programs, and education. They blame the federal government 

for finding solutions to the rising cost of social services and 

health care. They blame the federal government for looking for 

ways to ensure the Canada Pension Plan will be available for 

our children to collect. 

 

The problem with this provincial government’s continual 

complaints about federal funding is that this government simply 

cannot accept the fact that Saskatchewan is growing up. This 

province is becoming more and more fiscally independent and 

therefore needs and deserves less from the federal parents of 

this province. 

 

How can we as a province be seen as a fiscally mature province 

when every time something goes wrong we run to our federal 

father for more money and complain when we don’t get it? 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

Regardless of political affiliation, all people of Saskatchewan 

suffer the effects of the careless decisions made by this NDP 

government, be it Crop Insurance closures, Highway depots, 

schools, hospitals, and the list goes on. People all across the 

province suffer the consequences. 

 

It is due time that this NDP administration accept responsibility 

for the fiscal situation of our province. The federal government 

has not only maintained programs for the people of this 

country, it is taking steps to ensure that these programs will be 

available well into the next century. 

 

As Saskatchewan moves from a have-not to a have province, 

there will be financial changes. It is time that this government 

accept responsibility for these changes and work within their 

means to provide all essential services for the people of this 

great province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 

to enter this debate this afternoon, particularly in light of the 

amendment and the comments from the member of 

Canora-Pelly and the member from Humboldt. I’m not sure 

whether I am in fact more disappointed with their comments 

and their ignorance of the real issues or whether in fact I’m 

simply angry at their decision to ignore them. 

 

I want to start by refuting the argument put forward by these 

members opposite about the level of the cuts that Ottawa is 

delivering to this province’s social programs. This is one of the 

most deceptive arguments that I have seen. 

 

And it comes straight from the mouth, not of course of the 

members opposite because they wouldn’t want to defend the 

federal government, but I’m reading here a letter from our good 

friend, Ralph Goodale, Member of Parliament from the same 

riding that covers much of the same area that my riding does. 

 

Now he puts forward the same four arguments that we’ve heard 

opposite. He says in his letter in the Leader-Post on April 16, 

he says: 

 

. . . the three federal budgets from 1994 through 1996 were 

heralded nationally and internationally as (being) fiscally 

responsible . . . 

 

Well I guess we could accept Mr. Goodale’s word because 

when the last federal budget came down he didn’t even bother 

to be in the country. He happened to be in Tokyo that day. So 

Mr. Goodale would know a lot about how these things are 

being received internationally. 

 

He says: 

 

Second, Saskatchewan readily acknowledges it is vital to 

all Canadians for the federal government to battle the twin 

monsters of debt and deficit . . . 

 

Now we hear the members opposite say, oh, you know, they’ve 

got a bad problem in Ottawa. They’ve got these cuts they’ve  

got to make because of the debt and the deficit. I’m sure if there 

was an NDP government at some point, they’d blame it on us. 

But we haven’t governed federally. That debt and deficit was 

built up entirely  entirely  by Liberal and Tory 

governments. 

 

Now let’s just focus on this for a second. For 20 years we have 

seen those governments build up massive debts. In fact this year 

the Canadian debt will hit a $600 billion level  $600 billion. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It’s declining, isn’t it? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  It takes us . . . And it is a rising debt. And 

that is what the Liberals have done for Canada  $600 billion 

in debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know the problems that you can run into 

by running significant debts and deficits. Saskatchewan had its 

problem with the deficits built up by the Conservative 

government of Grant Devine, and we know that what it does is 

it leads you to the edge of bankruptcy. 

 

The problem is, and no one has a disagreement with the federal 

government attempting to deal with its debt problems, but in 

dealing with it, it’s showing it’s not only fiscally bankrupt, it is 

intellectually bankrupt and it is morally bankrupt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Let’s take a look at the priorities of how 

they’re trying to deal with that deficit and that debt. 

 

The members opposite say, well we should be protecting 

seniors. I read here The Globe and Mail headlines: “Politicians 

hit road show for pension review”; “Pension plan fate subject to 

hearings”; “CPP cuts opposed”; “Pensioning off the CPP.” 

 

In this editorial The Globe and Mail says: 

 

Ottawa’s travelling financial circus offers the masses not 

bread but pain and hard choices. Pain and hard choices for 

the seniors in our country, pain and hard choices for the 

people who are going to have to be paying the increased 

rates because of federal Liberal mismanagement. 

 

Now it’s nice to listen to the members opposite and the member 

for Humboldt stand up and talk about how we should be 

building this great, just society, this Trudeauesque vision. It is 

exactly that set of priorities which have led us to where we are 

today, which is a federal government that has no direction, that 

is lacking in integrity. It is lacking in much intellectual capital. 

It is fiscally bankrupt, and I would say it is lacking in moral 

standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is convenient for the members opposite to put 

forward a motion saying that Saskatchewan is responsible for 

all the problems the federal government is downloading, but it’s 

inaccurate. 

 

Let’s take a look at exactly what they say their argument is as to  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

why, you know, the federal government is not offloading that 

much, they say. In Goodale’s letter, he says: 

 

. . . the source of the current financial pressure on 

Saskatchewan is the ‘lost decade’ of gross mismanagement 

that plagued this province from 1982 to 1991.” 

 

Well that’s a convenient argument. The problem is, Mr. 

Speaker, that the problems forced on this province by the 

massive debts and debt built up by the Conservative 

government were brought in hand by the last legislature. It was 

in that legislature that we saw a balanced budget. It was in that 

legislature that we saw the choices made to help correct those 

problems. And as a result of those choices, Saskatchewan was 

put on a steady course to recovery. 

 

The problem is Ottawa didn’t bother to do anything about its 

problems. So this year we are all of a sudden faced with 

massive cuts through this CHST, the Canada Health and Social 

Transfer, or perhaps, Chrétien’s heinous slashing of transfer 

payments. Maybe that’s a better way for us to refer to the 

CHST. 

 

But what we see here is $106 million offload this year, not over 

the next three years  this year, $106 million. It required us to 

rethink our priorities. I agree with that. We did sit down and 

rethink our priorities. And we said, unlike the federal 

government, we said health, education, and the protection of 

our poor were our top priorities, and we would ensure that the 

federal cuts did not hit them. 

 

They go on to argue, the Liberals go on to argue, the 

unavoidable reductions, I’m quoting from the letter again: 

 

. . . unavoidable reductions in federal transfers to 

Saskatchewan will be relatively modest. Here are the 

major transfers this province can expect . . . 

 

And he goes on to list the same figures the member for 

Canora-Pelly listed. 

 

The problem is, in this wonderful accounting they’re doing with 

their electric abacus across the way, is that they are forgetting 

that what they are calculating in is a concept called tax points. 

I’m sorry the member for Thunder Creek is not able to expound 

on this at this point, to tell us about how these great tax points 

have been such a benefit to us. Perhaps I can simply stand in 

and say that these tax points were a concept introduced in 1977, 

almost 20 years ago. It was a one-time shift from a federal tax 

base to the provincial tax base to cover a program called 

established programs financing  EPF. That happened in 1977. 

 

There’s been no tax point transfers since then. The federal 

government has eaten up all the additional tax room that they 

had ever given us. This is what the problem is with this 

argument. Not only is it misleading, not only is it deceptive, but 

it is inaccurate. And I think that it is shameful for people like 

the member for Humboldt to stand up and say, well the federal 

Liberals are protecting the poor, when they’re not. The federal 

Liberals are protecting the elderly, when they’re cutting CPP 

(Canada Pension Plan). The federal Liberals are protecting the  

ill, when they’re cutting the transfers to health care. This is the 

most twisted logic that I have heard in this House yet. 

 

And I think that it would befit the members opposite to sit back, 

rethink their position, and really join with us in talking about 

how we can stand up for Saskatchewan against Ottawa’s cuts. 

It’s convenient for the members opposite to say, oh well, yes, 

but there’s all these other problems. Well it’s not the issue of 

the federal government. 

 

(1530) 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the federal government is offloading 

its spending on to us and it’s doing so at the expense of the 

poor; it is doing so at the expense of the young; it is doing so at 

the expense of the ill. And since the members opposite seem to 

only like to talk about rural areas and forget about those of us 

who live in urban areas, I will tell you it is at the expense of 

people in rural communities. 

 

Let me just use for an example on this, let’s take a look at what 

exactly the changes are that they’re making to Unemployment 

Insurance Act. Apart from the Canada Health and Social 

Transfers, they are in fact attacking this province and its people 

through other changes as well. They’ve introduced a new 

employment insurance Act. These changes, we know, will 

result in a more limited role for the federal government in 

implementing labour market policies. We know that it will 

narrow the definition of who can participate in the programs. 

They’re going to increase the volume of social assistance 

recipients. 

 

Now the member for Humboldt, who likes to stand up and on 

the one hand talk about poverty and on the other hand talk 

about no solutions for it, she offers no alternatives, no solution, 

no vision. But she likes to talk about the problem. The problem 

is the federal government continues to offload on social 

assistance funding. We take a look at the impact of this, and we 

know that there is potentially 5,000 fewer trainees who will be 

able to access training as a result of the federal government’s 

offloading. 

 

We know that through their changes to employment insurance, 

what we used to call UI (unemployment insurance), that they 

will particularly affect the re-entry of youth, of women, of 

aboriginal people and social assistance recipients into the 

workforce. 

 

This is the real problem that’s coming down from Ottawa. It’s 

not just a case of the social transfers. It’s a problem that we 

have with a variety of the legislation put forward  Bill C-96, 

Bill C-111, Bill C-112. These are all problems. And it’s 

convenient for the members opposite to say, oh well, the real 

problem is that Saskatchewan is not spending enough on health 

care, education and social programing. The fact is we spend 

everything Ottawa gives us and more. 

 

As a result of the cuts that the federal government is making, 

Saskatchewan will now have responsibility for 85 per cent of 

the funding of these social programs  85 per cent of the 

funding will come directly from Saskatchewan taxpayers,  



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

through Saskatchewan government. 

 

That’s the fact. Before the cuts, the amount was closer to 72, 73 

per cent. This is a massive offload. Now the member opposite 

from Humboldt stood up, and following the great leadership of, 

I guess it was a one-time Liberal leader in this House, Mr. 

Goodale, says that in fact the offload is only 1.5 per cent of the 

total provincial budget. 

 

That’s using the complicated system of tax points; that 1977 

program that we haven’t seen since  but 1.5 per cent. But the 

fact is, and madam member across the way knows this, we are 

looking at offload equal to 5 per cent of the total program 

budget of the province. We are talking about an offload equal to 

8 per cent of the money we spend on social programs. That’s 

the problem. 

 

I am pleased that the budget is balanced in this province. I am 

pleased that we have done that fairly, and I am particularly 

pleased that we have been able to find the money, as the 

member for Regina Qu’Appelle said, to replace the money 

offloaded by the federal government. 

 

Those are our priorities. We believe in standing up for the 

people of Saskatchewan against these horrible cuts Ottawa’s 

making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these cuts are going to have other problems in the 

post-secondary sector. I was somewhat disappointed to hear the 

comments from the member for Canora-Pelly who talked about 

the problems we have on our post-secondary sector. He puts 

forward an argument that says, well the cuts are not that severe; 

the problem is all Saskatchewan’s fault. We’ve mismanaged it. 

We’ve wasted money. And yet when you question them on it, 

they can’t provide a single example. They can’t provide a 

single, solitary piece of fact to back up their arguments. It 

simply comes down to being political rhetoric. 

 

Well let me talk a little bit about what the facts are on this. The 

fact is that Ottawa is going to be cutting more than $30 million 

out of the funding it puts into training programs  $30 million 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, this is not money that they 

are simply arbitrarily giving to us that we’re somehow flitting 

away as the members opposite say. This is money they used to 

use to purchase seats in our technical institutes. This was 

money that went to skills training. Specifically it was $4 million 

in apprenticeship training. That’s a $4 million cut to 

apprenticeship that the federal government is making. 

 

Ten million dollars in adult basic education, $10 million, now 

this is to some of our poorest adults, some of the people who 

are trying to get off of welfare by upgrading their basic skills. 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals and  I would hope  the 

Liberals opposite would know this is not acceptable. You can’t 

simply tell people, get off of welfare. You have to give them the 

opportunity to improve themselves, to be able to enter the 

labour force and participate fully. That’s what these funds used 

to go to. This is where the federal government is cutting back. 

 

We’re not talking about cutting back on the massive waste 

within their own government. We’re not talking about, as the  

member for Weyburn-Big Muddy pointed out, the fact that they 

continue to maintain the Senate for their Liberal cronies. We’re 

not even talking about the fact that they maintain 6,000 people 

in the Department of Health’s bureaucracy in Ottawa. 

 

What we’re talking about here is a cut to adult basic education. 

We’re talking about $10 million in additional cuts to vocational 

skills training  vocational skills training. And we’re talking 

about $6 million cut to outreach programs for women, for the 

disabled, for first nations people, and the Metis. 

 

So while the members opposite talk about all of these massive 

cuts that Saskatchewan is making, the fact is they’re not, we are 

not making the cuts. We are standing up for Saskatchewan 

people. We are back-filling the cuts Ottawa is making. And by 

our very nature, we are protecting the people who need our 

protection most. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 

colleague, the member from Regina South, for the courtesy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always a great pleasure for all of us to 

introduce guests  student guests  in this legislature, and this 

is particularly true today because seated in your gallery we have 

some out-of-province students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have 53 grade 7 to 12 students from Grenora School in 

Grenora, North Dakota. They are accompanied by their teacher 

Karen C. Helm, and their chaperons, Mr. and Mrs. Haugen, 

Mrs. Jacobson, Mrs. Rassmusson, Ms. Schultz, and Mr. and 

Mrs. Garass. 

 

Now we are all very pleased to see them here and we will be 

interested to hear what they have to think about the proceedings 

in this House. And no doubt there will be comparisons that 

you’ll want to make to your own state legislature. But I am 

delighted on behalf of my colleagues here to welcome you, and 

I’m going to ask my colleagues to join me in showing their 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Osika:  To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

members opposite for allowing me the opportunity on behalf of 

the official opposition here to welcome our young friends and  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

the students to this, the Assembly. We welcome you once again, 

and I hope you enjoy the proceedings and your visit to the 

beautiful Legislative Building here in Regina, Saskatchewan. 

Thank you for being here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 5  Post-Secondary Education 

and Training Funding 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 

with my colleagues in welcoming the guests to the gallery. It’s a 

pleasure always to see young people joining us here and 

watching our Chamber in process. 

 

I’m particularly pleased today, I guess, also to have them join 

us because we’re talking about a very important issue. We’re 

talking about the future of our education system in this country, 

and we’re talking about the future particularly, of the move 

from schooling into the job force. This is really what the issue 

is that we’re debating today. 

 

I mean what we’re looking at is the issue of how Ottawa and 

our federal government are offloading their responsibilities in 

the area of post-secondary education, training, and employment. 

I think that what we need to talk about for a little bit is what 

exactly the kind of society is that we’re going to be building 

here. 

 

Now we have a federal government that is pulling out of many 

of the key areas of our economy. We have a federal government 

that is offloading its responsibilities onto the provinces, not 

simply the funding responsibility, but its entire system is being 

offloaded onto the provinces. We are slowly losing our ability 

to set national standards as a result of what the federal Liberals 

are up to. And I would say with the tacit consent  or perhaps 

not even the tacit consent, maybe the very explicit consent  of 

the opposition Liberals in this Chamber. 

 

I think what we need to do is take a look at how this is 

impacting on us. Now we’ve seen the federal Liberals offload 

more than $30 million in cuts to our training programs in this 

province alone. Apart from the obvious impact it’ll have, as I 

mentioned, on adult basic education, on skills training, on 

income support programs and services, it has an additional 

impact in that it takes away the ability for Ottawa to set 

standards. It takes away the ability for us to draw together a 

national skills training network. 

 

It takes away from our ability to ensure that Saskatchewan 

people, students in particular, have the ability to be trained here 

and be able to go to jobs wherever they may want in the 

country, or conversely, to be trained elsewhere and come to 

jobs here in Saskatchewan. We are quickly losing these 

opportunities, and this is a major problem here. 

 

I guess the technical word for it is portability. We talk about the 

loss of portability of education. Now what we're starting to see  

here is a user-pay system develop because of the cuts that 

Ottawa is making to the social and health transfers. This system 

will take away the money that used to buy seats for students, 

and in exchange will expect the students to pay the full cost of 

their education  completely at odds with our history in our 

country. We have always supported those most in need. 

 

And what we’re moving away from is the vision of Trudeau’s 

just society that the Liberals once subscribed to, to a much 

colder, harsher, meaner, more market-driven Canada. 

 

Now the problem with this . . . that may not be a big problem 

for some business people; it may not be a big problem for some 

of the members opposite. It is a big problem, however, if you 

are a single parent; if you are a young student; if you are 

somebody wanting to better themselves, because they don’t 

have the money. 

 

Now we listened to the radio this morning  and I was quite 

interested to hear of a meeting that had occurred, I guess in the 

riding of the member for Regina Victoria, of a group of low 

income tenants last night. And they were talking about the 

hardships that they were facing, and how difficult they found it 

even to pay for rent as they were busy going to school and 

attempting to better themselves so they could get jobs, get off of 

welfare, and support their families  laudable goals. 

 

This is a problem they have today, with tuition heavily 

subsidized. Imagine what the impact will be tomorrow when we 

have to take a look and say to these single parents, say to these 

mothers with their children, I’m sorry; your $2,000 tuition just 

became a $10,000 tuition. And it became that because it will be 

better for you, according to the Chrétien government. Because 

you should be paying the full hit. You are the reason that we 

have a debt, according to Chrétien. 

 

This is the kind of heartless, thoughtless approach to education 

that the members opposite are supporting. And it’s one of the 

reasons I find it so difficult to support the amendment from the 

member opposite. This is just a dreadful approach to 

post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the examples are numerous. And I want to move 

on and talk a little bit about unemployment insurance. As you 

know, in this country we have built up, largely at the prodding 

from CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party) members in the federal House of Commons, 

a system of employment insurance, or unemployment 

insurance; that it protected people who have temporarily lost 

work. It is a bridging payment. It’s not an income support 

payment; it’s a bridging payment to allow them to have some 

wage stability till they can get back on their feet. 

 

Apart from cutting the training program, apart from cutting the 

health budget, apart from cutting the social services budget, the 

federal government doesn’t seem happy simply to stop there. 

They have to cut these very basic income replacement 

programs, these stabilization programs. 

 

Unemployment insurance is under serious attack in our country, 

and we are speaking out against it, not the Liberals opposite   



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

certainly not the Liberals in Ottawa, although perhaps Mr. 

Nunziata will now decide to join us and other members of the 

independent Liberal caucus  the ILC  folks of their ilk. It 

actually seems to be a quickly growing political movement in 

this country as the deposed member for . . . deposed Liberal 

leader in this House, the member for Greystone, has started the 

ball rolling by joining the independent Liberal caucus. Now she 

has two cohorts in parliament. 

 

(1545) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have with the 

unemployment insurance changes are very troublesome. What 

we have seen now is the cuts planned by the federal government 

are in fact the eighth major cut since 1971 for this program. It’s 

the fourth in the 1990s and it’s the second since the federal 

government was elected in 1993. 

 

These cuts are serious. They are going to have a very adverse 

impact on low income people in our country. And they are done 

for no particular reason. 

 

I think it’s important to remember that if no changes were made 

to the UI program, absolutely no changes, the program would 

run a surplus of 5.5 billion this fiscal year alone  5.5 billion. 

So why are we making the changes? 

 

Well I would have to go back, I guess, to the letter from Mr. 

Goodale that says, well we’re making the changes because 

Tokyo wants the changes. We’re making the changes because 

Saskatchewan . . . because of the federal debt. We’re making 

the changes because of ongoing debts — debts, of course, that 

the federal Liberals built up. And of course we’re making the 

cuts because it is really the fault, as we hear from the federal 

Liberals, of the poor, of those who are trying to better 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apart from the federal budget and the cuts to the 

health and social transfers, as I mentioned earlier, we have three 

other Bills that are of big concern. C-96, C-111, and C-112 are 

Bills which will devastate the social programs that we have 

come to rely on as Canadians and have come to define 

ourselves by. 

 

I’m reading here from a paper prepared by the Canadian Labour 

Congress as they appear before the human resource 

development committee, and they say that the changes, and I’ll 

quote briefly from the paper, they say the changes: 

 

. . . involve a totally unjustified reduction to the income 

protection of unemployed workers; they move the program 

away from its fundamental purpose of stabilizing the 

incomes of workers by replacing earnings during periods 

of unemployment; and, they increase the authority of the 

federal government to make changes to the program on a 

day-to-day basis without reference to Parliament . . . 

 

These are not the kind of changes that are progressive. These 

are not the kind of changes that befit a federal government that 

claims, as the member for Humboldt says, that they claim to 

represent the poor and represent the underrepresented in our  

society. What in fact this is, is a set of changes which show the 

real, true colours of the Grits. 

 

It shows, in fact, a mean-spiritedness. It shows a meanness in 

the society in that they are attempting to hurt the most poor. 

Now the members opposite will say, oh well, that’s just the 

NDP standing up for their constituents. Well that’s right. We 

are. We’re standing up for our constituents. We’re standing up 

for Saskatchewan while they remain silent. 

 

I think it’s important though that we take a look, as the 

members opposite seem to want to ignore urban Saskatchewan. 

As at one point, the absolute arrogance of the comment from 

the member for Arm River in saying that rural people’s votes 

should count for twice as much as urban members. 

 

Let me use this example and talk in your terms about rural 

Saskatchewan. Because I too care about rural Saskatchewan, 

and I care about what’s happening in the rural areas. And this is 

where these changes are going to be most devastating. Because 

what we’re looking at is changes that drastically affect the 

seasonal workforce. That seasonal workforce is not simply here 

in Regina. It’s in the north-east in the forest belt. It’s in the 

north-west in the oil sector. It’s scattered throughout the 

province, and it’s in rural areas. 

 

Now they say that in fact this is not going to have a big impact. 

They argue no, no, no, UI (unemployment insurance) changes 

are not going to have a big impact. It’s going to save the 

country money. It’s going to save the country money by taking 

money out of the pockets of our most poor. That is what’s so 

shameful about this. That is the problem, and it affects the rural 

labour markets in particular. It affects also a lot of the low 

income, part-time labour force who are going to have to work 

longer in order to qualify for the benefits. 

 

These are changes that the members opposite are defending? 

They’re defending changes that will cut the amount of money 

people can receive on UI. They’re defending the sort of changes 

that will allow us to cut out large segments of the labour force 

simply because they can only find work seasonally. 

 

They’re prepared to support cuts which will hurt women 

attempting to return to the labour force, who often enter into the 

lowest paying jobs, the seasonal jobs, who are not in the elite of 

our society. This is also going to affect obviously immigrant 

people. It will affect aboriginal people, and it will affect youth. 

So while the members opposite like to talk about how they are 

in fact supporting youth and how the federal government is 

such a great benefactor, the facts don’t support it. 

 

The UI cuts are very detrimental to young people. Young 

people often work in order to support their education, but work 

as we know . . . unemployment runs very high among young 

people. They are the ones who tend to take seasonal jobs in the 

forests. They are the ones who tend to take seasonal jobs on the 

rigs. These are the sort of people we need to be protecting 

because these are the sort of people who are using their money 

to go back to school, who are using their money to support 

young families, and they are using their money to support 

themselves in a very meagre way. But yet the members  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

opposite and the federal government continue their attack on 

these people. 

 

Well the member for Canora said that we should be apologizing 

for what is happening to social programs in this province. I 

cannot disagree more. We have every reason to stand here today 

and be proud of what Saskatchewan has done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  While Ottawa has backed out of its 

responsibilities, while it has backed out of its commitment to 

fund education, to fund health care, to fund social services, 

while it has continued its attack on the old, on the poor, on the 

young, on students, on aboriginal people, on immigrants, on 

women, while it has done all of that through its Bills and 

through its budget, we have stood firm in support of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to close my comments 

today by simply saying that I cannot agree with the amendment 

put forward by the members opposite for all of those reasons. It 

is just clearly, clearly an argument without basis in fact. It is an 

argument that ignores the real social problems in our society, 

and it is an argument that is ignorant to what the federal 

government is doing to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members  all members of this 

Assembly including the Liberal members opposite  to join 

with us in standing up for Saskatchewan. Vote down the 

amendment. Support the original motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to join in this debate and speak 

against the amendment and speak in favour of the main motion 

as put forward by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

I just want to read into the record again the motion as it is 

presented: 

 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan 

government’s funding priority in the March 28 budget for 

post-secondary education and training; and that this 

Assembly condemns the federal Liberal government’s 

attack on students through their Canada Health and Social 

Transfer, CHST, and the UIC cuts. 

 

When I look, Mr. Speaker, at the cuts in the Canada Health and 

Social Transfer and the unemployment insurance reductions  

the reductions by the federal Liberals  I certainly know where 

their priorities lie, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As you will likely be aware, the Canada Assistance Plan has 

been terminated and was replaced by the Canada Health and 

Social Transfer. Along with the Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education, I have some real and genuine concerns about the 

disappearance of the Canada Assistance Plan and how the 

Canada Health and Social Transfer was put in its place. 

Mr. Speaker, the provinces were obligated in the past to provide 

assistance to anyone in need. And this point is very important, 

the point that I’m about to make, is they were also obliged to 

use a common method for determining financial needs. In 

return, the federal government agreed to contribute federal 

dollars to help provinces maintain things like post-secondary 

education and training programs. 

 

In 1994-1995, the federal contribution under the Canada 

assistance program totalled nearly $8 billion annually. Our 

share of this money was used to help support a broad network 

of social assistance and educational programs across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a province and as a nation, we have been largely successful 

in protecting the most vulnerable. We’ve been successful, I 

think, in supporting those who are unable to support 

themselves. And I think we’ve been successful, Mr. Speaker, in 

providing top-notch educational and training programs, and 

especially, I think, Mr. Speaker, here in our fine province. 

 

But conditions have changed and we are now faced with 

growing public pressure to move beyond our past successes and 

to redesign social services and educational programs. 

 

The challenges that we will be meeting and the expectations 

will certainly be to ensure the safety net as was promoted under 

the Canada assistance program. And we want to ensure that 

those standards are not lost. 

 

This may be a challenge and I think it’s a large challenge, and 

the Canada Health and Social Transfer legislation with respect 

to education makes life, I think, for many provincial 

governments, extremely difficult. We all have different social, 

intellectual, physical, and financial abilities. These differences 

are differences that I think we often celebrate because they 

make us so diverse and a vibrant society. But it is often these 

differences which are the defining factors in an individual’s 

employment and financial status. 

 

Those of us who have healthy families, are well educated, have 

good jobs, and are financially stable are very fortunate. But 

with a few small changes in our lives, we could be less 

fortunate. With any adverse change to the status of the finances 

here in Saskatchewan, the ability to back-fill the federal 

Liberal’s educational cuts could be very difficult, if not 

impossible, Mr. Speaker. And when we have to make 

reductions in education I think that that truly makes all of us 

less fortunate. 

 

I am concerned as well, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that we are 

facing, as a nation, if the federal Liberal government begins to 

walk away . . . or I should say, I’m concerned about what we 

are facing as a nation if the federal Liberal government begins 

to walk away from its responsibilities. 

 

In Saskatchewan, despite difficult times, we have remained 

committed to a high standard of education for everyone. We 

have been doing our best to deal with these cuts and we are now 

looking at ways to link youth with jobs and education so that if 

they end up receiving assistance they are not caught in a  



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

dependency cycle. 

 

Our youth futures initiative would require that youth re-enter 

school or accept a community-based training or work 

experience to be eligible for that program. I think this is an 

innovative way to deal with these cuts. What I’m telling you 

today, Mr. Speaker, and to other members in the Assembly, is 

that the federal government’s present direction in the area of 

health, social programing and education is one that should be of 

concern to all of us. 

 

The erosion of a national safety net and cuts in funding to the 

provincial and territorial governments for education could have 

long-term, negative consequences for this country. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we have done what . . . what we have done in the face 

of difficulty is very different. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I want to refer to the March 28, 1996 Globe and Mail 

quote that was used in this Assembly several times before. And 

the caption in the top of the headline is: “Again, common sense 

in Saskatchewan”. And I’ll just pick one quote out of there. It 

says that: 

 

The New Democrats have governed imaginatively since 

they took office in 1991. Facing a deficit of $845 million, 

the worst per capita in Canada, they feared the collapse of 

the social system they had built. They didn’t create the 

mess  the NDP had left the Conservatives a balanced 

budget when they were defeated in 1982  but they knew 

it would take drastic measures to clean it up. To save social 

programs, they would have to recast them. 

 

And recast them, Mr. Speaker, we did. I find it incredible that 

the member from Canora-Pelly stands up in this legislature and 

twists the facts and defends the federal Liberal government for 

what they have done. To me, it seems that this provincial 

government has made some very responsible, and in fact very, 

very difficult decisions in back-filling 100 per cent of the 

educational cuts. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to strongly support the main 

motion, as I said, put forward by the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy and as seconded by the member from 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, and speak against the amendment. 

And I would ensure all members to vote as I do. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I echo the 

sentiments of my colleague that has just spoken before me on 

being pleased to enter the debate and support the main motion 

before us. And I’d also urge all members on all sides of the 

House to defeat the amendment. 

 

I’m finding it passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that members 

opposite have been doing nothing lately but apologize for the 

federal cuts that we’ve seen from their Liberal counterparts in 

Ottawa; and, Mr. Speaker, in standing up repeatedly to say, oh,  

it’s only this amount; or, what are you whining about, it’s only 

that; not recognizing some of the serious impacts that this will 

have in the areas of health, education, and social programing 

for all provinces. 

 

Because with the withdrawal of funding priority and 

commitment to the level that the federal government has put 

forward recently in their budget, there’s also the withdrawal of 

recognition that we have to have some strong standards in place 

across the piece so that all areas of our country, and not only 

our country but our province, can have a standard, and a quality 

standard, of education, of health care, and of social programing. 

 

Instead of recognizing clearly what’s going on, they’re now 

turning their backs on what really has been happening in 

Saskatchewan. And I’d say also turning their backs on the 

realistic nature of people across this country in understanding 

what’s going on when this statement is made by Ottawa in their 

federal budget. 

 

Surely the Liberals across from us must know that it was their 

campaign during the last election that’s had them walking door 

to door vigorously opposing any increases in spending. They 

were calling for expenditure cuts. They agreed that we should 

pay down on the debt to lessen the burden for future 

generations. They talked about decreasing the level of taxation 

and promised more or improved services for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Realistic? People in Saskatchewan couldn’t quite believe their 

ears because people in Saskatchewan began to ask the question: 

then where will the money come from; then where are we going 

to get the dollars that are needed in these priority areas? 

 

And they know obviously, from looking at what their federal 

counterparts are doing, they know now that it’s not going to be 

the priority of the Liberal members opposite either. 

 

People in Saskatchewan obviously, by their vote, told the 

Liberals opposite that they were embarking on mission 

impossible. Mission impossible, they say. When will we finally 

be paying for this, the promises of the Liberals, in the budget 

that would be in the same manner as the Conservatives? 

Talking about it one time in their election promises, the things 

we can do for you, and we’re going to find those efficiencies 

through meaner, leaner government, through somehow waste 

and mismanagement that we haven’t found since 1991 when we 

had to adjust already to a $1.2 billion cut to just come into a 

situation where we would be balancing the operating budgets of 

this province from year to year. 

 

So while they say, well it’s only a little hurt, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

little hurt on top of all of the kinds of things that we’ve had to 

do to make up for the Tories’ spending sprees over the years. 

And people in Saskatchewan now didn’t want to see the same 

kind of budgeting practices happening from the Liberal 

members opposite. 

 

For Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, I say, are astute, and 

they see the continuation of a Tory agenda federally with the 

budget that’s been presented. And they see that the Tory agenda  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

continues with a Liberal hat on a Tory head. The Saskatchewan 

litany applies here. A litany I heard when I went from door to 

door in Saskatchewan was: Liberal, Tory, same old story. 

 

The members opposite, in blocking out reality, have selectively 

chosen to ignore the facts as well. We’ve stated them over and 

over, but I think you have to restate them because they’ve 

chosen to block them out. And maybe at one point when one of 

us states them clearly enough, there might be an aha! 

experience in the Liberal ranks across. 

 

And they’ll join us in understanding that, as a result of federal 

withdrawal from training, partly through changes to 

unemployment insurance, SIAST will experience a total 

decrease in revenue of about 14 per cent. We had a presentation 

to our Regina caucus from the SIAST campus here, and this 

was before they had learned that the provincial government was 

going to attempt to back-fill the lost dollars from the federal 

government. And they told us about the magnitude of the 

impact that has on their institution and their worry about losing 

the competency-based education that is now helping individuals 

who are very skilled in a vocational, technical kind of way . . . 

from entering into the courses they need to be productive 

members in a workplace and contribute to the jobs and the 

economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

We heard presentations from regional colleges who are now 

putting forward reform or restructuring packages. And it wasn’t 

at the insistence of the provincial government or anything we 

had done, but they looked at the loss of monies that they would 

be gleaning from this lack of funding to adult-based education 

from the federal government, that they would be withdrawing 

the training dollars and opportunities to purchase those training 

spaces for people who were looking at, in their adult years, 

being retrained to re-enter the workforce and again contribute to 

the way that we’re trying to approach the 21st century and full 

employment for people in our province. 

 

What we try to do? We try to maintain the provincial funding to 

all our training programs this year in addition to maintaining 

operating grants to these institutions. It’s not what the 

provincial government will be doing, but they’re feeling the 

effects of the federal government, and they know we can’t 

possibly, at the provincial level, back-fill for all those lost 

dollars. 

 

They’ve also told me that you only need to look around at 

what’s happening in other provinces to feel grateful to the 

province of Saskatchewan for the commitment we have  

following the consultation process  to their priorities and 

their values and their principles. 

 

They wanted us to look around . . . and say, for example, New 

Brunswick who’s in the process of making everyone involved 

in education system in that province a provincial government 

employee: every teacher, every director of education, every 

administrator, and every janitor. Everybody in New Brunswick. 

They’re abolishing all elected school boards in the province. 

Now when you look at the post-secondary education and the 

school boards in our province . . . and we say that at the local 

level they’re better able to priorize through the regional college  

system, through our SIAST and so on, where we need to spend 

the dollars to reflect the job market and the economy and the 

local economy. We see what New Brunswick is doing. 

 

People tell me you need only look to Alberta at the magnitude 

of the budget cuts there and the government-imposed solutions 

that are realities for public education. 

 

It doesn’t take long to find out that if you’re going to have an 

impact on early childhood education and children in their 

formative years, it’s going to have an impact on what you can 

provide for post-secondary education. If we prepare our 

children early, we prepare them well to face the educational 

challenges and the training they’ll need for future employment. 

You need to start early, and you need only look at Alberta and 

find out what they see as starting early  cut back education at 

the kindergarten level; cut back funding to children in early 

childhood development stages and the early learning stages 

which will have an impact not only on our education system but 

our other systems as we try and restore the skills of those 

individuals who will now be falling through the cracks because 

they’re not prepared early on in their lives. 

 

Or you can look towards Manitoba where radical changes to the 

way the teachers are treated have been proposed with little input 

from teachers or communities  an imposition from the top . . . 

and in Manitoba, where the provincial grants to school boards 

are being reduced year after year after year. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, we all shudder when we look to 

Ontario. There sometimes seems to be an all-out assault on the 

public education system when you see slash funding that seems 

to be the number one answer to everything in Ontario these 

days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then I find it passing strange that the members 

opposite are not getting on their feet and talking about the 

Saskatchewan solution, the Saskatchewan response to the 

values and principles of working together to safeguard health, 

education, and social programing for future generations in this 

province. 

 

They’re still willing to sit there and block out the realty  the 

realty of reducing federal deficits by slashing Canada’s social 

programs with spending cuts to our key areas that we’ve 

identified. We believe the Liberals in Ottawa are making the 

wrong choices, and we believe those Liberals who are 

supporting Saskatchewan residents should be standing with us 

to tell Ottawa they’re making the wrong budget choices. 

 

We don’t believe in attacking those most vulnerable in our 

communities. We do believe in sitting down with our people 

and talking about how we can reform the systems to reflect the 

21st century, to prepare our province to enter the next century, 

and not stand by and say we can do nothing. 

 

We can be very creative. We can be very strong if we work 

together. And that requires a recognition on all sides of the 

House to come together and tell people where redesign and 

restructuring is necessary so that we can reflect the priorities of 

people in this province and not pander to the misguided  



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

priorities of the people in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, in the area of education, I can’t 

help but also mention that to have a strong post-secondary 

sector, you need people who are prepared, as I mentioned, early 

on in their education, but also through their K to 12 years. 

 

And I find again it very strange that the member opposite who 

comes from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) organization in his past life, that comes from the 

education sector in his past life, would not stand up and want to 

recognize that apart from what the other provinces are doing to 

recoil and recover from the federal withdrawal of monies, that 

in our province we’re committed to supporting education, be it 

rural, urban, or northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to ensure that all Saskatchewan students have access 

to a comprehensive range of high quality programs regardless 

of where they live and at what level in their education  be it 

early childhood, be it K to 12, or be it post-secondary. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the key to preparing our province for the next 

century and preparing our province to be a strong contender in 

the global economy. 

 

What does this mean for our province in the area of funding and 

the foundation operating grant this year for the K to 12 system 

which the member has blocked out and chosen not to 

recognize? It’s providing higher cost to education in rural 

settings because we recognize greater distances, and small 

isolated schools in Saskatchewan are a reality. On average, we 

recognize that expenditures per pupil in rural divisions are 25 

per cent higher than those from public and separate divisions in 

the cities. Rural school divisions are eligible for separate 

funding with a sparsity factor: small schools, rural 

transportation, and new rural technology factors. 

 

I don’t hear the members talking about that. I don’t hear the 

members understanding the demographics change in 

Saskatchewan. But funding with the foundation grant formula 

can make up for those changes. They talk about  what?  

poor us, no one’s listening to rural Saskatchewan. And they 

don’t stand up and at least acknowledge what has been done to 

the tune of . . . in 1986 expenditures for the rural areas, for rural 

transportation, for the technology changes that will provide 

distance education and other access to training in rural 

Saskatchewan, that these categories all total $70 million this 

year. 

 

(1615) 

 

While they ask us to stop whining about withdrawal of monies 

from the federal government, we ask them to stand up and 

recognize what’s being done instead of saying, we’re not 

getting this, or we’re not getting that. They’re not 

acknowledging that there’s a commitment to quality education 

in all areas of this province, at all levels of education in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, we’re also a government that 

recognizes the strong need to have local governments and 

governance at a local level that have a commitment from us to 

educate but also that 80 per cent of the grants that we offer to 

them  80 per cent Mr. Speaker  of those grants are monies 

that are unconditional to those local areas so that they can 

provide local priorities. 

 

It’s not a move on behalf of this government to strike out the 

local boards and say we’re going to be political; we’ll do away 

with you out there because we, the government from Regina, 

know what’s best for you  as we’ve seen in New Brunswick 

and as we’ve seen in Alberta. That’s the Liberal approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not the Liberal approach. We don’t say, if 

only the way it was in Saskatchewan was the way it was when 

we had to take 15 years to de-Thatcherize this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We don’t want to go back to the past, Mr. Speaker. 

Although some don’t recognize they have roots in that Liberal 

Party and they don’t recognize they have roots in the federal 

Liberal Party and they don’t want to speak on behalf of 

Saskatchewan Liberal people, Mr. Speaker, so I wonder where 

their roots really are, and where their priorities are going to be 

set, and who they’re going to listen to, to set those priorities. 

 

We ask them to join us, at least to join us in recognizing that 

there’s a lot of work that needs to be done, that we’re going to 

do it together with all people in Saskatchewan. And whether 

they like or not, we’re going to prepare this province to meet 

the challenges of the 21st century. That’s how we work. We 

work together to organize ourselves to face any challenges that 

represented to us. 

 

If they still are kind of shaking their head and not really 

understanding what that means in education, I can give them an 

outline of that, or what it means in health. It might mean, for 

example, $3 million for rural technology factors this year to 

prepare people in our rural areas for the technological changes. 

Additional million dollars for design of disabled students’ 

programs. Another million dollars targeted to behavioural 

programs. Northern allowances, there’s 2.35 million for 

community schools, and the list goes on. 

 

What we’re trying to do is sustain quality education in rural 

Saskatchewan, improve services for students at risk, improve 

opportunities for youth, maintain our opportunities for training, 

maintain our opportunities for people to retrain to re-enter the 

job market  all this in contrast to what I’ve heard said today 

about denial and not really willing to stand up and work 

together with us to adjust to these changing realities. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I suggest the members opposite 

face reality. Look at what is being done. At least be able to 

understand where the monies are priorized after withdrawal of 

the magnitude that we’ve seen from the federal government. 

And after serious second thought, join us. Join with us to 

congratulate all those, not just the representatives here on 

government side, who are trying to present this motion today 

and the kind of negativism that it’s incurred upon the motion 

from the amendment opposite, but to join with us and 

congratulate all those who worked so hard to maintain quality  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

of education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Set aside the cheap politic for the moment. Set aside the 

political antics. Recognize the hard work that still needs to be 

done. Roll up your sleeves, and support the motion before you. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I just want to 

comment as I enter this debate on the very good quality of the 

speakers  particularly on the government side  in this 

debate earlier today. It’s my great pleasure to address this 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan 

government’s funding priority in the March 28 budget for 

post-secondary education and training; and that this 

Assembly condemns the federal Liberal government’s 

attack on students through their Canada Health and Social 

Transfer and UIC cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with the first part of the motion, and 

that is the part that directly falls upon us as the provincial 

government. And I think I can sort of capture what it is I want 

to say right off the start by casting myself back 24 hours in this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Minister of Finance’s desk is two over from mine, and I 

found myself over bending the Minister of Finance’s ear 

yesterday over a particular issue. And after about 15 minutes I 

just stopped. And I said, you know, isn’t this amazing, the 

system we’ve got in Saskatchewan? Here I’ve spent 15 minutes 

nattering at you about a government policy issue. Would that 

happen, Mr. Speaker, in Ontario? Do you think there’s a single 

back-bench MLA has the opportunity to sit beside the Minister 

of Finance and discuss important issues of the day, issues like 

post-secondary education, issues like the running of Crown 

corporations, any other issue? 

 

I don’t think that in Ontario back-bench MLAs even can talk 

about the GST and the potential harmonization with their 

Minister of Finance. And we certainly know that in the federal 

government you can talk about the GST as long as it’s, aye, aye, 

whatever you say, Prime Minister, whatever you say, Minister 

of Finance  unlike our great tradition here. 

 

And I don’t mean to leave the impression that we can all go off 

as a bunch of loose cannons. But what I am trying to leave the 

impression of is here we have a process that’s in place that 

allows all members a full, complete access to the Premier, to the 

cabinet ministers, to each other, open caucus meetings every 

day  those sorts of things  and that’s the process, Mr. 

Speaker, that led us to our March 28 budget. 

 

That’s the process of involvement of the entire caucus that led 

to the choices we took. Now, certainly open for debate were all 

of the choices, the proper choices. Of course there’s always 

going to be debate and give and take about it. The fact is every 

single government MLA was in putting our pitch for what we  

thought should be happening in the budget. 

 

Now that comes smack up against the reality of $114 million 

offload from the federal Liberal government. That created huge 

problems, but problems that collectively we dealt with, I think, 

in an exemplary fashion. 

 

This motion talks about post-secondary education, and as we 

have repeatedly said in this Chamber and everywhere else, this 

provincial government back-filled $11 million of the $15 

million cut that the federal Liberals introduced into 

post-secondary education. 

 

And were that the long and short of the story, it would be great. 

No big problem. Certainly you can pony up probably $11 

million without huge difficulties, if you’re dealing with the 

entire budget at the same time. But to compound the problem 

was the offload in health  $52 million there, another $48 

million in social programing. The total, $114 million offload, 

and that’s this year alone. Never mind the effect next year when 

the offload is even greater. 

 

So we couldn’t simply say, well let’s go back to the taxpayers 

and increase taxes. I mean, tell me, anybody tell me what tax 

could reasonably be increased? 

 

The members opposite talk about the offload not being $114 

million, Mr. Speaker. In fact I heard the number earlier today of 

it being $61 million. This may be true if you take into account 

some tax credits that the federal government shifted onto  I 

see I’m onto it  that the federal government shifted onto the 

provincial government some time ago. 

 

Well please to tell me . . . please to explain how it is, where it is 

we should be increasing taxation. Where is it that we should be 

increasing taxation to come up with that additional 50-some 

million dollars? Is it that the official opposition, the provincial 

Liberal Party think that we should be harmonizing the 

provincial sales tax with the GST, the nationally hated goods 

and services tax, a tax so hated that one long-time Liberal MP 

(Member of Parliament) voted against his government’s budget. 

And his reward for having served them loyally for ’84 until 

now, his reward for serving the Liberal Party of Canada loyally, 

is to get the boot. He is out. He’s now sitting as an independent 

member. The Prime Minister has made it quite clear that for 

daring, daring to speak out against the Liberal GST problems, 

only reward is get kicked out. 

 

And this is all part of the broad problem, Mr. Speaker. Without 

a fair taxation policy nationally, a taxation policy that says you 

pay according to your ability to pay, that corporations should 

pay according to their ability to pay, that corporations should be 

paying a fair tax  without that fair taxation system, you get 

this push and shove. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it real interesting. Saskatchewan gets 

offloaded $114 million in those three areas  health, 

education, post-secondary education, and social services, this 

year alone  $114 million offload. But this year alone, and I 

invite the official opposition to square this circle. We get 

offloaded $114 million; Imperial Oil of Canada just received  



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

$843 million in a tax refund settlement from the federal Liberal 

government  $843 million in a tax refund to Imperial Oil. 

 

Imagine, Mr. Speaker. And let’s see now, how bad is Imperial 

Oil hurting? Well, Mr. Speaker, in 19 . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . yes, get out the kleenex. In 1994 over 1993, 

Imperial Oil’s profits only rose 29 per cent. In 1995 over 1994, 

Imperial’s profits only rose an additional 43 per cent to $514 

million. In 1996 over 1995, Imperial Oil’s profits rose over 300 

per cent  over 300 per cent. Imperial Oil clearly needed an 

$843 million tax break, courtesy of the federal Liberal 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who pays for these tax breaks? All Saskatchewan 

people. Oh, I don’t blame them for being upset. I would be 

upset if I had to defend that national government too. I would 

be real annoyed at this inane policy  843 million for Imperial 

Oil. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  We’ve got unemployment in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, double-digit unemployment. I remember the good old 

days  the good old days, 1974, when the national 

unemployment, the numbers, in real numbers, we hit a crisis, 

Mr. Speaker. There was in 1974, 1 million Canadians 

unemployed. Who was in power? The Liberals. Liberals in 

power. One million people unemployed in Canada in 1974 and 

we had a crisis. 

 

Well what’s the situation today? More than 2 million Canadians 

unemployed. And who’s in power? Liberals. Liberals. What’s 

their answer to unemployment? Let’s give Imperial Oil $843 

million in a tax rebate. 

 

(1630) 

 

Shame on you, shame on you for supporting that policy. This is 

unspeakable, how the federal Liberal government can treat its 

supporters who support the Liberal Party very, very well at 

election time with big dollar donations, with big help in election 

campaigns. 

 

Isn’t this awful that a government will respond to whoever’s 

paying the piper. They’re captives  the federal Liberal Party is 

captives to the corporate sector. And the provincial Liberal 

Party is tied right in. Tied right in. It’s the same party, the same 

party. 

 

Now contrast that, contrast that, Mr. Speaker, to our budget in 

Saskatchewan. I know Liberals want us to talk about the 

choices that we made. And certainly we have made choices. 

There were some choices that one would argue we could have 

made. You might say, why not cut the number of MLAs by 12 

per cent? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t even recognize . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the absurdity of this is the official opposition don’t 

even recognize it happened. Prior to the last election, as 

members will know, should know, there were 66 members in 

the Legislative Assembly. Today there’s 58. Today there’s 58 

members. That’s a choice that was made, recognizing that 

telecommunication services are improved, highways are much 

improved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ability for MLAs to get around and 

communicate is so much . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I recognize that we 

have the good fortune that this is not a timed debate and there’s 

opportunity for all members to get involved. However, we don’t 

all have to be involved at the same time. 

 

And I recognize that the hon. member from Regina Coronation 

Park has the floor and I’ll ask your cooperation to allow him to 

proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, we’ve 

reduced the number of MLAs from 66 to 58. That’s a 12 per 

cent reduction. Or put another way, it’s 8 fewer members sitting 

in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Or put another way, it’s leadership. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Put it another way, it’s leadership. It’s 

recognizing that if as a government we’re saying there’s only 

this many dollars to go around, we’re clearly not willing to 

increase taxes. We’ve done that. No question about that. After 

the ’91 election, we had to  we had to bring the fiscal 

situation into balance. 

 

Once we attained balance, the earliest opportunity you have to 

do this sort of a thing, to reduce the number of MLAs by any 

number or to increase the numbers, is at the next general 

election. At the very first opportunity, this government showed 

leadership. This government reduced the number of MLAs by 

eight. 

 

Then we also cut the Premier’s and cabinet ministers’ salaries 

by 5 per cent and then froze their pay at that reduced level. 

Then the complaints didn’t entirely go away. There was some 

need for further transparency into the way that MLAs are paid. 

So we set up a commission with instructions that our pay 

should not go up  written instructions tabled in this 

Legislative Assembly that our pay shouldn’t go up. 

 

Well I don’t know about anybody else, but if those are the 

instructions, clearly there’s only . . . the best I could hope for 

personally from my pocketbook would be break even. The 

worst is a decrease, from my personal perspective and from the 

credit union’s perspective as they look at my account balance 

daily or monthly or however often they want to do it. 

 

Well what we wind up with is pay cut, de facto 2 per cent pay 

cut. More leadership and more transparent pay system, 2 per 

cent cut in all of our pay. And I recognize this affects 

opposition as well as government MLAs, but that’s the system 

we operate under. 

 

What are some of the other things we did? We took a 25 per 

cent cut in our communication allowance. Now as members  



April 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

will know, the communication allowance isn’t something that 

goes into our pockets in any sense. It’s a matter of, if we need 

to buy a stamp and an envelope and some paper to 

communicate with constituents or others, we can do so and that 

is funded. So that didn’t affect my personal pocketbook, but it 

certainly affects my ability to communicate with people 

throughout Saskatchewan and elsewhere. And I think a 25 per 

cent cut in anything is significant. 

 

In fact the jury is out whether we should have or should not 

have done that, but that’s a moot point. 

 

Some of the other things we could have done with our budget 

 recognizing $114 million new problem presented to us from 

the federal Liberal government  some of the other things we 

could have done would be to perhaps cut health services, 

perhaps cut health services. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, we went around during the election 

and then had it reinforced with us after the election. We did that 

to consult with the people of Saskatchewan. In that consultation 

process the people of Saskatchewan said health is the biggest 

issue in our lives. We’ve got to maintain a health care system, 

and so we did it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could have made other choices. We could have 

cut social services benefits; again we did not. The measure of a 

society, I think, can be best summed up with . . . a society’s 

value can be measured, or the greatness of the society can be 

measured by how it treats the weakest and poorest of its 

citizenry. I think this government passed the test of time there. 

 

Yes, we’d like to do more. Absolutely. But I point out to the 

Liberal opposition, and anyone else, the budget choices we 

made were tough. I mean, ask any one of the 550 provincial 

civil servants who either took an early retirement or lost their 

job. They’re actively out looking for other work. Ask them if 

they could have paid a higher price. Clearly the answer is no. 

Clearly not. But faced with, protect health care, education, 

social programing, choices have to be made  difficult 

choices. I am very proud of the manner in which those 550 

provincial civil servants were dealt with. It’s not perfect, but 

I’m very proud of the manner in which we addressed that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made choices. I’m not going to try and rehash 

our budget. We made choices. The Liberals made choices. Their 

choices are very clear. They’re saying, let’s support the federal 

government. They’re saying, let’s support the federal 

government in its move to harmonize the PST (provincial sales 

tax) and the GST. They say, oh it will be so much simpler for 

business. 

 

Well you know what? It would be simpler for business. They’re 

absolutely right about that. It would be simpler for business. 

 

But what they fail to mention is that currently the situation in 

Saskatchewan with our 9 per cent PST is that 400 . . . nearly 

$400 million a year comes into the GST . . . or provincial sales 

tax revenue; $400 million a year comes into the general revenue 

of the province of Saskatchewan that under a GST, businesses 

pass on to the end consumer. 

Four hundred million dollars a year we capture from 

corporations when they purchase vehicles, when they purchase 

office furniture, paper supplies, that sort of thing. We capture, 

with our provincial sales tax, $400 million a year. Under the 

GST, that gets passed on to the end consumer. 

 

Now what that means in its simplicity, because there’s 1 million 

people in Saskatchewan, a $400 million profit translates simply 

into $400 for every man, woman, and child. Liberals say, pass 

$400 per person taxes on to individuals. New Democrats say 

no, that’s not acceptable  $400 additional taxes per person 

not on. 

 

That’s why we fight, we fight the harmonization of the PST. 

And we will, I predict, if  if harmonization carries on, 

Saskatchewan will proudly be the last province, the last 

province in Canada to join that. The only thing that would even 

cause us to blink is if it resulted in corporations potentially 

moving out of Saskatchewan and massive job loss. Clearly, in 

the face of reality, you might have to make some adjustments. 

 

Please don’t misread that I’m signalling we’re giving up the 

fight. We’ll be dead last. 

 

Liberals say, $400 additional tax per man, woman, and child is 

fine. We say it’s not. That’s the line in the sand. We are 

opposed to this harmonization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about fair taxation. I’ve talked about a 

number of things. I am proud to support this motion in which 

we are proudly saying we made the right choices, by and large, 

in our budget. 

 

The federal Liberal government, with things like it did with 

Imperial Oil, an $843 million tax refund settlement to Imperial 

Oil, they get . . . Imperial gets 843 million; we get a bill for 114 

million. Those things are just so patently unfair, Mr. Speaker. 

The Liberals are a party of the corporate elite. New Democrats 

are a party of the people. We’re trying to provide the best 

government we possibly can. I am going to proudly stand up in 

favour of this motion, and I will be opposing the amendment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:44 p.m. until 4:45 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  9 

 

Osika McLane Draude 

McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 

Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 

 

Nays  21 

 

Wiens Shillington Johnson 

Whitmore Kowalsky Pringle 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1996 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. I’m going to ask all members to 

come to order to allow the vote to proceed and to be conducted 

in an orderly fashion. 

 

Lorje Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Murrell Thomson 

 

The division bells rang from 4:47 p.m. until 4:48 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  22 

 

Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 

Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 

Pringle Koenker Trew 

Bradley Lorje Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Langford 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Sonntag Jess Murrell 

Thomson   

 

Nays  9 

 

Osika McLane Draude 

McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 

Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1085 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1086 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1086 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1086, 1104 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1086 

  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1086 

  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1104 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Wakaw Warriors Win Volleyball Championship 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1086 

 April Petroleum and Natural Gas Rights Sales 

  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1087 

 Saskatchewan War Brides’ Association Reunion 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1087 

 North-west Saskatchewan Drought 

  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1087 

 Passing of George Abel 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1087 

 La Loche Road Construction Training 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1088 

 Native Dancers 

  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1088 

 Saskatchewan Association For Community Living Employer of the Year Award 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1088 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1088 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1089 

 Health Worker Severance Payments 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1089 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1089 

 Grid Road Maintenance 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1090 

  Renaud ...........................................................................................................................................................................1090, 1091 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1091 

 McDowell Report 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1090 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1090 

 Removal of Maintenance Access Easements 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1092 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1092 

 Treaty Land Entitlements 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1092 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1092 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1092 

 Child Prostitution 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1092 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1093 



 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 78  An Act to enable Northern Municipalities to Name Airports within their boundaries 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1093 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................1093 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 5  Post-Secondary Education and Training Funding 

  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1093 

  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1097 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1098 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1100 

  Thomson ........................................................................................................................................................................1102, 1105 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1108 

  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1111 

 Recorded Divisions (amendment and motion) ...............................................................................................................1113, 1114 

 

 


