
























































June 12, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2469 
 June 12, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 

The Chair:  We’ll begin by having the minister introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated beside me 
is Dan Perrins who is the deputy minister. Behind Dan is Lily 
Stonehouse, assistant deputy minister. Behind me is Mae Boa, 
the executive director of finance and operations. In the back 
row on the left is Merran Proctor who is the president and CEO 
(chief executive officer) of New Careers. Beside Merran is 
Margaret Ball, assistant director of facilities planning. To my 
right and behind me is Brady Salloum who is the director of the 
student financial assistance. And that is the officials that I have 
here this morning, Mr. Chair. 
 
Item 1 
 
The Chair:  I recognize the hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale 
. . . no, for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I haven’t moved yet, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your assistants and staff. I look 
forward to a very productive morning. I know that we have 
discussed many issues in the past at the previous times that 
Post-Secondary Education has been up before estimates, and 
there are some things that I think we can move on to. 
 
Because post-secondary covers such a wide range of issues, 
from universities to technical institutes to the regional colleges 
to New Careers, I’m going to sort of split it into blocks and try 
to stay focused on each of the blocks. 
 
And I’d like to begin, Mr. Minister, with universities, if I might. 
Since 1991, if I take a look at the operating grants for 
universities, ‘92-93 to the current year, ‘96-97, I see that the 
operating grants to universities have decreased by about $10 
million  a significant amount of money when you look at the 
total amount allocated to the two universities in this province. 
Mr. Minister, what has this kind of a reduction . . . what effect 
has this had on the programs that are now being delivered at the 
two universities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, that’s a 
very important question. There’s no doubt that the universities 
have had to cope with difficult financial situations, probably 
over the past dozen years or so and certainly in recent years as 
the member has indicated. 

They have coped with those budgetary pressures by pressing on 
their entire range of programs, by cutting staff positions, by 
eliminating vacant positions, by limiting various kinds of 
expenses, by trimming here and there, and have managed to 
resolve their problems that way. The mental image that I have 
with respect to this problem is the universities pressing hard on 
the whole of the system to squeeze out of the whole system the 
savings that are necessary to cope with their financial situation. 
 
This has a number of effects on the programing or the product 
that is delivered in the universities. It results in larger classes. It 
results in more of the temporary kind of sessional lecturers and 
that sort of thing, rather than permanent, full-time professors. 
And it has a number of effects like that. 
 
It has not resulted in any dramatic deletions of entire program 
areas, but rather, I repeat, the image that I have and I think is 
the appropriate one, is of the universities squeezing the entire 
system and realizing their savings from that squeeze. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  As the universities, I think as you’ve 
indicated, become more efficient and look at ways of squeezing 
and providing still a very adequate program, I think you reach 
the point where you can’t squeeze any more because there just 
isn’t any more drops of, you know, orange juice in the orange. 
When I take a look at your budget, the government’s budget, for 
the next two years and I see that for both universities and 
federated colleges, because it’s lumped together, we see that 
there will be a $5 million further cut in funding for ‘97-98 and a 
second $5 million cut in ‘98-99, well those two 5 millions add 
up to again another 10 million. 
 
Now as you’ve indicated, you’ve indicated what has happened 
over the last four years, five years, in terms of how universities 
have coped with the first $10 million cut spread out over a 
longer period of time. Now we’re going to be looking at a 
further $10 million cut over the next two years. How do you see 
the universities handling that if there just isn’t any more to 
squeeze? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  They are, in my view, going to have to 
do two things. First of all, they are going to have to meet 
together and realize what savings and efficiencies they can 
realize from working more closely together. This will be 
achieved in my view in two ways: first of all administrative 
efficiencies by doing together some of the things they’re now 
doing separately and thereby do them more cheaply. And I think 
there’s . . . my understanding is there’s quite a long list of 
mostly administrative matters where that kind of cooperation 
can achieve some result. The second thing they can do together 
is some rationalization of their programs to try and ensure that 
they’re not needlessly duplicating each other’s programs and 
wasting resources as a result of that duplication. 
 
I don’t know what that will result in. There are factors to be 
considered in that debate that are just beyond the knowledge of 
government or ministers or this Assembly. That’s a matter for 
the . . . more for the people who are involved in the programs 
 the professors, the faculties, and the university 
administrations  to sort out how that kind of duplication can  



2470  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

be reduced or avoided. That’s the first point. That’s the 
cooperation between the two universities on those two fronts. 
 
The second is internal to each university. And I believe that 
what will have to happen will be inevitable; will be some 
rethinking of the programs that they offer to the students  
some cuts, some changes, some new programs. But I believe in 
the end there will be program cuts. It even may be the 
elimination of colleges. I don’t know. 
 
This is very much an internal matter within the universities, 
very much a matter for their own internal decision making. And 
we have to respect that process, although as the member will 
know, we are involved in the process through the presence of 
Mr. MacKay who is attempting to represent the public interest 
in the internal work of the universities. 
 
But I believe that at the end of the day there will be some rather 
significant changes to university programing as a result of the 
pressures that the member mentions. 
 
I just might add one thing. Tuition fees have been creeping up 
over the years. I ought to have included that in my first answer. 
And I believe that there will be some further increase like we 
saw at the University of Regina this year. That’s a complicated 
issue but it can’t be ignored. 
 
(1015) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You must have 
been reading my mind, because that’s exactly the next point that 
I wanted to raise. I’ve met with University of Regina Students 
Union and of course the University of Saskatchewan Students 
Union. And in each meeting I’ve heard from students that since 
1991-92, there have been significant increases in tuition at a 
time when universities were handling or were coping with the 
money that was granted to them, not the great, serious declines 
as we said  there was $10 million over the course of four or 
five years. 
 
You’ve indicated that tuitions are probably going to rise. But if 
we’re going to look at another $10 million cut over two years, if 
the universities aren’t going to really take a good, hard look at 
the program and achieve savings, if they’ve achieved all they 
can achieve in terms of the saving cuts, do you think that this is 
going to be passed on to the students in terms of a tuition fee 
increase that’s going to be substantial? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I believe there will be some tuition fee 
increase, but I don’t think it will be substantial. And I’ll tell you 
why I have arrived at that conclusion. They have to keep their 
tuition fee structure more or less in line with the universities in 
the prairie basin, maybe beyond that; but certainly within the 
prairie region they have to have an eye to the situation in other 
universities in Alberta and Manitoba. And they’re right up there 
now; they don’t have a lot of room to spare. 
 
So that’s why I arrive at the conclusion that they won’t be 
substantial. Although it is normal and natural that they would 
creep upwards, and I would expect that to happen. 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s the point 
that the students are making: like it’s a vicious circle that goes 
around and round if we indeed increase tuition fee beyond what 
is sort of a western Canadian average. And we now have 
students then that decide to select the universities in Alberta, 
the universities in Manitoba  not necessarily even just the 
universities but other programs  because they feel that the 
tuition of a university training in Saskatchewan is so high. 
 
Then they leave, and as a result, the class sizes are a little 
smaller and in the end there’s less money for the university to 
work. And the fact that the grant isn’t going to increase, then 
they increase it. 
 
That’s just a comment, that I’m glad that you’re recognizing 
that. And I think we have to pay very careful attention to what 
the universities decide to do with their tuition program. 
 
You mentioned the fact that currently your department has a 
special representative dealing with both universities in terms of 
trying to get a handle on revitalization, I think, was one of the 
key words that you used in the terms of reference. 
 
Looking at the terms of reference for the job that Mr. MacKay 
is doing, I notice that of course he’s to act as a catalyst and a 
facilitator. And then I also note that it says the universities will 
be invited to develop conceptual proposals. And you indicated 
in this House not too long ago of course, that the report that Mr. 
MacKay will eventually have before you, which will be 
sometime during the summer months, July or August probably, 
that this indeed will be made public and will be shared with the 
people involved. 
 
It also indicates in the terms of reference that he will work with 
the universities and offer advice and suggestions. And it says 
that he will . . . with a view to establishing the most desirable 
process to achieve university revitalization. 
 
When we take a look, and again we’re looking ahead through 
the crystal ball, when we take a look at that report and what it 
might contain  and I’m sure that you have had the discussions 
with Mr. MacKay and I think you have an idea of the ideas that 
the report will contain  what is your plan regarding how you 
will use the report, how it will plan the next X number of years 
for post-secondary training at the two universities? What is the 
game plan that you will put in place as far as using the report 
and its recommendations that it will contain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  My view of how this will develop is 
that it will be a long-term process rather than a short-term series 
of events; that when Harold MacKay reports to us, he will 
report on how the situation is developing, what the universities 
are working on, what sorts of changes they have in mind, what 
some of the options are, what he has contributed to that work in 
terms of the points of public interest that he has injected into 
the debate. He’s not deciding anything, but he is, in effect, our 
contact, our main contact, with this process in the universities, 
helping them to shape the process. 
 
I want to tell the member that I had a good glimpse of that  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

process just last week when I had dinner with the two university 
presidents and some of their senior people, and Harold 
MacKay. I watched, and to some extent participated in the 
discussion, and MacKay as a facilitator and as an inspirer, a 
catalyst for the conversation, was really something to see. 
 
He was directing their attention and encouraging their 
discussion with respect to a lot of very difficult issues. And that 
was a dinner midway between . . . in the middle of a two-day 
session that he had with those same people. And I think he’s 
playing his role exactly as it had been contemplated. 
 
Now that’s not going to result in any recommendations being 
made to us or any decisions being made of any substance, but 
rather more concerned with process and to ensure that this 
project is off to a good start and is on the right track from the 
point of view of the public interest. And I think then that his 
involvement won’t be necessary any longer and we can just 
leave it to the two universities to work it out. 
 
Now that’s not responsive to the member’s question in a full 
way, but I just can’t see the future clearly enough. It’s enough 
for me to know that the process is under way, that the 
universities in this province will be able to deliver a quality 
product at a cost that our taxpayers can afford. That’s the 
crucial thing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize that of 
course you can’t look ahead to what might be in terms of how 
the universities handle this. 
 
The fear that I had, Mr. Minister, of course is at the very 
beginning when the representative was selected, is that the 
universities seemed to withdraw within themselves for a brief 
period of time and there was strong criticism about, what are 
you looking for? We did our cuts. I think the president of the 
University of Saskatchewan said, we’d handled our cuts and I 
think we’ve cut $13 million from our budget over the last 
number of years. Are you saying that we didn’t do a good job as 
a university? 
 
And there was that fear, of course, that Mr. MacKay was going 
to come down I think with a heavy hand and say no, you didn’t 
do this right, you didn’t do this right, etc. I think . . . I mean the 
skills and abilities of Mr. MacKay are known and I think he’ll 
provide that. 
 
My fear of course, is that when the budget says that there must 
also be . . . at all post-secondary institutions there is a need to 
reduce for next year, there is a need to reduce duplication, there 
is a need to cut administration, there is a need to share more 
services — that is a directive that is already within the budget. 
 
And when the presidents of the universities, when Mr. MacKay 
look at this, and you’re saying that they’re not going to make 
recommendations, yet I wonder how they’re going to deal with 
this whole, global picture if they know that the funding is 
decreasing, if they know, on the other side, that there is a need 
to stay competitive. 
 
I’m hearing from the university professors, for instance, who  

are saying, we want to ensure that the quality of education 
provided by the two universities, which is renowned, remains 
that way  that we can attract the researchers, that we can 
attract the money that comes with research, that we can still be 
the competitive universities that we are without totally 
destroying programs and totally having an increase so large to 
tuitions that we drive away students, and then we become 
nothing. Then amalgamations . . . an amalgamation will have to 
take place or we’ll be closing one university totally and then 
moving to something like that. We can’t look ahead to that; I 
understand that. 
 
But my fear is that your department does this in such a fashion 
that we are able to control all parts of this post-secondary 
program, that we are able to look ahead and say okay, let’s not 
just deal with one very small part of it, and that’s maybe sharing 
of services at the universities, when the whole roof comes 
tumbling down. We’re going to worry about the foundation; in 
the meantime everything else is collapsing. 
 
I appreciate your comments as far as how we’re going to look at 
that and I look forward to the report in terms of being able to 
also contribute to that. Do you have any comments on that at 
the moment then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’d like to address one part of the 
member’s intervention, Mr. Chair. There was a sense of unease 
and withdrawal, particularly at the University of Saskatchewan, 
when they saw Harold’s terms of reference. And the immediate 
fear of some of them was that this was a pretty massive 
interference with the autonomy of universities with respect to 
academic matters. 
 
The way that we dealt with that is that MacKay and I appeared 
before the faculty in effect, the council that represents all 
faculty members. And we did that about two weeks ago at a 
meeting where there were probably 200 professors. And I said a 
few words and we answered questions. And you could feel the 
comfort level in the room rising, I think, as they understood that 
we understood the importance of the tradition of autonomy and 
independence at the universities, and that we were prepared to 
work within that reality, and that our participation was based 
upon the public interest in what is offered at the universities, 
and not upon any desire to control their programs or the kinds 
of offerings that they made to the student public. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. One final question on the 
universities. I note on page 105 of the Estimates book, under 
post-secondary, capital, if I compare the two years that you have 
listed in the two columns, the reduction in post-secondary 
capital is almost $5 million. It’s almost half the budget. 
 
How will the universities cope with this now that there is $5 
million missing from a capital budget that they’ve been 
accustomed to. What do you see in terms of things that may be 
put on hold, or do you see that there will be decisions made by 
the universities that will involve projects not going ahead at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, in effect 
what we have asked them to do is just put their major capital 
programs on hold for a year. They will have to do some  



2472  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

priorizing with respect to . . . as they do anyway  but they’ll 
have to sort out their priorities to see what work they can do in 
this fiscal year. But we’ve asked them to put their capital 
programs on hold for this year in light of our budgetary 
problems that we had for this year. 
 
But we didn’t take the money off the operating grants, and I 
think that was the right decision. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If we’re on hold for one year at 5 million, do 
you foresee that you’re back into a $10 million budget for next 
year and the year after? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Our plan is that normal funding for 
capital will resume in the next fiscal year. You know, but that’s 
the strongest base on which I can put it. That’s our plan. That’s 
our intention. And as I stand here, that’s how it is going to be, 
subject to how the process works. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that intention. Could we move 
to the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences, 
SIAST. 
 
Over the last three or four months, even prior to your budget, 
Mr. Minister, there was a lot of confusion, I think, and a lot of 
concern at the campuses, specially on the management side, 
regarding what the budget might contain, what the provincial 
budget might contain, what the federal budget might contain. 
We saw the lobby by students, in terms of program. 
 
(1030) 
 
And of course in meeting with Dr. Knight, as president of 
SIAST, he indicated to me before there was a decision made as 
far as funding, as far as . . . before the budget did come down, 
that there would be many lay-offs in terms of restructuring and 
program cuts. 
 
We’ve heard in the House many times ministers of your 
government indicate that all the federal funding has been 
back-filled. And yet I hear from the SIAST program that there 
might be as many as 70 jobs that will be cut this year. If the 
provincial government has back-filled and the grants to the 
SIAST programs are exactly the same as the year before, what 
is causing all this concern at SIAST in terms of lay-off and in 
terms of restructuring and fear for jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It is correct, as the member observed, 
that we back-filled behind the federal funding decisions, and 
that of course has been mentioned more than once in this 
House. More than once by me, as a matter of fact, in this 
House. And when SIAST began its planning it did not know 
that that was how it would come out. So they were planning for 
the worst. 
 
And I recall in the early days of this session the member from 
Rosthern had a document that Art Knight and his people . . . 
had been used for preliminary discussions on this, which was a 
pretty shocking document in terms of the changes that would 
have to take place. 
 

I think that that was what he had to do. I mean I think Art 
Knight is an excellent president and approached this in a very 
mature, very professional way. When it was announced and 
made known to him that the grant from the provincial 
government would remain constant, then he was able to change 
his planning and change his approach to what had to be done 
and when it had to be done. 
 
That wasn’t the end of the problem for him, as the member has 
observed. There was still a number of lay-offs that took place. 
And the reason for that is that the federal government, after the 
Prime Minister’s announcement last fall, just simply stopped a 
lot of their purchases of seats  and the member will know 
what that means; purchasing seats in SIAST  as well as their 
purchases with respect to a number of projects. An example of 
that, an example of that, is the bridging program for women that 
was being offered at various places. That just vanished and 
adjustments had to be made in light of that. 
 
In addition there were cost pressures as a result of the 
provisions in the collective agreements and in the normal 
course of events for cost inflation  let me use that term  
cost inflation that is . . . just normally happens. Things keep 
costing more. So he had to cope with that also and that resulted 
in the lay-offs that the member mentioned. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Will your department be involved with the 
SIAST administration in terms of how they will plan the 
restructuring and the delivery of programs? As you mentioned, 
the working document indicated that there would be complete 
elimination of programs from some campuses and centralized 
within another campus. There was talk of transferring of staff. 
Will your department be involved with Mr. Knight in terms of 
the long-term plan as to where we’re going to be delivering the 
proper courses that are required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
decisions that are going to have to be made at SIAST will be 
subject to a number of influences. The chief influence will be 
the developing Saskatchewan training strategy that I kicked off 
the other day with the document. Consultations with the people 
involved in the system have already begun, and we’re going to 
move that along as quickly as we can. But that ought to result in 
the articulation of a training strategy in the province that will be 
available for SIAST management to make a lot of the decisions 
it has to make about programing and the priorization of 
programing. So that’s one element of the piece. 
 
We have agreed with Dr. Knight and his people that they will 
proceed with the broadest possible consultation internally  by 
that, I mean with the faculty and the students  and externally 
with the groups that are directly affected by the training, either 
the employers or labour organizations or what have you. So 
that’s the second element of it. 
 
The third element is that the management of SIAST proposes 
the changes to the board of governors, the board of governors at 
SIAST. And they are responsible for the approval of the budget 
and of the changes, the plan; use whatever term you like. But I 
think we have a common understanding of what that will be, at 
least the kind of document that will be approved. 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

It will have within it the changes and the resulting programing 
and any transfers and movements that take place and the budget 
that will go along with that. So call that package what you like; 
it is subject to consideration and approval by the board of 
governors, and then it comes to the minister for final 
consideration and approval. And as I understand the Act, I have 
a significant say in how that will finally play out. All of those 
things are part of this whole piece. 
 
What I would like to see, and I’ll conclude my response on this 
note, what I would like to see is a plan by SIAST and an 
approach by SIAST that is tailored to and responsive to the 
reality of the Saskatchewan labour market  the needs of our 
economy, the needs of the employers in the economy, and the 
needs of our people. And that’s what the training strategy is all 
about and that’s how SIAST programing should be designed. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’ve heard you 
indicate in this House and I think you’ve done this publicly, 
regarding the approach that Saskatchewan must undertake. We 
know that the changes are occurring in terms of how training is 
going to be funded. Whether the funding is coming from the 
federal government or whether the funding is coming from the 
provincial government, that will change. 
 
And I’ve had a chance to take a look at your document 
regarding the choices for a Saskatchewan strategy. And I think 
the basis is there for, I think developing a new approach as to 
how the strategy will be planned for all of Saskatchewan for the 
year 2000 and beyond. 
 
I note that you’ve paid a lot of attention to the fact that training 
and employment in the end must be together, hand to hand. 
Because if they’re not, what’s the point of training people if 
there isn’t a job market? And I think we have to look at that. 
 
And I know in terms of the discussions with SIAST people, is 
some of the programs of course they’re very concerned about. 
There’s 100 per cent employment from a particular program 
class that’s offered and yet there seems to be . . . in the draft 
stages there was a proposal that that program would be reduced 
in terms of the number of graduates that would actually come 
out of that program. And people found that very hard to 
comprehend, the fact that you would have a hundred per cent 
employment and you’d be cutting back. 
 
We know of businesses . . . many of my colleagues on this side 
of the House have businesses within their constituencies that 
have indicated that they don’t have adequately trained, skilled 
people in the areas that they need as we’re moving into . . . 
highly skilled machinists that are required in many of the shops. 
 
So the document is a starting point. And I wonder, what is the 
plan that you see in terms of how you will use the document? 
What will you do with the input that you receive in terms of 
planning the strategy for the next millennium? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the member has raised some 
very important questions, and indeed those questions are the 
reason for the approach that we’re taking. That approach 
involves the development through consultation of a  

Saskatchewan training strategy which we will have for the first 
time. 
 
As I mentioned in the budget debate, our approach to training 
heretofore for the last probably 35 years has been to take 
advantage of any federal training program, and take full 
advantage of it by implementing it here and then supplementing 
around the federal program. And we did that apparently without 
any regard to the Saskatchewan priorities, the labour market 
here, the demand for that kind of skill. 
 
Well we want to change all that. In the meantime we’re very 
conscious that there are situations, such as the member 
mentions, where you’d wonder whether anybody’s looking at 
the labour market to see what is the relevance of the training 
program being offered. And even worse is the situation where 
the member mentions, where everybody that graduates is being 
employed, and yet there are rumours of that program being cut 
back. 
 
The idea of the strategy and the point that’s coming up again 
and again in the consultations is that the institutions have to be 
very sensitive to what is the labour market. And if there is, as 
the member says, 100 per cent employment from a particular 
skill that’s being taught, a particular class or particular program, 
then don’t mess with that. Think in terms of improving it or 
increasing it, expanding it rather than contracting it. 
 
The idea of the strategy is to help the institutes direct their 
minds to those questions and to make an assessment based upon 
the needs of the Saskatchewan labour market and Saskatchewan 
citizens. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
recently there was an announcement, of course, of the 
additional $50 million of federal money coming towards the 
federated colleges, the Indian federated colleges. I understand 
that about 2,600 students receive training through those two 
institutions. 
 
With this extra money that has arrived on the scene, will there 
be some changes in terms of some of the programs that can now 
be offered there, whereby maybe students had been involved 
previously through other campuses within the SIAST system? 
Do you see this . . . how do you see the program developing to 
accommodate this additional $50 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The federal announcement of last 
Friday was not an announcement of new money, new training 
money, but was a commitment to continue the funding that had 
been previously there under the pathways program. And that 
commitment now is extended for the next three years. 
 
The pathways program is quite complex. Some of the training 
that they arrange is delivered through aboriginal institutions like 
the technical colleges for the Indians, SIIT (Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies) and the Metis technical 
institute. And then some of the training is delivered outside of 
those institutes, arranged by the tribal councils. It’s quite a  



2474  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

flexible, wide-ranging program. But it is just a continuation of 
the existing pathways expenditures, and the commitment is over 
the next three years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  By that comment, I take it that it doesn’t enter 
into plans of this budget at all. Okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I could just move to sort of one other area that’s 
involved in post-secondary, and that’s the regional colleges. 
And we don’t hear a lot about those particular programs and the 
colleges themselves in the news. They don’t make a lot of 
waves, and they don’t make a lot of news, yet they do a lot of 
great things out there. 
 
We note of course that over the last number of years there has 
been a decrease in the funding to regional colleges, and regional 
colleges are coping like any other institution with those funding 
decreases. 
 
My question I guess would be, is, what effect has the cuts that 
have been made thus far, what effect has there been on program 
delivery out there in rural Saskatchewan? Regional colleges, 
programs that are offered are needed throughout Saskatchewan, 
and I’ve had a chance to meet with some of the board of 
directors of the various different colleges. And there is a lot of 
concern out there that they just may not be able to offer the 
quality of program that they have been offering. 
 
What are your comments there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I’m glad that the question 
has been raised because I want to say something about it. In my 
view, the position of the regional colleges in the delivery 
system of training in the province is a very, very important role. 
I believe that the more training we can deliver in the regions the 
better. I think that in the modern world, with the technology 
that’s available to us, that a very high product can be delivered 
through the regional colleges. And my vision of this includes 
regional colleges playing an increasingly larger role in the 
delivery of training. 
 
The member is correct that budgetary pressures have affected 
the regional colleges’ ability to function, and they’ve done a 
number of things. They’ve reduced some of their locations, 
thereby reduced some of their expenditures. They’re very 
flexible, as the member will know. They’re not bound by bricks 
and mortar and the necessity to maintain buildings and all the 
expenditures that go with that. If it becomes necessary for them 
to make a move, they can make it quickly. They can mount a 
program in a couple of weeks and deliver it in the back of an 
old, abandoned store if they have to. They are quite remarkable. 
 
They’re also remarkable because they’re out there looking for 
alternative ways of making their colleges work. Even in a tough 
funding situation, they’re around looking for partners and 
looking for opportunities to provide training to the people in 
their region that is relevant to their region. And an example 
which was just given to me by one of my officials, that the 
Estevan Energy Institute is an excellent example where the 
industry has committed to a training program in cooperation 
with the regional colleges. 

They are very concerned at the moment about the impact of the 
unemployment insurance changes to some of their core 
programs — best example is the adult basic education program, 
which depended upon the Unemployment Insurance 
Commission funding for a lot of the costs of that program. And 
they are very concerned about how the changes that are going to 
take place over the next three years will impact on them. 
 
Their involvement in skills training is similarly going to be 
affected. And at the same time you have what I think is a 
consensus that there ought to be more and more training 
delivered at the regional level. So we have to square the circles, 
and that is a major subject in the training strategy. That’s a 
major problem to be confronted and resolved, namely the 
delivery of training and especially the delivery of training to the 
regions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for those comments, Mr. Minister. 
As I’ve indicated to you before in discussions that you and I 
have had, I think we have to look at this globally. We can’t just 
isolate the universities, we can’t isolate SIAST, and we can’t 
isolate the regional colleges. What we have in Saskatchewan, 
we have a million people and we have to provide training in all 
parts of the province to different people. 
 
Not everyone’s going to attend university; not everyone’s going 
to be at SIAST, but yet a post-secondary education is so vital to 
today’s society. And I think, let’s make sure that all parts are 
within. If you look at it as a wheel and they’re the spokes that 
feed the highly trained, highly skilled person in the middle, we 
have to make sure that all the parts are working together. And I 
appreciate your comments about the regional system. 
 
But I might just turn to another point, around the student aid 
fund. I know you have your assistants here to provide some 
answers within that area. Within the budget I note that you have 
reduced assistance in the Saskatchewan student aid fund by 
about $6.5 million, and in March you announced a program 
with the Royal Bank. 
 
First of all, 6.5 million, a lot of money. Where did it come from 
in terms of . . . or where did it go in terms of the fact that you 
were able to reduce that much money from a budget, since you 
seem to indicate in your report that the amount of student loan 
that will be available is still going to be the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The $6.5 million that the member 
mentions is consequential to the arrangements with the Royal 
Bank. In years past we’ve had to set up a budgetary reserve 
against uncollectible loans. And as the Royal Bank enters the 
fray here . . . not the fray but the process of loaning money, 
they’re taking the risk and we’re relieved from the risk, and the 
savings for this fiscal year will be 6.5 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The first look at it by students of course, has 
caused quite a bit of concern out there. And I note that in the 
changes that you summarize in terms of your document back in 
March, when we talk about the loan negotiation, you’ve 
indicated of course, that the old program was that the student 
negotiated the loan with the province and you received approval 
from the province based on the guidelines. The  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

guidelines have changed slightly but nothing significant in 
terms of whether or not a student will be eligible, and now the 
student will negotiate the provincial loan with the Royal Bank. 
And people have looked at that and saying now, that the need is 
to establish a credit rating with the Royal Bank. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I know that there’s some confusion 
about that and I’m glad we have the opportunity to discuss it on 
the public record here. The student applications will still come 
to us, the department, and we will approve them according to 
the criteria, and we will issue a certificate that we’ve approved 
them and the Royal Bank then must make the loan. And there is 
no question, so far as the bank is concerned, about credit rating 
and they just simply make the loan and there is no discretion 
about that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I appreciate your comment when you said, 
must make the loan. When I look at the interest rate though, 
there is a flexibility there within each bank, as I see it, with each 
individual student, when it says that the rate will float and it 
will be prime plus a maximum of 2.5 per cent. 
 
Now if I’m a student who, maybe not first year out of school 
but maybe three or four years down the road, and as a 
16-year-old I did borrow that $1,000 for an old beater and the 
beater quit and as a result there is a delinquency in terms of 
payments with Royal Bank, now I’m still maintaining that loan 
but of course there isn’t a good relationship any more between 
the bank manager and this individual student. 
 
Am I now going to be at the 2.5 per cent because there is that 
little bit of risk that the bank manager sees? Or am I going to 
have a better interest rate as determined? Like the flexibility 
seems to be now in the control of the manager, rather than 
government saying no, it’s this much or it’s that much. Your 
comments, please. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that’s been handled in a 
satisfactory way. I just note in passing that we had a lot of 
student involvement in the shaping up of this program, and they 
participated in the announcement and told the press, I think, 
that they were very positive about it. 
 
The interest rate situation is as follows. If you’re a student that 
has been accessing the loans and they’ve been done through the 
Royal Bank under this agreement, at the end of your training 
you have a choice. You can choose either to go with a fixed rate 
of interest, or you can choose a variable rate of interest. If you 
choose the fixed rate of interest, then the rate will be prime at 
the time of selection plus 5 per cent. If you choose a variable 
rate, then your interest rate will be prime plus two and a half per 
cent, and the amount of that will vary as does the prime rate. 
 
Also there is this option available to you as a student; you can 
change from one to the other during the life of the repayment, 
so you have that flexibility too  not bad. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The flexibilities that you describe, Mr. 
Minister, are great. However the word still in there is maximum  

of 2.5 per cent, maximum of 5 per cent. Now does that mean 
that it’s zero to 5 per cent because the interpretation by students 
is that maximum says that he can’t charge me more than 5 per 
cent and prime. 
 
The other point that I would want to make, Mr. Minister, is at 
this moment in Canada and of course in the province of 
Saskatchewan, our prime rates are relatively low. I mean we’re 
of course very fearful of what may happen in the future as to 
what happened previously when we jumped to the 16 and the 
18 per cent prime rates. If we have 16 or 17 per cent prime rate 
and we have an additional 5 per cent added on to that as a 
handling charge by the interest rate, we’re now talking 20 per 
cent interest rates. That’s going to cause major problems for 
students. And I wonder if you’ve taken a look at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’ve just sort of reviewed the landscape 
here with my officials, and I want to offer this answer. The 
student under this program is in at least as good a position and, 
I think in all fairness, in a better position than under the old 
program. 
 
Under the old programs on the interest rate toboggan ride that 
the member referred to which took place back in the late ’70s, 
early ‘80s, the rates charged from the fund would vary with that 
toboggan ride too, and when the interest rates went to 16 per 
cent, the rates in the student fund would go up also. So the 
student was always having to cope with these difficulties or 
these changes, these volatile changes, to the interest rate at a 
time when the interest rates were volatile. Hopefully we don’t 
have that any more. But we think that the students here will be 
in the no worse position and probably in a better position than 
they were before. 
 
I want to address one other question that the member has 
touched on. These are maximum rates, the ones I put forward. 
A student has the ability go into the Royal Bank and negotiate a 
lower rate if the student can meet the bank’s criteria. And what 
we’re doing here is providing that this will be the rate that 
applies to everybody. Nobody will have to pay more than this. 
But if you’re able to make a better deal with the bank, just go 
for it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  So my analogy of a few minutes ago, if I have 
poor working relationship with my bank manager, I’m on the 
hook for the 5 per cent. I guess the criteria . . . the students 
would have to understand what the criteria is first. 
 
I have a number of questions, Mr. Minister, and I think in the 
. . . with the clock as it is, I would appreciate if your official 
could provide to me an explanation about whether or not the 
interest, program in terms of the subsidy that the government 
provides to the interest monies, whether they’re the 
responsibilities of the student. Have there been any changes in 
that area? If I could have a package of information about the 
student loan program because, the calls that I’m receiving, I 
want to provide accurate information. 
 
And the moment, I’m working off the very simplified sheets, 
and my interpretation of maximum of 5 per cent I see now was 
correct, but I would like to have those kinds of responses. The  



2476  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

information, all information regarding the interest rates, how 
much of it is subsidized, when the student loan kicks into force, 
all those things  if I could have them in a package provided to 
me sometime in the short future, I’d appreciate that. And if you 
could assure me that that would take place then, I would stop 
my questioning the regarding the student assistance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, Mr. Chair, we’ll be glad to provide 
that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, could we 
change now to New Careers please. I note that New Careers 
Corporation within the budget has had a significant increase in 
funding. I see that the budget has indicated that the New 
Careers Corporation monies will rise from 9.5 million to 12.3 
million, a substantial increase when we look at percentage and 
the changes. I’m wondering, the fact that this additional money 
is now within the corporation, what changes have taken place 
within the corporation to provide additional programs, 
additional seats? What has developed regarding this new 
monies? 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Requesting leave, to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair:  Does the member have leave to introduce 
guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much. I thank the member 
opposite for the opportunity to provide leave so that I might 
introduce guests this afternoon . . . or this morning. Seated in 
the east gallery, Mr. Chairman, are 35 grade 4 students who are 
here from my constituency of Yorkton from Columbia School. 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Miss Lorna Exner and 
Miss Luba Lubenko. And also their chaperons today are Donna 
Domres and Tammy Austman. 
 
So I want to take a moment here today to ask all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to join with me in welcoming the 35 
students from the Columbia School to the Assembly. They’re 
going to be here also visiting and touring other facilities here in 
the community. So I want to ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming all the students that are here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the member has a sharp eye, 
and I want to sharpen his view on this question. It’s necessary 

to have the budget estimates to follow the answer. But on page 
105, which is the page that the member is on, it would appear 
that there is a $3 million increase in funding to New Careers. 
 
But that’s not so because you then have to go to page 122 in the 
Social Services budget, and you will see that the amount of 
money paid to the New Careers Corporation for the training and 
employment of social assistance recipients has been reduced 
from 9 million to 6 million. I speak in round numbers. The total 
then that New Careers has at its disposal through these two 
budgetary items is the same this year as it was last year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, I guess the question that needs 
to be asked, of course, is why did this occur? Have there been a 
reallocation in terms of priorities from Social Services over to 
New Careers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The reallocation of the funding follows 
an extensive period of discussion between officials from the 
two departments in trying to line these things up in a way that 
more accurately reflects what happens, and where the money 
should be located for what happens. What part of it is more 
properly reflected in the budget of the Post-Secondary 
Education department as a service delivery from that 
department? And what part of it represents a payment on behalf 
of the social assistance system that is not included in the idea of 
the training that’s being delivered from the Post-Secondary 
department? 
 
Now I’m not certain that I understand fully what I’ve just said. I 
have to be frank about that because this is a matter for technical 
experts, and they’re trying make better sense of these numbers 
so that the information is presented in a more sensible way. And 
my understanding is that the process is not complete. The 
development of these approaches is still ongoing and dynamic, 
and I think we will likely see further changes in the future . . . 
but certainly reflects more emphasis upon training and 
employment then upon simply support for the individual. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I’m not sure I understand it either, Mr. 
Minister, so therefore when I look at the training  okay?  if 
Social Services was providing funding for training and now 
New Careers has the money within their line, will there be a 
continuation of the training? And in fact will now New Careers 
. . . if I look at the number of people that were involved in 
training programs . . . because now you have that additional $3 
million from Social Services, will in fact there be more people 
trained through the New Careers? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’ll try and respond to the member’s 
question as best that I can in a developing situation. 
 
In this fiscal year the amount of training is likely to be about the 
same. The dollar allocation will more closely reflect the reality 
of what’s happening. But there won’t be any dramatic increase 
in the training that is delivered here. The member will know 
that the bulk of New Career activity concerns work experience 
training  training by work experience and training by some 
other kinds of programs and seat purchases that New  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

Careers participates in. 
 
But the short answer to the member’s question is that the 
amount of training involved here is likely to be the same. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, I’ve heard from people 
involved in New Careers of course that there is a way . . . that 
they’re looking at ways of delivering the programs better. 
Policies are being developed. And I guess the question that begs 
itself of course is, has there been a look at New Careers in terms 
of expanding it, in terms of eliminating it, in terms of moving it 
over to another area? When we see the funding change of 
Social Services money moving into New Careers, we look 
ahead . . . my colleague has indicated that, you know, the Social 
Services department is looking at a new way of delivering 
program, and they’re talking about training. 
 
What is the plan for New Careers, I guess is the simple 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The questions that the member refers to 
are being considered in the government as we speak. I mean 
they’re just going on all the time. We’ve got, as the member has 
observed, a major concept in the social service programing to 
move people off dependency into the workforce, and obviously 
that involves training, upgrading skills. And obviously that 
involves programs like New Careers. So if we’re going to 
expand that programing, then we’re going to have to expand the 
New Careers programing. But at the same time, is that the most 
effective way of making this happen? 
 
Those questions have been debated within government and I 
believe continue to be debated at the officials’ level to find the 
most effective way of moving people from dependency to 
independence so that those consultations are going on. Those 
discussions are going on within government all the time these 
days, have been for some time, will for some time. 
 
In addition we’ve raised these questions in the strategy paper, in 
the consultation paper for public discussion, and a lot of that 
will take place in the next while. So as I mentioned earlier, what 
we have here is a very dynamic situation, a situation that is in 
transition from something to something with the idea of 
arriving at the most effective way in which we can to assist 
social assistance recipients and getting them into the workforce. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The most effective way though . . . you’re not 
sure whether that involves the maintaining of a New Careers 
Corporation or whether it involves amalgamating it within 
another department or whether it involves completely removing 
it. As you’re saying, I guess that those discussions are ongoing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I think all those questions are 
open, We, each of us, may have our views as to which is the 
most likely, but those questions are all open and are being 
discussed. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Two shorter-type questions requiring I think 
shorter-type answers. Who is the CEO of New Careers 
Corporation, and what is the relationship between yourself and 
that person? And secondly, one of the programs that you have  

is called CEP, I think it’s called community employment 
program. Could you tell me a little bit about what CEP is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the chief executive officer of 
the New Careers Corporation and the president is Merran 
Proctor, who is seated on my right as we speak. The chair of the 
board of the New Careers Corporation is my deputy minister, 
Dan Perrins, who is seated on my left. 
 
In the ordinary course of operations, Ms. Proctor reports to Mr. 
Perrins as the chair of the board. And as you would expect, he 
reports to me in all his capacities. And on any issues that 
involve the New Careers Corporation, they would both 
normally be present at meetings with me in order to discuss 
those issues. 
 
The community employment program, as the member knows 
this is a grant program that is available for NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations) and for businesses. The idea 
behind the grant is to fund training programs of 20 weeks . . . I 
think is the period of the program. And the target for the 
program is to service approximately 1,300 clients. 
 
The success rate in that program is, I think, quite good. The 
people who have gone through it are successful in getting 
employment, either with that employer or someone else, at the 
rate of between 55 and 60 per cent, which is not bad. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  A couple of questions then about CEP. The 
clients that you talk about, are the majority of them coming 
from a welfare roll? First question. 
 
Secondly, if they’re completing the 20-week training program, 
what happens to those  I guess it would be about 40 or 45 per 
cent  that didn’t obtain employment with that employer? Do 
they go back to the welfare roll? What happens to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The clients under the community 
employment program are all welfare recipients. Mr. Chair, I 
want to be sure that the member hears that the program applies 
to all welfare recipients. For those that, as the member says, 
don’t get jobs  the 40 to 45 per cent that don’t get jobs 
immediately  they go different routes. We do try to keep them 
from falling back onto the welfare rolls, recognizing the 
initiative that they’ve taken in becoming involved in the 
program in the first place. 
 
Some of them are able, through their unemployment insurance 
eligibility, to enter training programs of different sorts using 
their experience as the background. Some of them come back to 
New Careers for other opportunities and are moved into other 
situations that are part of the New Careers programing. Others 
are sponsored for further education. But we do try not to let 
them simply drop back into the welfare rolls. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
want to raise a couple more issues on New Careers, and this is 
an issue that I’ve discussed with you, and I want to have it on 
public record. 
 
I brought to your attention whereby a manager of a cooperative  



2478  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

at Leslie Beach, Miss Jacquie Klebeck, as one of my 
constituents, has brought to my attention a problem as she sees 
with New Careers. And this involves the fact that last year, 
through New Careers, there was a person that was hired at the 
resort, at the beach, to be on a program whereby she spent a lot 
of time training the person, ensuring that the person’s not only 
job skills but people skills improved. And of course by the end 
of the program, she was very pleased with the individual that 
she had. 
 
When they looked at the program again this year, the same 
person was eligible through New Careers to be placed, but 
when she found out that the person who had . . . because the 
person had worked for her last year at that particular job, he 
was no longer eligible to be an employee. 
 
She felt that another year of training for this program in that job 
would have enabled him to go out there  because not just the 
physical skills required but because of the people skills  that 
this person would have been able to then stand a great chance in 
being employed out there, outside of the New Careers program. 
 
And you’ve indicated to me that there’s been a regulation 
change that now has put this in place. The employer then who is 
looking at this, I think, is undergoing a lot of extra costs 
because she spends a lot of time with a first-time employee, 
helping them, making sure that they’re supervised. And it’s a 
long process until you can remove total supervision from a new 
person. 
 
She’s back into that very scenario again. Now it’s a new person 
that is being trained whereas this other person was still 
available. Now of course if the person is moved on to a job, 
that’s great. That’s what New Careers is for. But I’m wondering 
whether or not your department is looking at considering 
removing that restriction on an employer year to year. 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I recall 
this point being raised a couple of times in conversation with 
the member, and I thought and I do think that the member has 
raised a very significant point. Personally I agree with it. 
 
I’ve directed that the department and the corporation make 
whatever changes are necessary in order to eliminate this 
limitation in the program and make it more flexible. And my 
understanding is that that change is in the works and that it will 
be eliminated, and it won’t be a problem in future years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, and again I think my constituents 
will be very happy to hear that. 
 
One final comment, Mr. Minister. As I’ve indicated in the other 
departments, I have a number of concerns around New Careers 
in terms of some of the problems that have been raised. But 
rather than deal with them here, I would appreciate if I could 
have the cooperation of your officials some day, with the fact 
that I would supply first of all a written request regarding some 
questions and comments. And if I could have that meeting 
sometime in the future whereby I could deal with some of these  

concerns, I would stop my questioning and proceed in that 
fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, we will provide that written 
material, and we’d be glad to . . . the officials will be glad to sit 
down with the member and discuss this whole area of 
programing and indeed any of the programs of the department. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  With that, Mr. Minister, I know the third 
party may have some questions. And I would like to thank all 
the officials that have been here. I tried to involve all of you, 
but maybe I missed out on a couple, and I’m sorry. So next year 
I’ll make sure that I involve all of you. Thank you for your 
comments, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and welcome to the minister and 
to his officials on this particular topic, subject area. 
 
With the changes that have happened in education and the 
dividing of the departments into two ministries, my first 
question sort of follows through on that, and that is what 
particular programs and services does your department control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We are responsible for the programs 
involving the universities, SIAST, the regional colleges, New 
Careers, as we’ve just been discussing with the previous 
member, the training program, the training strategy, training 
questions, private vocational schools, apprenticeship, labour 
market planning, student loans. Those are the ones that occur to 
me and are being whispered to me as I stand here. 
 
I’ve just been . . . Another added to the list is VRDP (vocational 
rehabilitation for disabled persons program), the disabled 
persons. And finally SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications 
Network. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Under that listing that you gave, I 
wonder if you could give a little bit of an elaboration on the 
term that you used  private vocational schools. What sorts of 
schools would be in that particular category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are 31 such institutions that have 
been approved. These are privately owned training institutions 
that deliver training programs that have been approved by the 
department . . . cover a broad range of matters. That’s the 
answer. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Following through a bit more on those 
private vocational schools, what types of controls does your 
department have over them? I think you mentioned something 
about curriculum. Is that the only part that is covered in that? 
Anything to do with staffing or quality of staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The degree of the involvement with the 
private vocational schools is really quite extensive following 
the passing of the Act in 1995. There was a consultative process 
that took place after that that went on for some time and was 
very detailed. And out of that process came regulations which 
do provide a range of matters that are considered by the 
department on their way to the registration of a private 
vocational school. 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

That includes a business plan, promotional material, a 
graduation certificate, student contract, instructor approval; 
curriculum  as the member had suggested  the schedule of 
fees for instructions and supplies, and the registration fees, and 
matters like that. So there’s a good deal of department 
involvement in the programs being offered. And as I said 
earlier, 31 have been approved to this point. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. What boards and agencies does 
your department have the power to appoint? And I guess the 
other two questions that follow through with that one is what is 
the process for the appointments and the length of time or term 
for those appointments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Sorry, Mr. Chair, and to the member, 
that it took some time to get all the details that the member 
asked for. The boards that are in place are the boards of the two 
universities  the board of governors there  the board at 
SIAST, the boards at the regional colleges, the Provincial 
Apprenticeship Board, and 40 trade advisory boards with 
respect to the apprenticeship program. My understanding is, 
that in the case of all of these boards, the appointments are 
made for three-year terms. 
 
Now some words about the process. Let me start with the 
Apprenticeship Board and the trade advisory boards. The 
process there is that there is consultation by the department with 
industry. And when I use the term industry as the 
apprenticeship people use it, I’m including both the employers 
and the employees. And that consultation is directed at finding 
credible representatives to serve either on the Provincial 
Apprenticeship Board or on the trade advisory boards, and in 
reality is pressing competent people to devote their time and 
energy to the work of such a board. 
 
And then as a result of that consultative process, nominations 
are made by the industry to the government, and the 
appointment is by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Now with respect to the universities, there is no formal process. 
The appointments are made on the recommendation of the 
minister by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. The board 
structure is set out in the Act, and various of the board members 
are appointed by organizations outside the government like the 
university senate and the students and that sort of thing. They 
put their own members on the board. We appointment them 
pursuant to those nominations. 
 
(1145) 
 
In addition we appoint a number of members. In doing that we 
try to do a number of things. We try to reflect a good balance as 
far as gender is concerned. We try to ensure some aboriginal 
representation. We try to take geography into account. And we 
try to ensure that there is a mix of skills on the board so that you 
may have one person who is good at balance sheet and 
accounting problems, and another has a legal background 
perhaps or a farming background or an active business 
background or that sort of thing. You try and get a good mix of 
perspectives. And it’s very difficult to do that, but that’s what 
we have in mind as we’re going about selecting board  

members. 
 
The same thing applies to SIAST, except the SIAST board is 
entirely appointed, on the recommendation by the minister, by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. And on the SIAST board 
we pay a lot of attention to regional representation and a lot of 
attention to the bringing together of different perspectives. So 
that at a board meeting they will be able to discuss a broad 
range of issues intelligently because there’ll be somebody on 
the board that knows a fair bit about the subject. 
 
With respect to the regional colleges, the emphasis on the 
regional colleges is to ensure that different parts of the region 
are represented. I don’t think I could add anything to that. The 
emphasis there is on geographical representation within the 
region. The emphasis is also upon people who are interested in 
what a regional college does. And we try to ensure that there is 
energy and enthusiasm within the board by appointing to the 
board people who have got a fire in their belly with respect to 
the question of delivering training at the regional level. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. What agencies outside of your 
department does your department influence and fund? And I 
guess universities and technical schools would be obvious 
examples. Are there any others you could list that your 
department either influences or funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we provide funds to the 
SCN. Of course New Careers is funded. We fund the Wascana 
Centre Authority and we provide some funds to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. I think that’s the full list in response to the 
question raised by the minister. . . or by the member. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Question: how many officials 
does your department employ, and how many of those were 
seconded from the Department of Education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is not simple. We have 213 
full-time equivalents; 40 per cent of those . . . pardon me, stop. 
Let me start over again. We have 213 full-time equivalents; 70 
of those are shared with the Department of Education; 40 per 
cent of those 70 are included in our 213. So when I say we have 
213 full-time equivalents, that includes our share of the 
shared-services people  our share of the 70 people who are 
working in the shared-services area. The total is 213. 
 
We have none seconded from the Department of Education. I 
think that was the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I notice that your accommodation 
and central services budget will be going from 1.39 million this 
year to 1.427 million the next year. Is this difference only 
because your department has not been operating a full year? Or 
are you going to be spending more money on those particular 
services from that section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The period we’re talking about is the 
full 12-month period, and the difference is because of the 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
change in rental rates. 
 



2480  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Moving into the JobStart and 
Future Skills areas. If you could update the House on the 
progress of JobStart and the Future Skills programs, and 
looking particularly at outlining each of these programs, 
provisions and goals that are allotted to each program, and the 
funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The JobStart and Future Skills programs 
were remarkably successful on a number of counts and were 
immensely popular with the employer and employee 
communities. They have been combined this year into a 
combined program, which is logical because they both had the 
same goals. It was a question of one was directed towards youth 
and the other to the broader population. So they’re pulled 
together. 
 
I have numbers showing the situation as of May 27, which is 
two weeks ago. Over 2,775 training positions were approved 
during that period, and that includes over 2,000 Future Skills 
positions and about 600 JobStart positions. The 43 per cent of 
that total involved young people between the ages of 17 and 25. 
About 16 per cent were of aboriginal ancestry and about 10 per 
cent were on social assistance. 
 
The funding is complex because it derives from different 
sources. There is the grant that appears in the budget material. 
There is also the agreement that we made with the federal 
government earlier this year, the so-called strategic initiatives, 
which provides a variety of programing that is directed at the 
Future Skill-JobStart objectives. So we’re in full blast again, or 
still, with respect to that initiative. 
 
We’ve learned a great deal from this program about the 
relationship between this kind of training and its work-based 
nature and the involvement of the employer community in the 
dynamics of the program. It’s been a very, very valuable 
experience and taught us a lot that is relevant for the future. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for a 
comprehensive answer on a rather complex question. And I 
think as we look at that whole area the two kinds of things that 
come into focus on that is obviously the number of dollars that 
go into it, and we’ve talked about that to some extent. We have 
discussed the purpose of it, and I guess the next question is the 
results. And I guess the question then is: how many jobs have 
been created as a direct result of those programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the intent 
of the program is not to create jobs but to train people for jobs 
that are there. And that’s why you have so much employer 
involvement in this program. So when I say 2,775, as I did a 
few moments ago, those are the number of actual working 
positions in respect to which training is a major component. 
And we are involved through the Future Skills-JobStart 
program in providing that training. So that’s the answer to that 
part of the member’s question. We’re not creating jobs so much 
as training for real jobs that are there. 
 
And we’re quite satisfied about this because about 80 per cent  

of the people who have been trained pursuant to this program 
are still there, working at those jobs for which they’ve been 
trained. 
 
I had the experience just a couple of weeks ago of giving some 
profile to this program with an announcement at Freightliner in 
Regina. And they took me on a tour of the operation afterwards, 
and the tour involved employees who were in the program 
actually learning how to apply the very latest technology to the 
repair and maintenance of big truck units, tractor units. And it 
was most impressive. Those kids are really getting a very high 
level of training program, and it’s an example of which I think 
we can all be quite proud of, quite satisfied with. It’s injected a 
lot of energy into the employer community and into the 
employees that come in contact with it. And it’s really 
gratifying to see some of these situations in action. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I agree. It’s 
gratifying to see that when there’s a program in place, that 
people are . . . actually find work and filling jobs for which 
those programs are put in place. 
 
And as we just finished talking a minute ago about the purpose 
of the program and the funding that goes into the program, you 
answered the question on how successful it was. I guess we 
need to take one step further back and look at one other 
component to see how well and how carefully these dollars are 
all spent. And it may be a fairly difficult question to answer, but 
I think it’s very critical if we’re going to look at the best use of 
those particular dollars. And that is: how many people receive 
training they would not have otherwise received? I know it’s a 
tough one to come up with, but I think it’s very critical to know 
whether the dollars are spent exactly where they’re necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the member properly 
characterizes his question as being difficult to answer. But 
having said that, let me take a crack at it. 
 
What this program has done is provide the opportunity to have 
entry positions at different plants available to people who are 
not employed and, if it weren’t for this program, likely 
wouldn’t get those jobs. 
 
Take, for example, the Freightliner experience of a couple of 
weeks ago. They are servicing big, expensive units for 
themselves and for other companies. And the people who are 
doing this service work require a high level of skill and a lot of 
training. The company, Freightliner, would normally be looking 
for people who could come to work and do the job. They are 
skilled. If they couldn’t find them here, they would go to 
Alberta or Manitoba or somewhere and try and bring them in. 
They may even have to reach farther afield than that. 
 
This program gave them the incentive, made it worth their 
while, to hire locally people who are not employed, who didn’t 
have the skill but who the employer judged had the aptitude to 
be able to master the skills. And those ideas all married, and 
they hired people locally. These are kids from Moose Jaw and 
Saskatoon and Regina, and in the rural areas surrounding 
Regina. 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

Seventy per cent of the people who are on the program, of that 
2,700 number that I mentioned earlier, have grade 12 or less. 
And they are not in or were not in the training system. They 
were looking for a job, but they were looking for it without any 
specific training. And that’s a pretty tough market to break into. 
 
This program has created a situation where they’re getting 
hired. And even though they don’t have the skills, the employer 
judges that they would be appropriate and would be able to 
learn the skills. And the program provides the incentive to hire 
them and provide the training and give them a job. 
 
That, I think, is a useful program. I am pleased with it. I can’t 
take any credit for initiating it but I am very pleased that it’s 
there, and I like it and I encourage it. I think that’s as responsive 
to the member’s question as I can be at the moment. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And I think I’d underline the 
support for  especially one part that you mention  that quite 
a number of the people finding employment are grade 12 or 
less. And I think that’s always a critical area, to find good job 
opportunities for these individuals, and I think that’s to be 
recommended. 
 
Sort of a follow-up question in that similar direction, and that 
deals with the ability for some of these individuals to possibly 
find or fund those particular costs of education on their own. 
And the question then is, what systems do you have to ensure 
that people are not using these grants to underwrite education 
costs they might be able to manage on their own? Is there some 
sort of means testing  if you want to use that term  in place, 
or is the family looked at as well as a possible source of support 
for that educational funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the program is aimed at 
smaller employers. We’re not interested in participating in the 
training plans of the really big operations. They’ve got enough 
resources to be able to fund their own training and look after 
their own training needs. 
 
There is no means test for the entrance, the employee entrance. 
I just repeat that 70 per cent of them have grade 12 or less, 
which doesn’t speak directly to the point but speaks indirectly 
to it. The other thing is, the employers are paying half the 
program, half the cost of the program; it’s a cost-shared 
approach. 
 
I want finally to mention that one of the changes to the program 
that we have recently made is that tuition fees will be paid by 
those people in the program who take institutional-based 
training as part of their regime, and that’s needs tested as the 
member will know. And finally they can become eligible for 
student aid or the student loan program. 
 
But those are the elements that I can offer in answer to the 
member’s question. 
 
Just to repeat: there is no means testing or any testing of the 
ability of the family to support the effort, apart from the tuition 
fee matter that I mentioned earlier. 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In some of the 
questioning that went on earlier a comment was made that some 
categories seem to have very high success rates. In fact there 
seems to be an . . . almost a need for more opportunities in 
some of those areas. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department has a list of general 
categories of training that’s undertaken through the program  
not every specific one, but general categories  and what the 
most common types of courses would be that are being taken. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In response to the member, Mr. Chair, 
I’ll mention some of the main categories. Truck driver training, 
welding, fibreglass fabrication; various agricultural-related 
occupations such as bee-keeping, high-clearance spraying, 
horticulture, pork production; films and videos. The list goes 
on, but that’s a good sample. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Moving to a different category, 
and that category is aboriginal and northern education funding, 
and I’m wondering if you could give some details on aboriginal 
and northern education funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’ve got two pieces of paper in my hand 
and there’s a lot of information on it. The first deals with 
funding for post-secondary aboriginal programs, which is the 
precise question the member had, and covers the last two years 
plus this year. The second piece of paper is funding for 
educational programing in the North, a large portion of which 
involves aboriginal people. 
 
Let me go to some totals and then I’ll make a proposal. The 
total funding for post-secondary aboriginal programs, which 
will overlap a lot of the second document, is 13.207 million. 
The second document deals with funding for educational 
programing in the North, and that amounts to over $8 million. 
And as I say, some of these numbers are included in the general 
numbers. 
 
What I propose is just simply to send these papers across to the 
member and save the time of the committee. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A follow-up 
question on funding and that is, from the funding that is there, 
the total potful, how much of that went to institutions and how 
much of that went to individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, would it be satisfactory to 
the member if we provided a written response to that question? 
The information is there but it’s just a little complex and we’ll 
figure it out and write to you. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I asked a question a 
couple of minutes ago about the common types of training but 
that was in general to the whole program. Dealing with 
aboriginal and northern situations, and the question then is, 
what are the most common types of training received under 
those categories? And I guess what we’re looking at is 
long-term opportunities and are they there from the training 



2482  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

that’s being received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  With specific reference to Future Skills 
and JobStart, the major categories are the forestry industry and 
tourism. Speaking more generally with respect to training in the 
North, the multi-party training plan is the most prominent of the 
programs. It trains people for actual jobs in the mines. And it’s 
judged to be a very successful program. 
 
In addition, there’s the NORTEP (northern teacher education 
program) for the training of teachers, and there’s a lot of SIAST 
and university programs that are being delivered in the North, 
either by instructors or by technology  television and the like. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2483 
 June 12, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The numerous signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Kipling, 
from Grenfell, Whitewood, Kindersley, and all small towns 
across southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also would like to present 
petitions of names from throughout southern Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petitioners’ signatures are all from the city of Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Wolseley, Lemberg, Fort Qu’Appelle, Shaunavon, and 
places throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise to present petitions of names from residents in 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Balcarres, Indian Head, Bengough, Ogema, and a 
number from Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the concerned 
citizens of southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to close 
the Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the petition has been signed by many concerned citizens 
from the community of Tuxford, which of course is in the 
constituency of Arm River, as well as there is a few names from 
the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Moose Jaw, Estevan, Langenburg, 
Preeceville, Bienfait, as well as the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 
present names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Regina here. There also is one here from 
Edmonton, Alberta; from Lebret; from Fort Qu’Appelle; and 
they’re from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan once again on day 
71, the 71st day that we’ve stood in this House presenting 
petitions and all the efforts that Saskatchewan people have had 
in saving the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
the Craven and Lumsden area. I so present. 
 



2484  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order petitions respecting the closure 
of the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 76 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation: 
(1) was the minister aware of any donations made by 
York Medical to any secret trusts of the New 
Democratic Party before he made the decision to invest 
taxpayers’ money in this corporation; (2) was the 
minister aware of the amounts of those donations? 
 

I also give notice that on day 76 I will ask the government 
the following question: 
 

Regarding the Crown Investments Corporation: (1) was 
the minister aware of any donations made by the 
shareholders of HARO Financial Corporation to any 
secret trust funds of the New Democratic Party before 
CIC extended its involvement in the corporation; (2) 
was the minister aware of the amounts of those 
donations? 

 
I also give notice that on day 76 I will ask the government 
the following question: 
 

Regarding the Department of Energy and Mines: (1) 
was the minister aware of any donations made by Husky 
Oil Limited to any secret trust funds of the New 
Democratic Party before deciding to maintain 
multimillion dollar tax breaks to that company; and (2) 
was the minister aware of the amounts of those 
donations? 
 

And I also give notice on day 76 I will ask the government 
the following question: 
 

Regarding the Crown Investments Corporation: (1) was 
the minister aware of any donations made by Goldman 
Sachs to any secret trust funds of the New Democratic 
Party before employing the services of this company to 
sell Cameco shares in 1996; (2) was the minister aware 
of the amounts of those donations? 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 76 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

Regarding SaskTel: (1) was the minister aware of any 
donations made by Symmetrix to any secret trust funds 
of the New Democratic Party before the decision was 
made to award this company a re-engineering contract at 
SaskTel; and (2) was the minister aware of the amounts 
of those donations? 

I also, Mr. Speaker, will give notice that I shall on day 76 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

Regarding SaskTel: (1) was the minister aware of any 
donations made by Mr. Don Ching to any secret trust fund of 
the New Democratic Party before making the decision to 
appoint him as president and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
SaskTel; and (2) was the minister aware of the amounts of 
these donations? 

 
I also will give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on day no. 76 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

Regarding SaskPower: (1) was the minister aware of any 
donations made by Mr. Jack Messer to secret trust funds of 
the New Democratic Party before appointing him of president 
and chief executive officer of the company; and (2) was the 
minister aware of the amounts of those donations? 

 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
76 ask the government the following question: 
 

Regarding the Department of Economic Development: (1) 
was the minister aware of any donations made by 
Intercontinental Packers or any of its principals to any secret 
trust funds of the New Democratic Party before committing 
additional tax dollars to assist that company; and (2) was the 
minister aware of the amounts of those donations? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 76 ask the government the following question: 
 

Regarding the Crown Investments Corporation: (1) was the 
minister aware of any donations made by union contracting 
firms involved in the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement to secret trust funds of the New Democratic Party 
before signing this agreement on behalf of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan; and (2) was the minister aware of the amounts 
of these donations? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through to members 
of the Assembly, 33 grade 7, 8, and 12 students from Fillmore in 
my constituency. They are accompanied by teachers Murray Bruce, 
Andrew Kidd, and chaperon Elaine Driver. Also bus driver Deb 
Larose is with the group as well. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them afterwards for a photo, 
refreshments, and a visit. And I would ask all members to join in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the House a group of students I was really 
glad to see this afternoon when I walked into the House. They’re 
from Beardy’s Okemasis. I used to teach in Duck Lake and these 
students were in grade 1 when I was there. 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

And also their teacher, Mr. Harry Salahub, who was also in 
school and we learned a bit from each other. Mr. Salahub’s 
going to enjoy the sparring in the House; he’s good at that. 
And if you students want to verify that, ask him about some 
bus seats; he’ll tell you about it. 
 
So would you welcome these students to the House. They’ll 
enjoy meeting with their MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) later on for drinks and hamburgers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, since the students have 
already been introduced from the Duck . . . Beardy’s School, 
from Duck Lake . . . There are 14 in number. Their teacher, 
as has already been indicated, in attendance with them is 
Harry Salahub. But there are four chaperons  Ivie 
Cameron, Leona Eyahpaise, Greg Cameron, and Walter 
Littlepine. 
 
And I will be meeting with them afterwards for refreshments, 
and not drinks as the other . . . as the member across the way 
has suggested. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my great pleasure today to introduce a 
delegation from China, the Hebei province. This group is 
sponsored by Canpotex Ltd.. 
 
The delegation has met with me and the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs for lunch. They will also be 
meeting with the Department of Economic Development, 
Energy and Mines officials, to establish more trade linkages 
in the mining and cooperative sectors between China and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Tomorrow the delegation will visit a potash mine and will 
also be meeting with the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to welcome, if they 
would, Vice-Minister Gu, the vice-president of All China 
Federation of Marketing and Supply Cooperatives. And I’ll 
ask Mr. Gu to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I have quite a long list, Mr. 
Speaker, so if members would want to hold their applause 
until we’re done. Also with them is Mr. Xiao, deputy 
director of China National Academy of Cooperative 
Economy; Madam Ren, executive vice-president of 
CNAMPGC (China National Agricultural Means of 
Production Group Corporation); Mr. Wang, division chief of 
All China Federation of Supply and Marketing Cooperatives; 
Mr. Luo, who is the general manager of import and export 
department of CNAMPGC; Mr. Li, who is the business 
manager for import and export department of the same 
company; Mr. Steven Dechka, president of Canpotex Ltd. of 
Saskatoon; Mr. Howard Cummer, managing director of  

Canpotex Ltd. in Hong Kong; and Mr. Tommie Sutanu, managing 
director of Odyssey International Group of Hong Kong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will ask all members to give a very warm welcome 
to these very important people that provide so much economic 
benefit to our economy. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice on behalf of Her Majesty’s Official Opposition with a very 
warm welcome to the Chinese delegation. Thank you for coming 
to visit us and enjoy your visit here to our great province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to welcome our Chinese visitors here. I hope you find your visit 
here both prosperous and enjoyable and we welcome you to 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know that all my 
colleagues will also want to help me welcome a grade 5 class from 
the great community of Neudorf who are here in the east gallery. 
They are here to visit the Legislative Building and to take a tour. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Sandy Jost; Maureen 
Pfeifer, as a chaperon, Carole Smulan and Lorraine Geres. We 
really appreciate you coming to visit with us and enjoy your visit 
here this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly today, 34 students from Cut Knife 
Elementary School. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
They’re from grade 6, and they’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Len Dupuis, Michelle Ramsay, Pat Smith-Putland; and chaperons 
Glen Blackstock, Cody Denton, and Grant Wasmuth. 
 
And I will be meeting with them for MLA pictures and drinks to 
follow. Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the Legislative Assembly some visitors 
in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker  Mr. Brian Johnson, Lisa 
Simmermon, and their son, Hans. The Regina family are hoping 
that their visit to the legislature today will be a very productive 
one, as I do also hope that they have a productive visit. 
 
I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and  



2486  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

to the other members of the Assembly, and to you, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce 51 grade 7 students from 
the Stewart Hawke School in Hudson Bay. 
 
Many of you will know that Hudson Bay is the moose capital 
of the world, Mr. Speaker. If there are hunters in this room, 
they certainly would be aware of that. It’s a very active 
community as well, Mr. Speaker. The SaskFor-MacMillan 
plywood mill is located in Hudson Bay, and of course the 
chipboard mill as well. 
 
So I want to wish them a very enjoyable visit, a very safe trip 
home. And I will not be able to meet with you at 2 o’clock as 
the opposition will likely have some questions for the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, but the MLA from 
Regina South will be happy to meet with you this afternoon. 
 
Please help me welcome the students, the teachers, and the 
chaperons from the great community of Hudson Bay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Best Wishes to the Minister of Labour 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
my colleagues I would like to extend best wishes and 
congratulations to the Minister of Labour on today’s 
announcement. I understand that after 21 years in public 
service, the decision to leave government was a tough one. 
But I’m also beginning to understand the pressures and stress 
that occur in politics can place . . . on one’s personal life. 
 
I would like to thank the minister for his work on behalf of 
the Saskatchewan people, and I wish him and his family well 
as they head out of province to explore new opportunities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alternate High School Program 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was 
invited to attend a celebration of the first successful year of 
the Southeast Regional College alternate high school 
program. The local community partners who have supported 
this project, teachers, and students were at the event. 
 
This program is designed for students who have dropped out 
of high school but have since realized they do need further 
education. The alternate high school allows these young 
people to get their basic academic training in a setting that is 
removed from the traditional school system. The students 
themselves said they appreciated the second chance to start 
fresh. 
 
Operating out of the Southeast Regional College, young 
people have opportunity to learn with a more adult 
environment. The normal peer pressure of high school is 
gone. Students can focus on learning because they’re doing it  

for themselves this time. 
 
With one successful year behind them, the Southeast alternate high 
school is making plans to expand and improve upon the program. 
They want to integrate workplace training into the academics and 
put greater emphasis on life skills and preparing for transition to 
work. 
 
I encourage others to look at our alternate school as a model on 
how to help kids that, for whatever reasons, fall through the cracks 
in a traditional classroom setting. All children need a good 
education, but not all children can learn in the same manner. This 
program is an excellent example of a community partnership in 
action. A cross-section of health, education, social service, and 
business organizations have joined forces to meet a very important 
need for the young people of the Weyburn area. 
 
Congratulations to all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Best Wishes to the Minister of Labour 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
Liberal labour critic in saying a few words today about the 
announcement made earlier today by the Minister of Labour. First 
of all, Mr. Minister, I hope it wasn’t something that I said last 
night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and I have had the opportunity to have 
many heated debates in this legislature with many disagreements 
in this House. And I have enjoyed these exchanges. After all, what 
fun is it to talk to someone if you agree with them all the time? 
And there certainly was no danger of that in this case. But at the 
end of the day, I have always respected the minister and the work 
that he has done, even if we didn’t always agree on a lot of the 
issues. 
 
However, even the minister will have to admit that today’s 
announcement seems to have proven one of my points. The labour 
laws in this province are so bad that even the Labour minister has 
announced that he is going to move to another province to find 
work. And we sincerely hope that the minister will do us another 
favour and take his union-preference tendering policy with him. 
 
Mr. Minister, on behalf of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
caucus, in seriousness, I congratulate you on a successful career in 
politics here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, just to let you 
know that in question period later today, we will be picking the 
next minister to go. So, Mr. Minister, for you though, I do want to 
wish you and your family the very best in your home where ever it 
might be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina International Children’s Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is festival 
season in Regina, and a special one starts today: the 10th annual 
Regina International Children’s Festival. 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

This year’s festival is a four-day birthday party for Regina’s 
young at art. Three hundred thousand people have visited the 
festival over the past 10 years and have enjoyed hundreds of 
acts from around the world. 
 
This year’s theme is shake, rattle and rhyme — a chance to 
shake a leg with Fred Penner, rattle with the Echo City 
Musicians, and rhyme with the Armagh Rhymers from 
Northern Ireland. You’ll also shake with laughter at the 
antics of Checkerboard Guy, Flyin’ Bob, Paradox and 
Paradie, and the Queen of Art and her Wacky Friends. The 
acts this year come from as near as Winnipeg, Vancouver, 
Saskatoon, Quebec City, and as far away as Britain, North 
Ireland, the Czech Republic, and the United States. 
 
Other activities include a mad hatter’s tent, a story teller’s 
tent, an enviro tent. The Queen of Art will be on hand with 
her face-painter friends, Vincent Van Glow, Purple Picasso, 
Willie Shakespeare, and the Knights of the Rectangular 
Table. 
 
I urge people to take a little drive down College Avenue and 
have a look at it. It’s quite an exciting bunch of tents, and all 
kinds of action going on. But it is again community support 
that makes the festival tick — the patrons and donors and the 
hundreds of volunteers so that school groups . . . I hope that 
some who are here today will be by there; their children and 
parents can enjoy the excellent program. 
 
So happy birthday, Children’s Festival, and thanks to 
everyone involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Homecoming Celebration 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
commend all the people in my hometown of Ile-a-la-Crosse 
who are working very hard to organize a large homecoming 
gathering for people from the community. 
 
The 150th anniversary celebration of the Roman Catholic 
Church’s arrival in Ile-a-la-Crosse will take place the last 
week of this month. The community is also celebrating its 
220th year of existence. The homecoming celebration will 
also coincide with the 90th anniversary celebration of the 
signing of Treaty No. 10 in 1906. 
 
It will feature a variety of activities for all those in 
attendance. Organizers are working hard to contact all the 
people who have lived or worked in Ile-a-la-Crosse in the 
past 50 years  that includes the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) officers, nuns, doctors, priests, etc. 
 
Ile-a-la-Crosse has a rich and diverse historical past that’ll be 
showcased during the celebrations. Hopefully all those 
making the trip to take part in the festivities in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse will be blessed with beautiful weather. I look 
forward to seeing everyone there and I invite other members 
of the Assembly to join us as well. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Company Develops Arts Education CD-ROM 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Among the growing 
list of innovative software and high-tech companies in 
Saskatchewan is a production company called Pebble Beach 
Interactive. Pebble Beach Interactive is located in my riding and 
has recently developed and released an interactive CD-ROM 
(compact disc read-only memory) for high school arts education. 
 
Entitled “Ideas and Inspiration,” this CD-ROM enables students to 
tour through a series of virtual reality galleries featuring 
contemporary art work. In doing so, it makes the learning and 
research process more interesting and inviting to students. 
 
As a teaching tool, it includes the works of 100 Canadian artists, 
covering the fields of architecture, fine arts, crafts, fashion, and 
graphic design. It also gives students the opportunity to view 
artists’ studios and to hear the artists discuss their works. 
 
This initiative demonstrates that Saskatchewan is on the cutting 
edge of arts education and that we are setting new standards in 
interactive educational technology. Assistance for this project 
came from Sask Education, the Western Economic Partnership 
Agreement, SaskFilm, and the JobStart-Future Skills program. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Pebble Beach Interactive and all the 
organizations involved in this project for taking the education of 
our high school students one step further into the information age. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mrs. Barbara Wasylciw’s 100th Birthday 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
recognize a constituent of mine, Mrs. Barbara Wasylciw. Mrs 
Wasylciw will celebrate her 100th birthday on Saturday, June 15, a 
milestone few people ever achieve. 
 
Mrs. Wasylciw was born in the Ukraine in 1896 and came to 
Canada with her parents at the age of four. She settled in the Fish 
Creek district. In 1913 she married Peter Wasylciw and together 
they raised a family of eight children. 
 
The Wasylciws farmed in the Aberdeen and Redberry districts, and 
moved to Saskatoon in 1941. Mrs. Wasylciw is a very sociable 
person. Her home is always open to other people for short and 
long stays. She has strong faith and a strong work ethic. Even with 
failing eyesight, at the age of 100 she cannot sit idle, and braids 
rugs and place-mats at her residence in the Cudworth nursing 
home. She is very alert and enjoys singing to the nurses and the 
guests at the nursing home. 
 
Her daughter, speaking with pride and admiration, says that her 
mother is one in a million. What an inspiration. Happy birthday, 
Mrs Wasylciw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2488  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Duck Lake Interpretive Centre Historical Exhibit 
 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, as I make this member’s 
statement, I know I’m being watched by students from the 
Beardy School. The town of Duck Lake in my constituency 
is the site of a historical significance in western Canada. In 
recent years the community has taken a number of steps to 
explain the region’s history to visitors. 
 
The first battle of the Riel rebellion is part of that history. 
This summer the region’s interpretive centre in Duck Lake 
will showcase a new exhibit, Duck Lake  Frontier of 
Indian, Metis, and Pioneer Society, 1870-1905. 
 
Visitors can view this exhibit and take in one or more events 
that commemorate that history. From August 16 to 18 the 
largest outdoor powwow in Saskatchewan will be hosted by 
the Beardy’s First Nation. On July 15 and 16 there will be a 
pilgrimage to the St. Laurent Shrine. On any other day a 
visitor may see nearby Fort Carlton which housed the 
North-West Mounted Police during the Battle of Duck Lake, 
or simply tour the town to enjoy the history art  murals 
painted on downtown businesses. 
 
I invite everyone to visit Duck Lake and the surrounding area 
this summer, and ask the members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating the community spirit that has made 
such a celebration of history possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker I brought to the attention of this 
House yesterday the fact that more than $1.4 million passed 
through New Democratic constituency associations in the 
past six years. 
 
I also pointed out that during that same period of time NDP 
(New Democratic Party) returns filed with the Chief 
Electoral Officer do not disclose even one contribution from 
an individual or corporation. 
 
I called on the Premier to explain where the NDP hides such 
donations. Unfortunately he failed to provide an answer. Mr. 
Speaker, I am prepared to give him another chance. Will the 
Premier explain where the New Democratic Party hides such 
donations, and will he assure this House that neither he or 
any member of his cabinet or caucus or their constituency 
associations or secret trust funds on their behalf have 
received a political donation from corporations doing 
business in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Here we go again. Read my lips. Mr. 
Speaker, I invite the Leader of the Opposition to listen 
carefully and read my lips. The New Democratic Party has 
been in full compliance with The Election Act expense  

provisions since they were enacted. Now I trust that’s clear 
enough. 
 
I wonder where the Liberal Party is on this. The best I understood 
yesterday’s media reports and the basis of what their lawyer was 
saying, the Liberal Party is simultaneously in violation of the law 
and not in violation of the law. And the reason why apparently it’s 
not in violation of the law is that it hasn’t been successful in 
raising any money. 
 
But what kind of hypocrisy is that, to come in here and accuse us 
when your own lawyer admits that you’re in violation of the law? 
We don’t think we are. If you are, you do what you like. But we’re 
not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  We believe there have been serious violations of 
the law, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of businesses that have a 
specified . . . a special relationship with this government and have 
benefited as a result. As examples I can name Phoenix 
Advertising, HARO, Harvard Developments, the law firms of Ron 
Gates and Company, Woloshyn Mattison, and Olive Waller. And 
of course there are the trade unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain if these firms contributed to 
the New Democratic election, the New Democrat election 
machine; and if so, where would we find such donations properly 
disclosed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I repeat, we are in full compliance with the 
law. 
 
We have invited you over the last several days to toughen up the 
law. We’re interested in doing that  toughening up the law. We 
notice you’re not in favour of toughening up the law. We are, and 
we will introduce those amendments into this House. 
 
I wonder if the problem isn’t, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite and their advisers simply don’t understand the law with 
respect to election financing. I run into that problem with respect 
to my understanding of computers. And I go down to the computer 
store and I see all kinds of publications there, DOS for Dummies, 
Word for Dummies. Maybe what we need here is a new 
publication called “Election Finances for Dummies.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Speaker, when print is black and white 
and sections of The Election Act read straightforward, there is no 
question the matter of interpretation is a problem on the other side 
of this House. 
 
The media reports that the Conservatives are now demanding that 
all parties, all parties, turn their financial books over to the Chief 
Electoral Officer. This is merely another attempt by them to 
obscure the situation. Mr. Kusiak already has the right at any time 
to see the books. Only a full-scale inquiry will determine the true 
level of corruption surrounding this issue, Mr. Speaker. 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

The Election Act clearly identifies the rules relating to 
disclosure of political contributions. If disclosure is not 
made, that donation is deemed to be anonymous. Sections 
207 and 226 indicate that any person who knowingly is party 
to, acquiesces in, or assents to a scheme to make donations 
contrary to the requirements, would also be guilty of or party 
to this offence. 
 
Given that fact, will the Premier explain if, when his party 
received cheques from supporters and their identity is not 
disclosed, whether he is informing them that what they are 
doing contravenes The Election Act and is in fact illegal? Is 
this his interpretation of the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it does not contravene 
the Act. Our lawyers are better than your lawyers, and our 
lawyers say we’re complying with the law. Our auditors are 
better than your auditors, and our auditors say we are 
complying with the law. 
 
But work with us . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. I’m going to ask 
all members of the House to  I was having  to come to 
order  I was having difficulty hearing the question being 
put, and I am finding it extremely difficult to hear the answer 
being provided right now. Order. And I will ask for all 
members of the House to allow both the question to be put 
and the answer to be provided in a way that all members can 
hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In part, Mr. Minister, it’s my own 
fault. When the member shouts at me, I can’t resist the 
impulse to shout back at him . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. minister knows 
that it’s not appropriate to be commenting — order, order — 
the hon. minister knows it is not appropriate to be 
commenting on the Speaker’s ruling. I’ll ask him to proceed 
directly to his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, our lawyers are better 
than their lawyers; our lawyers say we’re in complete 
compliance with the law. Our auditors are better than their 
auditors; our auditors say we are in full compliance with the 
law. Our accountants are better than their accountants; our 
accountants say we are in full compliance with the law. We 
are. 
 
Let us work together, though, now that we have this 
opportunity, with the issue having the public profile it has, 
and the Act being in front of us in this House, to improve the 
law to ensure that there could be no question as to its proper 
interpretation, and we can go on with life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, let’s deal with the violations 
that have occurred over the past couple of decades first, and  

then we’ll change the laws. But in the meantime, let’s take care of 
the violations that occurred. They’re saying that their lawyers are 
better than our lawyers, and I’m not going to dispute either way. 
But if that’s . . . we feel our lawyers are better, so then we let a 
judge decide who is right and who is wrong. 
 
When the NDP came to power, they promised to be much better 
than the previous Conservative government, but time has 
demonstrated they’re clearly not. In fact as time goes on we can 
draw similarities. In recent days we have learned both parties have 
slush funds. Both channelled their money through constituency 
associations in contravention of The Election Act, and both are 
now feeling the heat as a result, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Obviously one of the reasons the NDP government is refusing to 
order a judicial inquiry into this issue is because of the fact that 
their political existence hinges on keeping the Conservatives afloat 
so as to ensure the right-wing vote is split. 
 
Will the Premier explain if it is for this reason or because he 
knows his party has contravened The Election Act, that he is so 
steadfast in refusing to order a judicial inquiry into this important 
issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, this is really getting weird. 
This gets weirder and weirder. Let’s hope this session ends pretty 
soon before these people spin right off into space on this issue. 
 
Let me say once again to the member, we will not call a judicial 
inquiry to determine what is a question of the interpretation of the 
existing Act. No one has ever done that in the history of the world. 
It would be irresponsible government, and it’s irresponsible for the 
opposition to keep pressing such a ludicrous proposition. Maybe 
the answer here, talking about the soundness of the legal advice, 
was captured by the legal adviser to the opposition. And I’ll quote 
from the Star-Phoenix of today: 
 

Party lawyer Garrett Wilson told the news conference the 
Liberals weren’t in violation of the act because the dollars 
involved are substantially smaller. The Liberals received 
$32,312 from their ridings over the past six years. 
 

Maybe that’s why they’re getting the kind of legal advice they’re 
getting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  We’re prepared to be checked out the same as the 
other two parties, Mr. Speaker. We welcome, we demand, it. 
 
A column by Murray Mandryk in today’s edition of the 
Leader-Post poses some very legitimate questions, Mr. Speaker. 
He indicates, and rightly so, that at issue here are anonymous 
donations in the thousands and tens of thousands of dollars from 
big businesses and perhaps big unions. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know whether undisclosed 
contributors benefited from or influenced government decisions. 
Providing one such example, and I quote Mr. Mandryk: 



2490  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Were any of the seven companies that most benefited 
from SaskPower’s rate “restructuring” last year . . . 
contributors to Tommy Douglas House Inc.? Were any 
of the donors insurance companies that have received 
guaranteed . . . loans? Hog Processors? Oil companies 
now being allowed more foreign ownerships? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is the point. The people of 
Saskatchewan don’t know the answers to these questions. 
Mr. Premier, the buck stops with you. This is serious. Will 
you call for a judicial inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the present . . . if they 
will pipe down across the aisle, they’ll hear my answer. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now once again the Speaker 
is having difficulty being able to hear the answer being 
provided by the hon. minister, and I will ask for the members 
of the opposition to allow him to be heard in providing his 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the present laws 
respecting election financing were passed by this legislature 
in, I believe, 1974. The Liberal opposition of the day voted 
against those provisions of the Act, arguing to the effect that 
they would in effect destroy democracy as we know it. They 
were opposed to it. We passed the law anyway. And the law 
has served us very well over the years. We have complied 
with it, and we continue to comply with it. 
 
Now if Murray Mandryk and if you agree that some 
improvement to that law, some tightening of that law, is now 
appropriate, we stand prepared to do it. And we have 
supplied you with a proposed House amendment that will 
put beyond doubt the requirement of political parties to 
report contributions. 
 
In the meantime, read my lips again; we have complied with 
The Elections Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Underground Fuel Tanks 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Environment minister. Mr. Minister, you 
recently received a letter from service station owners, Linda 
and Rick Becker of Kindersley. Their business has been 
devastated by your unreasonable underground fuel tank 
policies. The Beckers estimate that these regulations have 
cost them a quarter of a million dollars between the 
replacement costs and the 84 days their business was forced 
to close the doors to remove the tanks. 
 
The Beckers write: 
 

As small-business owners in Saskatchewan, we are 
employers, and we contribute significantly to the 
economy. But you are creating a burden which we alone 
must bear, and it is driving us out of business. 

Mr. Minister, have you responded to this letter yet? What do you 
say to people like the Beckers who are being driven out of 
business by your unfair fuel tank policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. 
member for the question. Certainly the issue of underground fuel 
tanks which are old and leaking and becoming a problem in the 
environment is an issue. 
 
I have not specifically responded to the case raised by the hon. 
member, but I can assure you that the department and this 
government is working cooperatively with the service station 
owners, rural communities, and other areas where there are 
problems with underground fuel tanks. We are keeping the 
expenses involved as low as possible and using monitoring where 
we can. 
 
But when there’s a serious problem affecting a community, which 
there are many communities in the province affected by leaking 
underground tanks, we do have to take action and we are working 
cooperatively as we can to resolve these problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
service station owners are only asking to be treated fairly. They say 
both levels of government got a lot of revenue through the gas tax, 
but only the service station owner is being stuck with the bill for 
gas tank removals. And in some cases, like the Beckers, the bill 
can run as high as a quarter of a million dollars. And you simply 
can’t absorb that kind of a hit in a small town gas station, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I understand you are meeting next week with the Environmental 
Fairness Association. I understand that they’ve been asking you 
for some type of cost-sharing compensation package to pay for the 
removal of these underground storage tanks. 
 
What will you be saying to them next week, Mr. Minister? And 
will you consider cooperating and providing compensation for 
service station owners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I wish to 
inform the member, and he’ll be happy to know, that we do have a 
liability committee looking at who should pay for cleaning up of 
orphan sites, leaking underground tanks, and other contaminated 
sites. 
 
We have industry, we have the small service station owners, we 
have Environmental Fairness Association, lending institutions, oil 
companies, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), Federation of Independent Business. We have this 
stakeholder group dealing with this very complex problem. 
 
It is not always fair for the last person owning a site to pick up the 
bill, and we are trying to resolve that. And we will, within the next 
few months, have a solution and a formula to deal with these 
problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  And now for the rest of the story, Mr. 
Speaker. My question is for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, our MLAs have been receiving numerous 
letters complaining about the terrible conditions of 
Saskatchewan highways, and I’m sure you have received 
many of these similar letters. The other day I got one such 
letter from a 10-year-old boy, Gavett Stokke, of Consul, 
Saskatchewan. He writes, and I quote: 
 

I ride the school bus 125 kilometres a day. I travel on 
Highway 21 and 13. The highway is so rough and 
bumpy, I sure wish they could be fixed. Could you 
please come and take a look at them? 

 
Mr. Minister, I have personally promised Garret that I will 
come out and look at these highways with him in the next 
couple of weeks, as soon as we’re finished in the Assembly. 
Would you care to join me, Mr. Minister? Will you come out 
and look at the terrible highways that Garret and all of the 
students of Saskatchewan are having to ride on in their 
school buses throughout this terrible time of our highway 
deterioration? Will you come along? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for 
the question, Mr. Speaker. As he will be aware, the crews are 
out now and they’re doing an excellent job in repairing the 
damage to the highways this spring. The crews were delayed 
a bit, Mr. Speaker, because, as you know, we had some wet 
weather this spring  not unlike the farmers couldn’t get to 
their fields, we couldn’t get to our roads. 
 
But I want to say to the member, when he talks to that young 
fellow, that 10-year-old young fellow in his community, I’m 
wondering if he is going to tell the young fellow that they 
spent and spent and spent during the 1980s, creating a huge 
debt for the province of Saskatchewan on the shoulders of 
every one of us, and that if we would in fact have the $850 
million that we spend in interest, we certainly could do a 
better job on roads and a faster job on repairing roads, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Prosecutor Investigation 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, last 
October Crown prosecutor Randy Kirkham was suspended 
with pay over allegations of jury tampering in the Robert 
Latimer case. That investigation, Mr. Minister, is still under 
way. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have now learned that Mr. Kirkham has 
already collected nearly $50,000 in pay while suspended. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: why is this investigation taking so 
long? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for the question. This matter is undergoing internal review 
within the department, and as it is such a case, I won’t comment 
any further. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Autism Therapy 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to bring to the attention of this House an issue 
involving six-year-old Hans Johnson of Regina who is autistic. 
This young boy’s parents were recently made aware of the fact that 
specialized therapy for his condition is not offered — not offered 
— in this province, but is offered in Manitoba. 
 
They contacted Saskatchewan Health to determine if it will cover 
the costs of this therapy, given the fact that this is beyond their 
financial means. Mr. Speaker, this therapy program is scheduled to 
begin tomorrow, but the Department of Health has yet to reply to 
this financial request. 
 
Will the Minister of Health stand in this House today and clear the 
way for young Hans Johnson to receive proper treatment for his 
disability? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, any time someone wants to get 
some kind of medical treatment out of province, that treatment has 
to be reviewed by a committee to see if the treatment would be 
viable and effective. That process is presently going on in the 
Department of Health. 
 
There is an out-of-province mental health treatment review 
committee which will have completed its review and communicate 
its recommendations to the department either today or tomorrow. 
And the department or the referring practitioner will contact the 
family before the end of this week to indicate whether this is a 
program that should properly and appropriately be covered by 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister isn’t 
hearing the problem. It has to be dealt with today. No sense 
shuffling it off for another day, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Brian Johnson and Lisa Simmermon, the 
parents of Hans, made their application for assistance from 
Saskatchewan Health, they were told to first provide scientific 
proof that such therapy would benefit their son, something they 
have done. 
 
However it is absurd that parents who merely want proper medical 
therapy for their son are subjected to providing scientific proof and 
must justify treatment for a family member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this six-year-old boy does not deserve more than  



2492  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

others. He merely wants the same as others  the 
opportunity to attend school, to grow up in the care of his 
parents, not in the province. Mr. Minister . . . or will the 
minister explain why he is standing in the way of the therapy 
for Hans, therapy that may allow this six-year-old boy a 
greater chance at a better life. But you must act today, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as I attempted to 
explain to the member in my last answer, if someone wishes 
to get out-of-province treatment we have a duty and 
responsibility to the taxpayers and to the person who would 
be sent for that treatment to examine whether the person can 
be effectively treated in the province or whether there is 
effective treatment and viable treatment with respect to 
which someone is making a request. 
 
That process is under way. I’ve said to the member that the 
family will be notified by the end of the week. That is the 
appropriate process, Mr. Speaker, and the appropriate 
process will be adhered to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addictions 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, studies 
from across the country show that gambling addictions are 
growing at an alarming rate. This is especially true when it 
comes to VLTs (video lottery terminal), the crack cocaine of 
gambling. And this is affecting our society. 
 
In fact a study in Monday’s Toronto Star show that 
Manitobans lost more on gambling last year than they spent 
on grocery staples. Mr. Speaker, we know that this 
government has embraced gaming and VLTs as a miraculous 
cash cow. Will the Gaming minister please tell me what this 
government is doing to ensure that Saskatchewan people do 
not become a society that spends more on gambling than on 
food? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And thank you to the member for the question. I want to first 
say to the member opposite that in Saskatchewan we have 
developed, through our gaming regulations, some of the 
most stringent gaming regulations across the country, and 
have, in your reference to the VLT programs, specifically 
have capped two years ago the number of VLTs that we have 
in this province. At the same time have implemented through 
the Department of Health, a variety of different programs 
that are there to assist communities and individuals to the 
tune of about $1.5 million. 
 
And if you were to compare that amount that we provide in 
Saskatchewan compared to any other community or province 
across the country, you’ll find that that figure far exceeds any 
other. So when you look at the fashion in which we’ve dealt 
with gaming in this province you’ll see that we have, as I’ve 
indicated to you, some of the best regulations and  

provided some of the best treatment programs anywhere in the 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is ample evidence 
that this problem is growing at an alarming rate here, as I’ve stated 
before. This government continues to pat itself on the back 
because it has introduced gaming into provincial revenues. On 
budget day the Finance minister told us that her government 
estimates that $118.4 million will come in from VLTs alone this 
year. This is well above the 75 million that they had estimated in 
the 1994-95 budget. 
 
Madam Minister, or Mr. Minister, with gambling revenues 
sky-rocketing, are you prepared to channel more funding into 
addiction counselling and prevention, or are you going to wait 
until children are going hungry because their parents have a 
serious gambling problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I want to first indicate to the member 
that when we developed VLTs in this province, we were asked to 
do that by the hospitality industry in a major way. The hospitality 
industry in Saskatchewan came to the government and said we 
have a serious problem with the hoteliers across Saskatchewan, 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan, which members opposite have 
been standing up and indicating that this government hasn’t been 
providing enough service to. 
 
The development of VLTs in Saskatchewan is specifically around 
the issue of ensuring that we have a strong hospitality industry in 
rural Saskatchewan, and a large part of that funding that we 
receive goes directly into rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The member standing up in the House a couple of days ago talked 
about bus tours coming into Saskatchewan  requirements for 
further bus tours to be coming into Saskatchewan  for gaming. I 
don’t think you can have it both ways. You can’t be asking for 
more activity in Saskatchewan for gaming and then make the case 
that we shouldn’t have gaming activity in this province. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that we have in this province the 
strongest, best regulated gaming regulations anywhere in Canada. 
And yes we have, as you’ve indicated, as I indicated earlier, some 
of the strongest health care services for people with addictions 
anywhere in the country, and continue to provide those services in 
the future if those needs become greater. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Agricultural Biotechnology International Conference 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, “A 
Quick Dip in the Gene Pool”, molecular markers, DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid) fingerprinting, Global Ag Biotech 
Association luncheon, reviewing regulatory regime seminars — 
are all a warm up to an amazing conference in Saskatoon this  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

week. I rise in the House, Mr. Speaker, today to bring 
members’ attention to the ABIC conference in Saskatoon. 
 
ABIC is the agricultural biotechnology international 
conference. This is truly an international event which is 
twice as large as predicted, with 600 delegates and presenters 
from over 30 countries around the world. Sask Ag and Food 
is a proud partner in sponsoring this conference. It is fitting 
that this conference is being held in Saskatchewan, and 
particularly in Saskatoon, because Saskatoon is recognized 
as one of the six centres of excellence for ag biotech in the 
world. This conference is one of the many reasons I 
proclaimed June as Agricultural Science Month. 
 
Agricultural sciences such as biotechnology are vital to 
Saskatchewan’s economic development and growth. In 
Saskatchewan, biotech product sales are estimated at $35 
million in 1995, and it is estimated by the year 2000 we’ll be 
over 300 million. 
 
During the conference yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I released a 
report called Agriculture and Food, Agriculture 
Biotechnology Report. This report is the product of several 
months of information gathering, and surveying over 70 
industry and public sector leaders in ag biotech. 
 
Today I would like to thank the department people who put 
their work into this report. I would like to thank the people 
who provided their wisdom, the 70 people who they 
interviewed. And this exercise is very much focused on four 
ag biotech disciplines. They are micropropagation and tissue 
culturing, animal health and vaccines, microbials or soil 
nutrient systems, molecular genetics or plant breeding. 
Specific recommendations are presented in the report for 
each topic. 
 
The survey results suggest that Sask Ag and Food should 
increase its level of involvement in some aspects of the 
biotech industry. The actions or roles of the industry as 
identified are the increase of biotech expertise and industry 
interaction within Sask Ag and Food, the provision of 
long-term basic research funding, the provision of a business 
environment conducive to industrial development, the 
continuation of support and funding for Ag-West Biotech, 
and the development and implementation of a strategic plan 
or vision for the agriculture biotechnology industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These recommendations will be considered as the future role 
of Sask Ag and Food as the ag biotech industry is developed. 
Over the next four years the department hopes to invest 19 
million in support of the ag and food innovation fund. We 
continue to see the industry with a bright and productive 
future here in Saskatchewan and look forward to being part 
of the next phase of the industry’s development. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, biotechnology, particularly in agriculture, is 
extremely important in Saskatchewan, not only because of  

the dollars and the jobs it creates within Saskatchewan but also 
because of the research results that result from that activity within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think particularly of the herbicide-resistant canolas that have now 
come out in the market, because the gene manipulation that has 
taken place will provide an excellent opportunity for prosperity for 
the canola producers of this province. It would allow us to 
enhance our export activities around the world, particularly now 
that the Japanese are giving serious consideration to allowing it 
into their food supply. 
 
I think we can commend the government for encouraging this 
particular type of research within the province of Saskatchewan. 
But I think part of that commendation also has to go to those 
entrepreneurs and those scientists who do the research, who have 
the ideas, and wish to pursue those dreams and those goals, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I believe that both sides, the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the industry itself, deserve the praise that they receive for their 
innovation. And I would hope that the government would not put 
any roadblocks into the road of this type of technology in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’d 
like permission to make a brief personal statement to the 
legislature. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1430) 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Resignation of MLA for North Battleford 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m 
taking my life back, from the political arena that is. Earlier today, I 
tendered my resignation as Minister of Labour and as the member 
of the legislature for North Battleford. Both resignations will take 
effect on July 1. 
 
I come to this decision only after much discussions and soul 
searching with my family, and we have decided collectively to 
leave the political arena. I announce this decision with mixed 
emotion because, while I look forward to new opportunities, I 
know I’ll miss the colleagues in the legislature, and my staff in 
Regina and also in North Battleford, the people of Saskatchewan, 
and in particular the people of the Battlefords. 
 
Today I have some heartfelt thank-you’s that I wish to pass on. I 
first off thank my constituents in the Battlefords, whom I’ve had 
the pleasure of representing for 14 or more of the last 16 years. 
Their trust and encouragement have sustained me through what is 
relatively a long career in public service. 
 
I say thank you to the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party. 
They’ve been a wonderful extended family. 
 



2494  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

And I thank the public employees of Saskatchewan who 
serve this province with distinction and dedication, and I ask 
their forgiveness, I guess, in times that I have challenged 
them. 
 
I thank my colleagues in the legislature on all sides of the 
Assembly. Public service is an honour that we all share and a 
responsibility I know we strive to live up to, as difficult as it 
may be sometimes. 
 
I’d like to say thank you to my staff in Regina and North 
Battleford for their loyalty and their dedication. 
 
I also want to thank my family for the hardships that they 
face which only really a politician’s family can ever really 
understand. 
 
And I want to thank the oil and gas industry and the mining 
industry for their support while I was a member of cabinet, 
and the labour community for working with me, and truly 
working with me, during my time as Minister of Labour. 
 
And a special thanks to you, Premier, for giving me the 
privilege to serve as a minister of the Crown. It was certainly 
a remarkable experience that I’ll never forget. I hope that you 
all have that experience some time but not too soon, Premier. 
 
I believe that in Saskatchewan we are far ahead of most other 
jurisdictions in Canada in preparing Saskatchewan citizens 
to meet the challenges of the new century with a good deal 
of confidence and optimism as we go into these very 
challenging times. I’d like to thank the comments from the 
member from Melfort and the member from Cypress Hills 
this afternoon. I’ve enjoyed the debate with all of you over 
the years. 
 
I would want to say, before I sit down, how much I’ve 
appreciated the Legislative Assembly and the respect that I 
have for the role of the legislature in our province in terms of 
our British parliamentary system and the changes that have 
come about in it over the years. 
 
I’ve always viewed the Assembly as being something very 
basic. It’s a place where we deal with budgets. It’s a place 
where we deal with laws, and finally it’s a place that 
preserves democracy, and the latter likely being the most 
important of all. And I think we all need to strive continually 
to upgrade the respect for this institution and the politicians 
who serve within it. 
 
Although in the public eye, politicians may be at their lowest 
that I’ve experienced since I entered politics, but I’ve always 
been proud to be a politician. I think we should all be proud 
to be politicians and continue to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So as I ride off into the sunset of my political career, I have 
no regrets, and I wish my colleagues well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 77  An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to finally have a chance to rise on Bill 77 which amends 
The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the government opposite has come to learn in the 
last year or so, there’s no more tender subject of discussion in our 
province than that having to do with the medical care of our 
citizens. As this government has learned, the single issue in 
Saskatchewan that stirs the most emotion, the most anger, the most 
fear, among our people is any issue having to do with health care. 
 
On the face of it, Mr. Speaker, Bill 77 doesn’t appear to have 
much to do with the actual care the people of the province receive 
from their doctors. On the face of it, all this Bill seems to do is 
extend the power to deduct Saskatchewan Medical Association 
fees from payments to doctors operating outside of the 
fee-for-service system. Why would the average person on the 
street care? 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, while the person on the street may not notice a 
difference in their care with this Bill itself, I believe Bill 77 is 
another step in the recognition that the method in which we pay 
our doctors is going to come under increasing scrutiny over the 
next while. I don’t think there’s any question at all that the 
government opposite intends at some point to make this their next 
big issue when it comes to health care. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s an issue that should be looked at, just as the government must 
look at all areas to make savings in our health care system in order 
to provide the services people need most. 
 
Up to this point the government has had it all wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve closed dozens of rural hospitals. They’ve curtailed 
services at those that remain open. Beds are being closed at 
provincially funded nursing homes throughout the province. Yet 
with all the heartache and with all the fear that’s been created in 
rural areas, what’s been the result? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, other than gutting health care throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, really not much, because certainly the government 
has not saved any money through these cuts. We’re spending as 
much as we ever were, even in the days when all people 
throughout the province had access to adequate health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously when you’re dealing with something as 
large and as important as our health care system, reforms are going 
to be necessary from time to time. As this government likes to say,  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

you’ve got to look to the future to decide what kind of health 
care system you’re going to need to suit our province years 
down the road. At least that’s what the members over there 
like to say. How they act is totally opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has tackled a very difficult, 
very difficult issue of health care in a very ham-handed and 
clumsy way. Despite their pompous, arrogant talk, they had 
no plan heading into this much-vaulted health reform 
package back in 1992. And, Mr. Speaker, four years later I’m 
quite confident saying they still have no plan. 
 
At least no plan beyond their own political fortunes. And 
that seems to be the name of the game for the last couple of 
years; how best to take the political heat off the Premier, the 
Minister of Health, and all the members opposite. 
 
This government’s health reform package has not been about 
fixing the problems that may exist in our current system. 
Instead it’s been about blaming those problems on others. If 
we are to believe their rhetoric, the problems in the health 
care system can’t be blamed on the government, Mr. 
Speaker, or so they would have us believe. The problem is 
the federal government, which has cut us back all of one and 
a half per cent; or the problem is the Tories who got us into 
debt in the first place; or the problem is with the district 
health boards who have supposedly been given all this power 
to make decisions. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, this last point is a complete farce, 
since health districts are still under the control of this 
government and this minister. Everyone sees it; everyone 
knows it. Another farce, Mr. Speaker, has been this 
government’s commitment to a complete and full 
consultation with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only over issues concerning health care, but almost any 
issue we’ve seen come up in this legislature, every time we 
see this government patting itself on the back for consulting 
affected parties. We soon hear that those affected parties 
who complain, that they haven’t been consulted at all. 
Instead we’ve been told what the government plans to do. 
End of story. End of discussion. 
 
I think this tendency to talk at the people, instead of with the 
people, says a lot about what’s gone wrong with health care. 
Somewhere along the line the government stopped listening, 
if indeed they were ever listening to begin with. 
 
In studying Bill 77, I caution the government that this has got 
to stop. While Bill 77 does not overtly say the government 
plans to change the way it pays physicians in Saskatchewan, 
I believe the underlying intention is there. In the 
government’s own explanatory notes the government states 
that one of the main reasons for this Bill is continuing 
movement away from paying doctors on a fee-for-service 
basis. It recognizes the growing movement towards a new 
method of payment, be it salaries or capitation  sometimes 
known as rostering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the government makes any formal  

decision to adopt any of these methods for our province, I urge the 
Minister of Health and all members on that side of the House to 
consult fully with both the citizens of our province and with the 
physicians who practise here. I think it would be arrogant in the 
extreme for any of us to dismiss any of these methods out of hand, 
just as it would be arrogant and unwise to fully endorse these 
various methods of payment without a full study into the matter, 
and again, a full round of consultation with the stakeholders  
both those who receive the service and those who provide it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not a doctor. I don’t know what physicians in 
Saskatchewan or physicians anywhere for that matter think about a 
movement away from payment for service whereby they receive a 
fee each and every time a patient visits their office. But I think 
they want to have some input in any discussion regarding these 
issues. 
 
Because these are very important questions that must be answered 
before we adopt a new policy. Is it wise to continue with the 
current method of payment? Are there better ways to pay our 
doctors? I don’t know, and I don’t think the members opposite 
know either. Because like I say, none of us can form a firm, 
educated opinion on this matter until we speak to affected parties. 
 
And before we make any giant leap towards capitation, I believe 
we have to think about what such a move would do in helping or 
hindering Saskatchewan to attract doctors here. I think there’s 
prime concern, because coming from rural Saskatchewan I know 
there is a problem in many of our small communities to attract 
qualified physicians. 
 
And before we change our method of payment completely, I would 
like to see some studies done to see how such a change would 
affect our smaller communities in this regard. Because if it comes 
to a point where these communities cannot get doctors to come to 
their towns because doctors won’t come to Saskatchewan at all, 
then we’ll all be in worse trouble than we are now. 
 
Still, Mr. Speaker, I believe we must study all options in this area 
and see what their benefits and their drawbacks would be. 
 
I read with interest in November two articles in The Globe and 
Mail that dealt with the specific issue of capitation. As well, a 
comprehensive study on the issue was recently conducted by the 
American Medical Association. Both the articles and the study 
seem to come to the conclusion that yes, there is a potential for 
savings under a capitation system. 
 
In fact some say that a capitation system whereby physicians are 
paid a fixed monthly fee per patient, regardless of the number of 
times they see that patient in the month, could save up to 60 per 
cent over the current system and provide equivalent service. At 
least in the United States, where the study was conducted, that 
seems to be true. 
 
(1445) 
 
Obviously our system is much different than that south of the 
border, so we must do our own studies to see what the savings, if 
any, would be here. Before we jump head first into such a change, 
I maintain we must weigh all the benefits and all the drawbacks.  



2496  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if it’s all about cost savings, we are 
putting a significant proportion of our population at risk for 
fiscal matters only. 
 
Our focus must always be to continue to be providing the 
best possible care for our residents. If economics begin to 
dictate all our decisions, we are failing the people who need 
us most  the sick and the elderly. But I think it’s a 
discussion worth having, Mr. Speaker, because right now 
we’re living in the worst of both worlds. 
 
Decisions being made about our health care throughout our 
province more often than not these days are being made only 
with economics in mind. Health districts have seen their 
funding squeezed dry by this government; therefore they’ve 
had to make decisions based on what they can afford, not on 
what their people need. At the same time that these decisions 
are being made due to economics instead of care, what’s 
happened? Well, Mr. Speaker, like I said previously, the 
government hasn’t saved a plug nickel, not a dime, not a 
penny. 
 
The question on many people’s minds is this. Where is the 
money going? Because it certainly isn’t going to provide our 
people with the best quality of health care, the health care 
they deserve. 
 
That leads them to conclude that too much is being spent on 
administration; too much is falling into the sinkhole of 
government waste, which unfortunately is still a gaping 
chasm  as gaping under the NDP as it was under the 
Tories. The government must begin at long last to look at its 
own house before any other controversial changes are 
undertaken. 
 
The people have been through enough, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
think they can stand any more. The government must look to 
reducing costs other than those to direct medical services. So 
yes, by all means study the methods in which we pay our 
doctors. Study, consult, whatever. If there is a better way, it 
is your duty to bring the alternatives to the floor of this 
Assembly to be fully and thoughtfully debated. 
 
But before you begin fingering another part of our medical 
system as the main culprit in the waste in the system, you 
must look at your own operation to ensure that the money 
that is supposed to be used to keep our citizens well, to heal 
their wounds and soothe their pains, in fact is going in that 
direction. 
 
There’s no more room to blame others, Mr. Speaker. Health 
care is too important to be used as a political football. This 
government blames all others for its woes, but has yet to look 
into the mirror even once. And, Mr. Speaker, when they 
finally look in that mirror, I don’t believe they’re going to 
like what they see. They’re going to see what residents 
throughout the province have been seeing for some time 
now. They’re going to see a group of politicians who put 
their own political welfare above the welfare of those who 
elected them. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think they know that’s where the real reforms 
are going to have to take place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege to rise and just make a few comments regarding The 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, Bill No. 77. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve been hearing, this Bill certainly has 
some serious connotations that we must take into consideration. 
And just recently, in the last two weeks, we raised the question 
with the minister on behalf of the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) about the fact that the government, before they 
pursue any new changes in how doctors are billed or paid for 
services, that they take the time to talk with the profession. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I was coming in yesterday I happened to note 
there was a survey taken in the province of Manitoba  a survey 
which indicated that there were, I believe, something like 110 
more doctors in the cities of Brandon and Winnipeg than were 
necessary. And one would wonder why a government or why the 
public would be concerned. 
 
It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that if there are more doctors 
 if more people choose to perform medicine or to set up a 
practice in a large community  than what you would say would 
be the normal or the ability of the community to support that 
number of physicians, it would just be a detriment to the 
physicians themselves as there would be more to share the number 
of dollars that were available. 
 
And I would think that when it comes to the consumer, they would 
look upon that as a good thing. And it surprises me that a report 
would be given that would even cause a government to consider 
the fact of laying down some guidelines as to where physicians 
practise. 
 
We heard in B.C. (British Columbia) what happened when the 
province of B.C. tried to regulate where doctors practise. And I 
think what we’re going to find here in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and the concern that really arises out of this, if we start coming up 
with some new ways of financing or new ways of paying doctors 
for their services or bringing in new fees or whatever, Mr. Speaker 
. . . There are many communities who are struggling today to 
attract physicians to their communities. And a change without 
consulting with the Saskatchewan Medical Association and 
working with them and through them might be to the detriment of 
health care in this province. 
 
And so I find, Mr. Speaker, that before this Bill is passed, it would 
seem to me that maybe the government should give more thought 
to this piece of legislation. They should maybe take the time to sit 
down with the SMA and discuss it more fully. They should maybe 
take the time to talk with other stakeholders and, Mr. Speaker, 
come up with a solution. 
 
I can understand where the government is coming from and I can 
understand where the public are coming from when they look at 
the cost of providing health care and providing health services and 
the feeling that we need to set a limit, if you will, or draw the line. 
 
But so far, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what has been done over  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

the past five years and the arguments as to why we’ve cut 52 
hospitals or why we’ve cut so many care homes or care home 
beds or acute care beds, taken them out of service in this 
province, or why we’ve cut down service to level 1 and 2 
and restricted it to level 3 and 4 and even more so now to 
the level 4 area  why communities like Swift Current are 
losing their seniors’ care home and the city of Regina is 
looking at closure of the Plains Health Centre when we see a 
centre that has provided a very effective service to the people 
of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
And many of these questions are being asked and one has to 
ask, with all the reductions in services, why we haven’t seen 
a significant cut in the expenditures in health care. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we are spending more today than we did in 
1991 before all the cuts came in. And I guess I’m concerned 
that we would all of a sudden now blame the federal 
government or we blame the former Devine government or 
we’re blaming the health district boards for decisions that are 
being made. Now we’re looking at doctors as scapegoats, or 
patients. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, I believe the 
government should take some time to review this piece of 
legislation, and rather than rushing ahead with it, Mr. 
Speaker, they should indeed take the time to debate it and to 
sit down with all the stakeholders so that when a final 
decision has arrived, everyone is agreeable with it; and it is a 
decision that will have a real effect, have a real benefit, will 
continue with just the top-notch health care system and 
services that we’ve bragged about in this province, and that 
all the stakeholders will be more than pleased with what they 
have done through cooperation, working together, rather than 
the heavy hand of government coming down through a piece 
of legislation. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I feel that in that respect it would be 
important, and it’s important, that we allow the debate to 
take place, and I believe that we should adjourn debate and 
allow that process to continue. Thank you. I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 114  
An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown 
Foundation for District Health Boards and their 
Affiliates be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
one would hope when we have these debates in this House 
we could concentrate on what’s in the Bill, what it does, and 
how it affects the Saskatchewan public. In this forum of 
democracy we would like to concentrate on these Bills to see 
what’s in them and what should be changed, if any. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the farther we get into the 
session the more one thing strikes me about many of these  

Bills that come before us. There is nothing in them. And yes, there 
are lots of words and terms and definitions, but the real intent of 
these Bills to a great extent are simply not there. And therefore 
they cannot be debated fully and properly. 
 
Too often, Mr. Speaker, we come up against something in these 
Bills called regulations. Regulations are being used to a greater 
and greater extent to run this government and this province. And I 
think the people of Saskatchewan are being cheated by this 
government’s growing reliance on regulations. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it comes to the point where many of these 
Bills we debate in this supposedly democratic forum are simply 
meaningless because of the wide-ranging subjects that are left to 
be determined in the regulations. In other words, determined by 
cabinet, away from this House, away from the media, and away 
from the public. I don’t think there are any clearer example of this 
growing problem than it is in Bill 114. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we do get an idea of what the government wants 
to do with this legislation. As my colleagues have stated, we do 
have many problems with the Bill itself or what there is of it. We 
have major difficulty with this government’s turning towards 
charity to fund health care when the government knows full well 
it’s really their responsibility. 
 
However, as my colleagues and the official opposition have and 
will continue to speak on this, I want to speak for a few minutes 
today on what is not in the Bill, on what will be determined behind 
closed doors in regulations. Basically, Mr. Speaker, almost 
anything that tells how this government-appointed Crown 
foundation will work or how it will operate, will be determined in 
these regulations. 
 
I think it’s just unacceptable to ask this House to vote on a Bill 
like this when we have no indication how this foundation will 
operate. Simply unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. Let’s start with the 
powers of this new level of bureaucracy called Crown foundations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in most legislation, the power of such bodies are 
spelled out or at least in some detail. Not so here. The only hint of 
what powers this government-appointed body will have comes in 
clause 6, which gives the Crown foundation all of the capacity, 
rights, powers, and privileges of a natural person. Not clear 
enough for you. Okay, then it goes just a little further. 
 
It says the Lieutenant Governor in Council, or the cabinet to you 
and me, can make regulations restricting and regulating the powers 
of the foundation. Mr. Speaker, this means that the Crown 
foundation can virtually do anything it wants, subject only to its 
powers being cut down or regulated by the cabinet. 
 
My question is, why this is being done? Maybe I’m overly 
suspicious of a tricky bunch opposite. But I want some answers as 
to why this government didn’t follow the normal course of action 
and list the powers this body will have. What’s the need for giving 
it such wide-ranging powers? Why can’t it be given specific 
powers, and why can’t these powers be spelled out now for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
It appears the government wants to either hide something or wants  



2498  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

to have virtual control over this body, just as it has virtual 
control over everything else having to do with health care in 
our province, despite what it says about local representation 
on district health boards. I mean isn’t that precisely what 
health care was supposed to do? Weren’t decisions regarding 
our health supposed to be moved closer to the communities? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that’s what we were told by this 
government at that time. 
 
But as we’ve come to learn, this is a government that 
chooses not to live up to its commitments time after time 
after time. This is a government that has a hidden agenda 
behind every move it makes. Health reform wasn’t about 
making the health care system more responsive to local 
concerns; it was about deflecting the blame from the politics 
we see across from us; it was about giving them a convenient 
way of passing off blame and on to others. That’s what 
health reform was all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as it turns out, the government wants even more power 
now. This Bill and others we’re debating this session is proof 
enough of that. This isn’t a government that wants to be 
more democratic, and this is a government that wants all of 
the power concentrated in the minister’s office. And leaving 
so much up to regulations is a perfect way to do just that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is little reason to wonder why the Health 
minister and the government opposite want to hide from their 
own responsibility, their decisions and their choices. 
 
It’s little wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the members opposite 
want all the power to regulate and control health care in our 
province, and yet at the same time, shield themselves from 
all the blame. 
 
For a few moments, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell this House of 
the things that are facing health care in my constituency  
problems this government is responsible for. Like many 
constituencies in Saskatchewan, mine has a high senior 
population. And also like most areas, there has been a lack of 
planning by the government to meet the growing needs of 
our seniors; 45 per cent of the population in my riding is 
over the age of 40. Making the problem worse is the loss of 
funding of level 1 and 2 care homes in my riding. 
 
This in turn has brought about an increased need for private 
care homes which this government has heartily endorsed. 
These homes are often too costly for many seniors in need of 
long-term care. Therefore they have nowhere to turn or they 
must move miles away from their own communities to seek 
the care they need and the government does nothing but 
blame others and at the same time cuts funding. 
 
(1500) 
 
Furthermore, the closure of existing long-term facilities can 
be devastating to seniors, Mr. Speaker. Many of these people 
have been unable to leave these facilities for years. Forcing 
them out to move somewhere else can be traumatic and it 
can be life threatening. 

Yet the government does nothing but blame others. Mr. Speaker, 
at the hospital in Kamsack there are only two RNs (registered 
nurse) on each shift who are responsible for 18 acute care patients, 
emergency patients, and who must oversee long-term care patients. 
Obviously this decreases the quality of care they can provide, and 
further cuts are predicted. Yet the government does nothing but 
blame others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one positive thing that has happened in my 
constituency is the new health centre in Langenburg. This facility 
was funded by local taxation over a period of time as well as from 
monies from the hospital that was closed by this government in 
1992. It was the people of Langenburg who built this facility, Mr. 
Speaker. The government deserves and will get no credit from the 
people who live there. The only thing this government deserves 
credit for is the absolute abandonment of health care in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government’s lack of commitment to 
health care in rural Saskatchewan is truly scary, especially for the 
people who live there. And try as they might to pass on that 
responsibility for the mess they have created . . . is not going to 
work. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this government tries to blame all their 
troubles in the world on federal offloading, that whopping 1.5 per 
cent cut of our provincial budget received. That amount of course, 
has been more than made up for in gambling revenue. But we 
never hear the government talk about that. We only hear them 
passing responsibility off to others because, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been their game plan. As if we need any lessons from this 
government on the evils of offloading, Mr. Speaker — this is a 
government that’s turned offloading into an art form. 
 
As a former reeve, I’ve seen the devastation this government’s 
budget cuts have had firsthand, and they’re not through yet, Mr. 
Speaker. Next year, municipalities will receive a 25 per cent cut in 
their funding  25 per cent, Mr. Speaker. There’s no telling what 
other vital services will have to be cut in rural areas to make up for 
this tremendous hit on top of the ones we’ve already received 
since 1991. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, forgive me if I don’t cry out for this bunch across 
from us who have only had to absorb one and a half per cent, and 
forgive the people for not shedding any tears over the tales of 
woes spun by this government. The people know the government 
are still in complete control. 
 
They know that they control the purse-strings, the lifeblood of our 
health care system. And now the people can see the government is 
still asserting control with this ludicrous power that is left to the 
regulations in which the cabinet controls behind closed doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown foundation Bill acknowledges the 
generous nature of all Saskatchewan residents. Many of the 
facilities in Saskatchewan today are in place through the giving of 
local residents. Mr. Speaker, the Plains hospital to a great degree is 
an example of this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill leaves the power of the Crown 
foundation wide open. There’s not even a guarantee in the Bill 
telling donors they can direct their contributions to specific areas 
or to specific projects. All the Bill states is that the Crown  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

foundation must only consider direction of the donors. 
 
Well isn’t that nice, Mr. Speaker? They will consider the 
requests of those donating their money. But of course they’re 
not bound to follow these directions. In other words, once 
again, the people really have no say. 
 
And if these donors don’t like how the Crown foundation 
has spent their money, what can they do? Well of course, 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. The government has made sure of this 
by restricting the right of the public to sue the Crown 
foundation or the minister who appoints and controls. It is 
the money the people have so generously donated is misused 
or squandered by this government . . . appointed government 
board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite forgot sometimes 
that we do live in a democracy. They do not control 
everything in this province. Well at least not yet, Mr. 
Speaker. This is not Communist Russia, Mr. Speaker, and 
this government works for the people, not the other way 
around. 
 
The NDP continue to government with unprecedented 
arrogance and contempt for the public. Mr. Speaker, this has 
got to stop  and it will stop, Mr. Speaker. It’ll stop in 1999 
when the people of Saskatchewan tell the crew opposite they 
are tired of not being listened to and not being heard. 
They’re soon going to tell them that they’ve heard enough of 
political trickery and their deceitful way of running this 
province. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, deserve better. 
And they will get better, Mr. Speaker, but only once we rid 
ourselves of the government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province should not be governed through 
regulation or government decree. It should be governed 
honestly and openly in this House. That’s the way our 
democratic system . . . whether the NDP likes it or not. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to stand in this Assembly as well and raise some 
concerns that we have regarding the Bill before us, Bill No. 
114, the Crown foundations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our caucus has a number of serious concerns 
about this Bill. Mr. Speaker, we feel that this Bill is a typical 
example of Trojan Horse legislation. On the surface, it seems 
harmless. But on closer examination, it is quite dangerous. 
 
We all know of the challenges that face health care in the 
province today. Likewise we all know that the province had 
to show some fiscal restraint in this field, as in all others. Of 
course, Mr. Speaker, our caucus has maintained in the past 
and shall continue to maintain that this government has badly 
mishandled their responsibility regarding health care in this 
province over the past five years. 
 
The cuts, Mr. Speaker, that have been made have been  

sloppy, we feel, and we feel they’ve been cruel. We feel especially 
that they’ve left our rural areas with a truly second-class health 
care system, which the minister says is not second class but is still 
a top-notch health care system. 
 
The Premier, Mr. Speaker, loves to talk about how we should 
avoid a two-tier health system, but he has already created one. Ask 
anyone in this province, especially outside of the two major 
centres  a system for urban areas and another for rural people 
that is vastly inferior. 
 
In spite of these many assaults by this government, the people of 
rural Saskatchewan have rallied behind their local health care 
services. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of attending 
meetings over the past month where people have gathered together 
with some major concerns about health care and about the services 
in their communities. 
 
And what I have found interesting, Mr. Speaker, is while the 
individuals have gathered and have concerns, they haven’t 
specifically just complained all the time but they’ve offered 
alternatives and they have asked  whether it’s the district board 
or whether it happens to be a representative from the Department 
of Health  they’ve asked, if we did this, would that be possible 
and would it be a means with which we can continue to provide a 
level of service that would meet the needs of our community? So I 
think Saskatchewan residents certainly have shown and will 
continue to show they have ideas and they have ways, innovative 
ways, of meeting the need out there. 
 
It is indeed inspiring to see the number of people who made 
significant donations and bequests in their wills to their local 
health services. This is the kind of community spirit for which this 
province is justly famous. And I think, Mr. Speaker, we’re all well 
aware of that. We look at Telemiracle and we look at the funds 
that have been raised for people, needy people, across this 
province, and how people have been helped, whether young or 
old. And in many cases it’s because of physical ailments or 
problems or health care needs. 
 
However, regarding this Bill, in this instance, as always, the NDP 
are clearly afraid of anything that resembles local independence. It 
is truly ironic to hear the Health minister say, either you believe in 
local decision making or you do not. 
 
This government has never shown any belief in the 
decision-making powers of local people. Only grudgingly did they 
hold elections for the district health boards. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
raised that question day after day in this Assembly back in the 
‘92-93 period about electing boards rather than continually 
appointing them. 
 
And while we give credit for opening up election to eight board 
members, we still feel, Mr. Speaker, that it’s time the government 
opened up total elections of district boards and allowed them and 
gave them the autonomy that they have been requiring and asking 
for, in view of the fact that they seem to get blamed for everything. 
Even then, they made sufficient provisions for appointed board 
members to ensure that the provincial government will maintain 
strict control over their decisions. This, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP  



2500  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

way: big, central government, Big Brother constantly 
hanging over the shoulders of the taxpayers telling them 
what is and isn’t good for them. 
 
And we see this once again in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, a board 
entirely appointed by the provincial government, centralizing 
all charitable donations to health districts and distributing 
this money as they see fit. 
 
It is obvious what the NDP is afraid of. If the Health minister 
decides to close a hospital, who are the local people to say 
that they want to keep it open even if they can put up the 
money? The government clearly does not want local people 
challenging their authority or their decisions. As I said 
earlier, this Bill is a Trojan Horse. On the surface, it closely 
resembles the foundations that serve universities. One, Mr. 
Speaker, cannot argue with the reasoning that people who 
donate to health services should be entitled to tax credits for 
that donation. And this Bill will help them do that. We 
recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However there is a significant difference between this Bill 
and the university foundation Bills. Each of the universities 
has their own foundation. If people give to the University of 
Saskatchewan, they can feel confident that their money will 
go towards projects at that institution and will not be 
diverted to pay down the debt of the University of Regina. 
 
This Bill gives no such assurance to people who donate to 
health services however. All their money goes into one big 
pot. And only the Big Brother, provincial government, can 
say where it will go. 
 
I find it truly offensive, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill would 
presume to take away the rights of individuals to donate 
money to and only to the health institution of their choice. 
Instead the Bill states that the new board, appointed by the 
minister, will take into consideration the wishes of the donor 
but will not be bound by them. I find this, Mr. Speaker, to be 
completely unacceptable. 
 
I know the excuse given by the minister is that sometimes 
people may donate money to something that doesn’t make 
sense, such as an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) clinic 
in Arcola, and certainly there is none there. However in such 
cases, if it is money that is willed by an individual, the 
executor of the will or one of the family members should be 
able to decide what the secondary choice would be. After all, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that person knows the deceased more 
than anyone else. 
 
If the donator is not deceased, don’t you think that that 
person should be able to decide where their own money is to 
go? And I’ve just received a couple of letters from 
individuals asking about the funds that they’ve donated to 
hospitals, and is it really used in the hospitals they donate to? 
Well under this piece of legislation, it really will not allow it 
to be. While the minister says it may be, it can be, this 
appointed board will have the choice and the ability to 
determine whether it is. It certainly shouldn’t be decided by a 
group of strangers who are getting paid from the interest  

made on donations. 
 
And this is another thing that offends me, and I think will offend a 
lot of people, which is another point of contention. 
 
The minister was happy to tell reporters that the new level of 
bureaucracy he is creating won’t cost the government money 
because board members will be paid out of interest gained on 
donations. Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, I don’t think that’s much to 
be proud of. I’m not sure that every individual who donates or 
would donate to this foundation would be pleased to know that the 
interest their money is generating all of a sudden is going not to 
the services that they’re providing the funding for, but is going to 
pay for another appointed board member. 
 
That’s why, as I said it earlier in the Assembly at question period, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, we do have boards across this province duly 
elected, some appointed, who can handle and manage that money 
and have a better idea of how that money should be used in their 
own community or in their own district. When people donate 
money to their local hospital, that means all of the money, 
including interest, should go straight to the facility. It shouldn’t be 
wasted on paying unneeded and unnecessary bureaucrats. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would have no problem with this Bill if it set up 
separate district foundations or required the provincial foundation 
to respect the wishes of donators. As it stands, I repeat that I find 
this Bill offensive, a money grab by the province, and an insult to 
the rights of charitable people. 
 
I urge the government to give the people what they want and need; 
I urge the government to enhance tax credit for those who are 
donating but to get rid of the new board this Bill creates and get 
rid of not listening to where people want their money to go. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find, in view of the fact that many 
people have concerns that . . . ongoing concerns with the issues 
that are being raised out there, I find it imperative that at this time 
we adjourn debate on this Bill. I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1515) 

Bill No. 76 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 76  An Act to 
amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital 
Act and The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as my 
colleague, the hon. member from Cypress Hills, pointed out the 
other day, this Health minister has made a great show out of being 
the defender of local autonomy of district health boards. He was 
even so bold as to challenge opposition members the other day by 
saying that either you believe in local decision making or you do 
not. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, shows just how hollow those words are.  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

Time and again through this session, whenever our caucus 
has tried to hold the minister accountable for the cruel 
consequences of his government’s health policies, he has 
tried to turn the focus on to the district health boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we brought to the public’s attention that 
the government’s health cut-backs were going to throw 
seniors out into the street in Swift Current, he said, don’t 
look at me. It was the district health board that made that 
decision. When we sought his intervention into the closure 
of the hospitals and acute care beds in Pangman, Estevan, 
and other communities, the minister threw up his hands and 
said, it’s not my responsibility, go ask the district health 
boards. 
 
When we charged him with breaking his commitment to 
sustain services at the Radville Marian hospital he said, 
sorry, all I can say is that district health boards have to live 
with their own budgets. 
 
From the beginning, Mr. Speaker, of the government’s 
reform of the health care system, our caucus has realized that 
the district health boards were being set up to do nothing but 
act as scapegoats for the NDP’s destruction of the province’s 
health care system. 
 
This Bill serves as a further proof that while the Health 
minister is more than happy to leave the districts with the 
blame, he is not prepared to give them any authority. 
 
I find it quite curious that the government should bring in 
this legislation at this time. Through the past three years they 
have not found it necessary to bring in the changes they are 
proposing today. Why should they bring them in today? Of 
course for most of the past three years they had the luxury of 
appointing the boards of the health districts. There was 
scarcely any need to have rigid control over local decisions if 
you could keep control over the local decision makers by 
appointing them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after years of delaying the election of 
these boards, the government is finally faced with district 
health boards which are at least partially elected and 
responsive to the needs of local people. Well we can’t have 
that now, can we, Mr. Speaker? We can’t have local people 
making their own decisions. After all, in the minds of the 
members opposite, the NDP always know what is best for 
the people, so we can’t either have a situation where the 
people might overrule the decisions of the Big Brother 
government in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes three distinct attacks on the 
autonomy of district health boards. First it restricts still 
further the ability of boards to acquire or dispose of property 
without first seeking the approval of the minister. 
 
Secondly, it requires that all health districts adopt a particular 
philosophy and a particular approach to service delivery 
which has already been predetermined for them by the 
Department of Health. To make sure that the boards toe the 
line on these policies, the minister is giving himself the  

ability to overrule any by-laws passed by the districts. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill extends, to a still more ridiculous 
degree, the power of the minister to impose public administrators 
on districts and their affiliates for any reason he sees fit. 
 
In summary, the power to control its expenditures, the power to set 
policies, the power to impose direct authority on boards and 
affiliates  for a man who continually says that he has no desire 
to influence local health decisions  the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
sure seems to be asking for a lot of power over them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill strikes at the very heart of the issue of local 
autonomy. Those of us both in and out of this Assembly who are 
concerned about the delivery of health care have fought too long 
and hard to ensure that local views are respected. We cannot allow 
this legislation to pass unchallenged. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
urge all members to join with our caucus in defeating this Bill. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every day 
I rise in this Assembly, along with my colleagues, to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens with respect to the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. By the end of this session, we 
will have presented petitions totalling over 70,000 names. What 
this government must remember is that there’s probably a family 
represented by each name on that petition. That means thousands 
and thousands of people were so upset with the announcement that 
the Plains Health Centre was closing that they were actually 
moved to do something about it. They decided to voice their 
protest at rallies and by signing these precious petitions. 
 
The key thing this government must remember is that these 
petitions are vital to the democratic process. Their sheer amount is 
a powerful sign that the government should re-examine its 
decision to direct the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
And make no mistake. I know the government is behind the 
decision to close this valuable health facility. It was pushing for 
the closure of the Plains under the guise of the old health board. 
But its threats have become even more blatant with the mandate it 
has outlined for the new health board. It maintains its control of 
this supposedly independent body by maintaining a high 
percentage of appointees. Even though the Health minister stands 
in this Assembly day after day spouting the same rhetoric — that 
his government is not responsible for spreading misery across 
Saskatchewan with the closure of over 52 hospitals and millions 
and millions of dollars in health service cuts — I know he is 
ultimately responsible. 
 
Unfortunately Bill No. 76, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 
will give the government even more control over the decision 
making of the health boards. What is even more disturbing about 
provisions within Bill No. 76 is that it will provide mechanisms 
that will allow the government to emasculate the current health 
boards and any meagre input municipalities may have by 
withholding funding, in order to protest board decisions. It’s 
astonishing to discover that Bill No. 76 will actually provide the 
government with more tools to stifle the democratic process when 
it is already accomplishing that goal under the current health care 
structure. 



2502  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

The Save the Plains Committee published a letter outlining 
its concerns in Regina’s Leader-Post. Health board member, 
Darlene Sterling, revealed the methods the government was 
using to force the new board into upholding the plans to 
close the Plains. These strong-arm tactics included a letter 
from the government stating, and I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Health department informed the 
Regina District Health Board that if they deviated from 
the course already established, they would have to repay 
the $5 million advanced last year to meet their deficit. 
The health board would not then get help with the 
deficit that is surely going to be incurred this year as 
well. With a gun like that to its head, what choice was 
left. 

 
How can the minister honestly say the decision-making 
power is in the hands of the board when board members are 
virtually being blackmailed with the threat of funding cuts. 
The people of Saskatchewan know that the government 
ultimately controls the purse-strings for district health 
boards. 
 
The Minister of Health is not fooling anyone when he tries to 
deflect responsibility for the massive health care cuts that are 
stripping away services and health care jobs across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know this government has not allowed the Regina District 
Health Board careful consideration of the decision to close 
the Plains Health Centre. The closure is not based on any 
sound economic analysis. The sad fact is that there has never 
been an independent benefit/cost study done. 
 
Thousands of the names on the petitions that I help present 
to this House every day are from rural Saskatchewan. In fact 
about 70 per cent of people who are treated at the Plains 
Health Centre are from rural communities. The Plains has 
always been fairly accessible to them because of its location 
on the outskirts of Regina. 
 
Plans to close the centre and to disperse those services to the 
Pasqua and the General will make it harder on rural patients. 
Many people will have to travel through downtown Regina 
to get to the Pasqua and the General. They could waste 
valuable time that in cases of emergency may mean the 
difference between life and death. 
 
The plan to close the Plains is moving forward even though 
there are still serious questions about whether or not the two 
remaining hospitals will be able to handle the volume of 
patients who need emergency care. The General Hospital is 
already overcrowded and there is barely any room for 
expansion at the Pasqua. That means more long lines in the 
waiting room for non-emergency service and even longer 
waiting-lists for non-emergency surgery. 
 
There is already an extensive waiting-list for people waiting 
for open heart surgery. I have to wonder if the Health 
minister has considered the possibility that many more 
people needing such surgery may seek it outside of  

Saskatchewan because they can’t endure a long waiting-list for 
that serious of an operation. Of course the Plains not only treats 
rural patients, but many emergency patients from within Regina 
are currently rushed to the Plains. 
 
Accessibility from within the city is also a concern if the Plains is 
closed. It’s estimated that an ambulance trip from north Regina to 
the General in rush hour traffic could take at least a half an hour. 
In most of those emergency cases, the first 20 minutes after a 
serious accident usually determines if a victim will survive or die. 
 
Many people I have spoken to are not just concerned about the 
accessibility to health care services after the Plains closes, but they 
are gravely concerned about the quality of health care services that 
will be provided. 
 
Regina and Saskatoon have approximately the same health care 
load. But Regina is already having difficulty attracting specialists. 
In fact Regina already has 100 less specialists than Saskatoon. 
People across Saskatchewan are wondering if closing Regina’s 
only trauma centre will discourage even more specialists from 
choosing Regina as their workplace. 
 
The number of health care professionals currently employed at the 
Plains Health Centre are also worried that their jobs are in 
jeopardy. They are not assured by the Health minister’s statements 
that he does not anticipate a lot of job loss at the Plains as a result 
of the closure. I am sure the minister knows that there will in fact 
be a significant number of job losses. 
 
As recently as last week, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
revealed that the future amalgamation of union bargaining units 
could result in widespread job bumping within the two remaining 
hospitals. SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) says dozens of 
people are already losing their jobs, so that by the time the Plains 
is slated for closure in 1998, there probably won’t be any jobs left 
to cut. 
 
The Canadian Union of Public Employees is quoted in the June 7 
edition of the Leader-Post as saying: 
 

Since the announced closure of the Plains in 1993, the health 
district has eliminated 285 jobs at the city’s three hospitals; 
130 of those job cuts were at the Plains. 

 
Keeping along the same line of thought, it logically follows that if 
there are hundreds less health care professionals employed by the 
Regina health care district, the quality of care for the same patient 
load will be negatively affected. The target number of closures of 
acute care beds, as outlined in the Towards 2000 report proposed 
by the Regina health board, is to have just 734 acute care beds to 
accommodate the acute care patient load in Regina and area. 
 
According to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the current 
number of acute care beds in Regina is only 735. Can the Health 
minister tell me if that means that there will only be one more 
acute care bed closure between now and 1998? I don’t believe he 
can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

The prospect of a further number of acute care bed closures 
becomes even more frightening when you consider the sheer 
population numbers just in Regina, which now tops 180,000 
people. Studies show that in the near future, Regina’s 
population will jump by at least 50,000. 
 
A veteran economist with the University of Regina outlined 
his concern in a letter to the editor in the August 29 edition 
of the Leader-Post. John Boan pointed out that there can be 
no value placed on having more than two hospitals in the 
event of a natural disaster such as a tornado. He writes: 
 

If one hospital got knocked out, there would be two left 
to cope with the multiple injuries from such a disaster. 
It’s a small point. But insurance is not taken out because 
one knows there’s going to be an accident, but in case 
there is one. 

 
He goes on to point out that the Regina District Health Board 
claims that closing the Plains Health Centre will save about 
$10 million a year, yet plans to upgrade the Pasqua and 
General hospitals will cost at least $90 million plus interest. 
Mr. Boan correctly points out that it will be the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers who will be footing the bill for the 
interest on the construction bill. 
 
It will be the Saskatchewan taxpayers who will foot the bill 
for any future renovations to the Plains Health Centre 
building to make it more marketable. I cannot believe that a 
multimillion dollar decision that will affect the future health 
care of thousands of Saskatchewan people will be left 
untouched by this government. 
 
I would like the Minister of Health to explain how, exactly, 
his wonderful health care reform remains to be a democratic 
process when he and his government continue to turn a blind 
eye to the thousands of names on the petitions we have 
presented concerning the closure of the Plains. 
 
I would like him to explain why this government continues 
to ignore the dozens and dozens of questions by economists 
and other health care experts about the feasibility of the plan 
to shut down the Plains. I would like to know how the 
minister and this government can ignore the dozens of letters 
to Saskatchewan papers about the Plains impending closure. 
 
I would like to know how the minister can ignore the 
thousands of people who are turning out for rallies and 
meetings across the province to show their disgust and 
concern about massive health care cuts. 
 
I would also like to know why the minister feels the 
government needs additional authority and power that will be 
provided within The Health Districts Amendment Act, when 
day after day the minister stands in this House and claims he 
and the government are ultimately not responsible for health 
care cuts that are sweeping across Saskatchewan. 
 
Bill No. 76 will place further limits on health boards. And it 
will also take away municipalities’ right to legally challenge 
decisions made by the district health boards. This legislation  

will provide several mechanisms for the government to stifle any 
protests Saskatchewan people may have about district health board 
decisions. 
 
The undisputable facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are many health 
board members in Regina and across Saskatchewan are appointed 
by this government. Secondly, this government directs how much 
funding the district health board gets. And the current Regina 
Health Board members were already threatened with even more 
drastic funding cuts if they did not uphold the plan to close the 
Plains. And thirdly, the government continues to exercise control 
over district health boards across Saskatchewan, including the 
Regina board. 
 
The provincial government was elected by and must answer to the 
people. It’s time this government and the health board minister 
change their ways and actually start living up to that responsibility. 
 
I want to know why the government feels that it needs all the extra 
authority that it will attain with the passage of Bill No. 76. Why 
does it need more unchecked power when it is already managing 
to force its overall plan for massive health cuts down the throats of 
district board members and the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
If this NDP government truly aims to uphold the basic principles 
of democracy, it would start listening to all the thousands of 
people who are attending the health care meetings and rallies; it 
would take note of the 70,000 people who have signed petitions 
about the closure of the Plains. 
 
If this government truly believed in exercising democracy, it 
would put future health care cuts on hold, including re-examining 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Finally, if this government truly believes in the principles of 
democracy, it would not try to ram through Bill No. 76. The 
Saskatchewan people will not forget the callous disregard the 
government and the Health minister has shown them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
and join in the debate on Bill 76, an Act to amend The Health 
Districts Act and other Acts. Mr. Speaker, or . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join this debate not because I support 
the legislation but because I take a great pride in speaking up for 
my constituents. I take great pride in speaking up for the many 
other people in this province who have been deprived of a voice 
because their representative is muzzled on health care by the NDP 
caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look over at the members opposite and it saddens 
me to think of the many thousands of people who don’t have a 
voice in this House because their MLA doesn’t have the courage 
to speak out. 
 
I think of the thousands in Regina South who are upset about the 
cuts in the Regina Health District and the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. If not for the opposition, their voices would be 
silent because the member from Regina South puts politics ahead  



2504  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

of the public service. 
 
We have a controversial Bill before us today and yet I know 
the voice of the member from Swift Current will also be 
silent. No one will hear him tell how this Bill will affect his 
many constituents who will be without health care jobs. No 
one will hear him speak out about his constituents who must 
move at an advanced age in what should otherwise have 
been their happy golden years. 
 
Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud to join this debate only 
so I can help give a voice to the many people who are deeply 
concerned about this government’s misdirected approach to 
health care. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think of the other 
members who will not so much as whisper a word to 
represent their constituents on important Bills in issues 
dealing with health care. 
 
The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy will also 
undoubtedly be silent. I guess dreams of summer holidays 
and caucus discipline come before the need to fight for a 
valued service that forms the very fabric of what it means to 
be a resident of this province and what makes us all proud to 
be Canadians. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while protests and lay-offs continue 
impacting upon health care in the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency, much the same will be happening with the 
member from Estevan. The health facilities in his district will 
also continue to feel the pinch of health cuts. The very 
community he represents will be left with no voice as he’ll 
not find the courage within himself to speak his mind and 
stand up on this important issue for the people who elected 
him. 
 
The member from Estevan’s silence will not surprise me, 
however, as he’s told his own local paper that his caucus 
colleagues will expend every effort to rid themselves of 
dissenting views. Last summer for instance, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member from Estevan was quoted saying that 
he once had an opinion on the Plains Hospital but he had had 
it brainwashed out of him. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that was a tongue-in-cheek 
remark but the member’s statement and his behaviour with 
key issues like the Bill before us today, speak volumes about 
how this government deals with health care. There’s no 
tolerance over on the government benches for any dissenters, 
even if they just want to speak up for their own constituents. 
There’s no tolerance whatsoever allowed on this issue. 
 
I’m sure many of those members go home on the weekend 
and are given such a hard time about their silence on the 
health care issue and on the Bills that impact on it, like this 
one, that many wonder whether being an MLA is worth it 
after all. I’m sure a number of these members I’ve mentioned 
sit back and say to themselves, is it worth it? Why don’t I 
just cross the floor and join the opposition where I could 
have a chance to speak up? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when Bills like this one come to the  

floor of this House I’m sure some members have thoughts like 
that, but then they look at how the Premier keeps calling the 
member from Wood River a turncoat, and they think to 
themselves, could I put up with that kind of constant attack on my 
character? 
 
They toy with these thoughts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They weigh the 
benefits of keeping silent against those of keeping promises to 
themselves and their constituents to speak up and try and be good 
public servants and representatives. 
 
So far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier is winning this battle with 
his catcalls of turncoat, and the result is silence. I take great 
pleasure in speaking for the many thousands of constituents whose 
voices have been drowned out by this sort of politicking by certain 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to this Bill today, not only do I 
take great pleasure in speaking for the constituents of Swift 
Current, Regina South, Weyburn-Big Muddy, and Estevan, but I 
also take pleasure in speaking for the constituents of the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
That member, Mr. Speaker, was a respected man in his 
community, and I would say considered by most to be a nice, 
personable gentlemen. But his own constituents are wondering 
why he’s so silent while the health system in his community 
crumbles. They wondered in the past how he could be so strongly 
opposed to casinos in his own city but sit as a member of a 
government that’s forcing five casinos on the province while 
saddling his own community with dozens of VLTs  the crack 
cocaine of gambling. 
 
An important Bill like the one before us today will impose some 
controversial changes on our health system, but yet no word will 
be heard from the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. Health 
care in his seat is in the midst of a crisis that is not likely to go 
away and yet a member who was elected to deal with matters like 
these refuses to uphold the interests of the people that placed their 
trust in him. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for months now I’ve attempted to give 
people a voice. Health care and the changes occurring to the health 
system through Bills like the one before us are issues of paramount 
importance to the people of this province. 
 
We sit in this House and often wonder why people become so 
cynical about the legislative process and about their politicians. I 
say wonder no more; the evidence of why people are so cynical is 
all around us. We have cabinet ministers getting convicted; we 
have secret trusts; we have political parties that steal public money 
and then avoid paying it back. 
 
Worst of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people send members they 
believe they can trust, to this House to represent their interests. 
They invest much of their time and tax dollars and above all, faith 
in these individuals. For their reward, the public that continues to 
go to the polls receives elected officials who have no interest in 
representing the concerns of the average person. They have no 
interest in speaking up on Bills like the one before this House 
today. They have no interest in fighting for their constituents on  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

issues like health care unless they can see some place to 
score safe political points. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what politics has brought us to. 
For many communities this sort of behaviour threatens to rob 
them of necessary medical facilities. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is shameful. 
 
To the members I’ve mentioned, the member from Swift 
Current, the member from Estevan, the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, the member from Regina South, and 
lastly, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I would like 
to offer some advice. This is an important Bill and health 
issues are important to your communities. So I suggest you 
speak to them, and when doing so, speak up for your 
constituents. I realize, however, that given these members are 
on the government side, they fear speaking up on these 
issues and they fear being punished for doing so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for some of these members I hold some 
hope, while others, like the member from Regina South who 
seems totally immersed in the life of politics  he has no 
interest in the lives of his constituents  one has to remain 
sceptical. 
 
(1545) 
 
To these members I say that when you go home on the 
weekends and face ridicule from your constituents for not 
speaking out, remember these events are just trials in your 
life like any other. They’re trials and difficulties like others 
you face. The objective isn’t to avoid every trial in life; the 
objective is to gain from them. Every trial and difficulty we 
face as human beings should give us strength. And strength 
can give you the courage to speak out for what the members 
know is right. Courage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, 
produces hope, and hope never disappoints. 
 
So I say to the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, gain 
from the ridicule you now suffer for your silence on these 
important issues like the legislation before us. Use these 
experiences to find the courage within yourselves to stand up 
to your colleagues and speak out on the disastrous situation 
facing health care in this province. Stand up and speak out. 
By doing so, you’ll give your constituents hope that their 
health system will not be destroyed by a government that’s 
strayed from its support for quality care in Saskatchewan. 
 
The voices of these members could not only give their 
constituents hope, but it will not disappoint these members 
either. They will learn that they can fight for what’s good 
and right and they will be able to handle whatever scorn or 
punishment that caucus over there chooses to place on them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, until those members and others like 
them choose to speak up, as I said before, I will be pleased to 
ensure that the concerns of their constituents continue to be 
heard. 
 
The Bill before us is controversial. It’s just one more in 
another long line of controversial measures this government  

imposed on our health system. The basic problem with the Bill, 
and with the original legislation it attempts to amend, is a simple 
one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When The Health Districts Act was 
introduced, this government told everyone that it wanted to 
empower communities, that it wanted to reform the health system 
so that it would be both community and wellness oriented. The 
members opposite told everyone that they’d have a better health 
system in the end. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, four years have almost passed now and 
we know what this is all about. Today we look at our health 
system and we find that it isn’t really community oriented; it isn’t 
really wellness oriented either. All people really see when they 
view the health system is the hand of government slashing services 
and ensuring that there really is just less health care to go around. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simply what’s wrong with this Bill. 
While the government might wish to tell everyone this Bill will 
clarify housekeeping matters and further empower districts and 
affiliate agencies, the end result will be anything but. That, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is sad, but that’s been the way this government’s 
handled health care reform since it began the process back in 
1992. 
 
Back then people might have toyed with the argument and the 
public relations fluff that health reform was about wellness and 
empowering communities. But today, people see it for what it 
really is. Health reform is simply about Bills like this that rob 
control from our communities, and it’s simply about leaving 
Saskatchewan residents with less and less health care. The more 
this government imposes its cuts on the health system, the more 
readily people in this province realize that this government is 
simply feeding them a line about community and about wellness. 
 
The more cuts this government makes to the health system, the 
more tainted and distant are the memories of CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) icons who, unlike the members 
opposite, were admittedly committed to quality health care. While 
the members opposite try and pass legislation like this, they 
continue to remind themselves and everyone else of people like 
Woodrow Lloyd and T.C. Douglas. 
 
The Minister of Health loves to pull up a picture of a former 
Liberal leader kicking the door of this very Chamber to protest the 
introduction of medicare. That being said, the Liberal Party has 
steadfastly supported medicare for years and will continue to do 
so. Liberals extended medicare beyond this province to the country 
as a whole, and that is the proud achievement of Lester Pearson. 
 
It’s such an important achievement that many Canadians now 
identify medicare as an integral part of our Canadian identity. 
Since that time Liberals such as Monique Bégin worked to defend 
the state of our health system from innumerable pressures, Despite 
burgeoning debts left by the previous Mulroney administration, 
medicare remains a cornerstone of public policy across this 
country. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the members opposite pull out their 
icons in debate such as this, they do so in order to forget what  



2506  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

they’re really doing to our medicare system. They do it to try 
and forget that maybe the changes they impose, like those 
requested in this Bill, are sometimes not a good idea. They 
also do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to wipe from their memories 
the faces of the many people who have fallen between the 
cracks in this health care system. 
 
A month or so ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I gave the Minister 
of Health a picture, seeing as he’s so fond of looking at 
photographs. While he dwells on his icons and pictures of 
Liberal leaders protesting health changes, he forgot the face 
of one such man who fell between the cracks. 
 
The photograph I showed the minister was one of Mr. Jack 
Nicholson who fell off his toilet while in the care of home 
care workers. After that, he was not admitted to the hospital 
for three days. On the day he was finally admitted, his family 
had to go right to the CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
district to beg that he be given a bed. Two weeks later, this 
gentleman died of his fall. His daughter remains deeply 
disappointed that no proper investigation was ever done. She 
would sue, but she has no money to do so. Her aims in doing 
so would not be to get money but to ensure that this sort of 
thing never happens again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mention this sad and regrettable story 
because it shows what this government’s real intents are 
behind legislation like that before us. Since health care 
reform was imposed on us by this government, the Minister 
of Health and his colleagues have had one common goal. 
That goal is to ensure that they avoid taking responsibility 
for the mess they continue to make of our health system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the incident dealing with Mr. 
Nicholson is just one such example. What we see here is a 
government that’s refusing to act when it knows it should. 
The members of the cabinet are always happy to hire an 
impartial investigator to help clear a fellow cabinet minister 
of wrongdoing, but when an 84-year-old man dies while in 
the care of health workers the minister is happy to leave the 
investigation of the matter with self-interested parties. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister is happy to leave the matter 
in the hands of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
and the district health board because he wants to distance his 
government from what one of his senior staff in his 
department so callously term as fallen sparrows. 
 
This Bill is no different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
government wants to make amendments which will alter The 
Health Districts Act so it’s easier for the government to pass 
responsibility to other agencies. Whether it’s a matter of 
people falling through cracks or people suffering because of 
health care cuts, the government’s game plan doesn’t 
change. The members opposite just keep the course and 
continue to do anything necessary to avoid taking 
responsibility for their actions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill before us is another attempt by 
this government to distance itself from responsibility for its 
decisions with respect to health care. It’s an example of how  

government is taking powers away from communities for health 
care while claiming to be promoting community involvement and 
local control. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while there are a few house-cleaning 
amendments in this Bill, for the most part it’s simply just another 
clever disguise from the private school kids opposite who think 
they know better than the rest of us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I begin explaining how this 
government is wrenching control away from communities, I would 
like to comment on the principles of community involvement and 
accountability. 
 
Since my election to office I’ve spoken to a wide variety of people 
about health care. Many of these people are the constituents of the 
seemingly mute members I referred to earlier. Some of the 
individuals that I spoke to lamented the loss of representation 
afforded under our previous system of health boards. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, under that old system everything was clear and 
understandable. Everyone knew there were lots of health boards in 
the province and everyone knew that members of those boards 
worked for free. In addition, and most importantly, everyone knew 
that the provincial government was responsible for health care 
funding to the numerous boards around the province. 
 
The other thing which people lament is the loss of a more natural 
form of representation in favour of a more contrived one, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. When we used to have union hospital boards in 
this province, they generally were made up of representatives from 
each municipality, while participating urban communities were 
often given more representatives than their less populated rural 
counterparts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government took a system where people 
had over 400 boards that were voluntary in nature and reduced 
them to 30 boards. That’s a huge change, and when this was done, 
the people of Saskatchewan lost a natural form of representation. 
 
When you have many small boards that are voluntary in nature, the 
issues which they deal with tended to be more manageable. Today 
we have boards that deal with budgets in excess of $50 million, 
and in the case of Regina and Saskatoon, in excess of $250 
million. 
 
With some 8 to 12 members many board members find it difficult 
to get as involved in the issues facing their health districts as their 
predecessors once did on boards for individual facilities. 
 
What results is a situation where management provides the reports 
at meetings and government officials and administrators wield 
greater influence against the health board members in districts 
across the province. 
 
There are other things which people lament beyond the loss of 
small local boards where board members had ample time to deal 
with every issue. 
 
People regret that they often no longer know who their board 
members are. In the past, one likely knew who sat on the board for 
local facilities because they were so numerous they often were our  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

friends or our neighbours. 
 
Today we may only have eight members on a board. They are 
supposed to represent people just like the old volunteer 
boards, but there are so few of them often covering wide 
areas that people have little if any idea who their board 
members is, let alone how to get a hold of him or them. 
 
What’s been accomplished by all of this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Well the government says they’ve reduced 
administration but I know many people disagree. Getting rid 
of 400 volunteer health boards in favour of 30 paid boards is 
no cost saving. While the boards of separate institutions were 
removed, the administrators at individual facilities that used 
to once have their own boards often remained. 
 
This prompts many residents of this province to lament that 
the removal of hundreds of unpaid boards in favour of health 
districts simply serve to rob people of their say rather than 
save anyone any money. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, community involvement has always 
been a part of our health system, and despite what the 
members opposite say, it played a greater role before they 
decided to allegedly fix our health care system than it does 
today. Not only was community involvement more important 
then but the people who made key decisions could be more 
readily held accountable. 
 
People knew that small boards were responsible for some 
matters, and if they had a problem with their decisions, they 
knew where to find them. More importantly, they knew that 
the province was responsible for funding the facilities. If 
there were cuts or major program changes, everyone knew it 
was the province who was responsible. 
 
Today we see the government returning to The Health 
Districts Act and trying to amend that piece of legislation, 
among others. They’re trying to change the very piece of 
legislation that did so much harm to community 
involvement, and even more to damage accountability. 
 
The members opposite want to amend this legislation, but as 
I said earlier, the game plan remains the same. There will be 
no change to the plan that continues to see them try and pin 
blame for their cuts on local people. There’ll be no change in 
their plan to take away the key controls that make community 
involvement both real and possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill further damages the key 
principles of community involvement and control, and it 
harms accountability in a number of ways. 
 
Instead of further damaging this, the government should take 
steps to improve The Health Districts Act. The members 
opposite, who are so mute all of the time on important or 
controversial issues, between their dark thoughts about 
bailing out on their NDP colleagues, are probably asking 
themselves what I mean. 
 
(1600) 

Mr. Speaker, instead of passing this piece of legislation and 
wasting so much effort, this government could have at least made 
some improvements to the way our district health boards are set 
up. 
 
The greatest problem with the district boards continues to be the 
fact that only some of them are elected. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is offensive. If this government wants to show it has any 
commitment to community involvement, then that is the first thing 
that they should be doing. Get rid of the appointees to the districts 
and turn yourselves over to the judgement of the voters. 
 
What we see in this Bill is the government making some 
clarifications as to how board members are appointed. They now 
must gather 10 signatures from people in the district in order to be 
eligible for an appointment. That’s hardly a significant 
requirement. In some areas of the province, elected board 
members gathered thousands of votes, while others won seats on 
the health boards with the approval of just a few hundred people. 
Regardless of the number, these people put themselves and their 
name on the line for their peers to judge and they gained the 
approval they were looking for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the Canadian way. It’s the belief that 
democracy is always right. The people are always right. And no 
one, not even the private school kids over there, should be afraid 
to face the court of public opinion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we shouldn’t be surprised that the members 
are failing to make any changes to The Health Districts Act that 
would end the system where we have appointments that, while 
paid less, are still appointments, just like all those Senators that the 
NDP so vehemently abhor. 
 
I say we shouldn’t be surprised, because in the last year the 
members opposite in the government have done everything they 
could do to avoid accountability. They’ve done everything they 
could to take control of the local health system without, at the 
same time, accepting any blame. I’ll admit they’re masters at this, 
but the game is up. People will no longer tolerate this sort of 
politicking which is killing our health system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the last election, the members opposite 
cleverly avoided a sitting of this House. They didn’t want to sit 
because they didn’t want to be in the legislature while they were 
forcing the Regina Health District to close the Plains hospital. 
They didn’t want to be sitting when they finally informed the 
people of Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek that they were breaking their 
promise of separate funding for the geriatric unit. They didn’t want 
to be sitting when dozens of people deeply opposed to their 
handling of health care were elected to health boards all across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we shouldn’t be surprised that this Bill offers 
little, if any, means for improving community involvement in 
health care, and little if any improvement in the way this 
government is held accountable. If one needs any further examples 
to prove my point, all you have to do is look at the report which 
laid out the election rules for health boards in the province — the 
report done by Garf Stevenson, who, although an intelligent 
person, is an NDP partisan. 



2508  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

It’s not surprising that the report avoided having the 
elections when the municipal elections were held. Not only 
did this cost us more money but it also allowed the 
provincial government to call an election and get re-elected 
before health board votes elected many individuals strongly 
opposed to this government’s health reforms. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, amending the election process would 
do much to improve community involvement, but the system 
of 30 health boards will still leave the government pretty free 
to try and avoid accountability. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the worst things that happened 
to the health system since reform is this government’s 
callous and thoughtless attempts to pit different communities 
and different groups against one another. When boards 
represented just one facility and their funding came from the 
provincial government, there was no possibility that local 
people could be pitted against one another. If funds were not 
available, it was clear the province was to blame. 
 
Today boards represent a great number of facilities and 
several if not dozens of communities. This government cuts 
funding to a board, and then the minister lowers himself and 
says that each and every one of his funding problems is 
simply a dispute between a board and an affiliate board. If 
it’s not that, well then it’s a dispute between communities 
and the local health board, or between medical staff and the 
local health board. At the end of the day, the minister will 
never admit that he’s to blame or that his funding cuts are at 
the source of the problem. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m deeply disappointed at the 
minister’s lack of courage. That lack of courage is evident in 
this Bill, and it’s been evident all session long. I say the 
minister lacks courage because instead of taking 
responsibility for his decisions, he wants to pit people in a 
community against one another simply to avoid taking the 
blame for decisions that he’s made and that he is responsible 
for making. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn’t political leadership. In fact I 
would say it’s the most shameful and lowest version of 
politics that I’ve ever witnessed. Not only does the minister 
insist on swinging in the dirt and pitting community against 
community with his divide and conquer mentality, but he has 
a double standard when it comes to federal funding for 
health care. 
 
See, the minister never wants to take responsibility for his 
cuts, but he insists to no end that the federal government 
takes the blame for funding reductions. We all recognize that 
the federal government reduced funding for education, health 
care, and social services. But the amounts that the minister 
claims they reduced them by are grossly inflated from the 
truth. The minister claims that these expenditures were 
reduced by 114 million. But if one looks at the revenue page 
in the budget address, they’ll soon discover that the real 
figure is only 41 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he not only can’t get his figures  

straight, but he insists upon continuing his course of blaming. It’s 
always someone else’s fault. 
 
If the minister wants to continue taking this shameful approach to 
his job, he should be warned that claiming that something else is 
always . . . that something is always someone else’s fault won’t 
help solve any of the problems he and his government are creating. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can see exactly how we’ve come to this 
point where the government is trying to pass legislation like this 
Bill before us. Everything wrong with health care is always 
someone else’s fault. The members opposite want this Bill before 
us passed so they can continue to dodge blame but retain control 
of the health system. 
 
They want to continue to direct it in such a way that their 
damaging needs-based funding system removes precious rural 
monies to urban areas. They want to continue to their chosen 
course of taking away health services. But most importantly, they 
want to be able to blame someone else for everything they’ve 
done. 
 
Instead of amending this legislation, this government could and 
should have been devoting time to issues like needs-based 
funding. When the members were elected back in 1991, they knew 
what base of support they wanted to cultivate. What they wanted 
was to keep seats that were urban and they could care less about 
those constituencies in rural areas. 
 
As a consequence, we shouldn’t be surprised that they devised a 
funding system that would be set up to permanently inflict cuts on 
rural health districts in this province. The money reaped from 
those cuts would be moved to the cities. Not only is this system 
unfair, unfair to people in rural areas, but its presence does the 
most to rob these health districts of a real sense of community 
involvement. 
 
At the same time this government uses this funding formula to 
shield itself from blame. Instead of devoting itself to improving 
the system, we find the government here just rejigging the rules a 
little more in this Bill before us today to further harm community 
involvement and to avoid blame. As I said before, their shameful 
game plan remains the same. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are five health districts whose borders 
cover part of the Thunder Creek constituency. All but the Regina 
Health District lost money, thanks to the government’s 
needs-based funding formula. 
 
While the Regina district didn’t lose money, it continues to be 
saddled with a large deficit which recently forced the closure of 
another long-term care home and more staff lay-offs. While 
government reaps windfall revenues from VLTs and resources and 
uses them to keep its balance sheet okay, district health boards are 
left carrying debt loads that they cannot manage. 
 
Needs-based funding and this Bill share a common problem, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That problem is that they both allow government 
to wrench true decision-making powers away from boards. By 
quietly and indirectly taking away local involvement in funding  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

decisions to boards, the government also attempts to avoid 
taking the blame for unpopular decisions. The needs-based 
funding formula is probably this government’s most sinister 
creation when it comes to finding ways to avoid taking 
blame. 
 
Under this funding formula, if a district loses patients to a 
larger, say urban district, then in subsequent years it will 
continue to lose money to that other district. This forces 
many less populated rural districts to lay off staff and cut 
services. 
 
Because they cut services in one year, more people find they 
have to travel to larger districts to get the services they need. 
The result is that in the following year the same rural district 
has to make more cuts. If that wasn’t enough, because these 
districts must make cuts, and often significant ones at that, 
they begin finding it increasingly difficult to attract doctors. 
 
The Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District, for example, 
experienced a major turnover in doctors and it continues to 
have considerable difficulty retaining them. Thanks to a 
needs-based funding, this district will be facing even more 
difficulty attracting doctors. With problems like this the 
vicious cycle just continues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Without doctors, people just continue to hop in the car and 
travel to the larger urban centres to get care. When doctors 
rapidly turn over in a community, some people feel reluctant 
to commit to seeing a doctor who will be heading off to 
British Columbia or the U.S. (United States) in search of 
greener pastures in a year or two. You can hardly blame the 
doctors in this situation, nor the patients. It’s, as usual, the 
provincial government who should accept responsibility for 
this situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of making positive 
improvements in this Bill, this government is just attempting 
to perpetuate the system. All they want to do is just keep the 
system in place. This government should be changing the 
needs-based funding formula but it would rather just make 
amendments like those in this Bill. So their plan to evade 
responsibility and rob communities of a role in their health 
system continues. 
 
As far as this government’s concerned, the needs-based 
funding system is just perfect. It’s ideal for them because it’s 
a permanent system that annually imposes cuts on rural 
areas. Because it’s automatic, the minister can more readily 
try and avoid taking responsibility. That, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is shameful, and for that reason alone this Bill, if 
not the government’s entire health policy, is deserving of no 
one’s support. 
 
Instead of making improvements to our health system, this 
government is doing everything it can to avoid responsibility 
while wrenching more control from local communities. 
 
Another disturbing aspect of this Bill involves the 
disqualification of members from district boards. It appears 
that the government can disqualify members from boards if  

they are no longer a resident within the district. What concerns me 
about this change to the Act is the fact that it does not apply to the 
appointed members but only to the elected members. 
 
I know that Saskatoon and Regina’s district board may always 
have to have a member from outside of those districts who might 
be appointed, but this aspect of health boards doesn’t require that a 
double standard between elected and appointed members be 
written into the Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why should elected members of district 
health boards have to face a rule which appointed board members 
don’t have to face? That’s certainly unfair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but it’s par for the course from the members opposite. From 
reading this aspect of the Bill, I think a more suitable alternative 
would have been to apply this section to all members, then 
specifically exclude the couple of members on the Regina and 
Saskatoon boards who are not residents of their districts. 
 
To specifically write into the law that these two members or so 
were excluded from the residency requirement would allow one to 
avoid a double standard. By doing so, one could still ensure that 
rural communities that use the base hospitals in these districts are 
represented on those boards. 
 
(1615) 
 
Well I think that that would be a more sensible approach. After 
reading this Bill, I thought I would think in a less sensible and 
more partisan NDP fashion, like the members opposite. After 
doing so, I fear the motivation behind this specific measure and 
wording in the Bill is to rid this government of some annoying 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a former member of this House, Dr. Lewis 
Draper, has always been an ardent defender of rural health care. 
Not only has he been an ardent defender of rural health, but he’s 
also a colossal thorn in the side of the members opposite. He was a 
nightmare come true for both the Premier and Deputy Premier. 
 
I would hope the member from Regina South pays particular 
attention to this aspect of my speech, because if he wants to have a 
hope of becoming an effective representative, he should pay good 
attention to the example set by Dr. Draper. I should also note that 
the member from Regina South should pay good attention to the 
example set by Dr. Draper and not to the example which his party 
tried to make of an independent thinker like Dr. Draper. There’s a 
significant difference there between the two. I think, however, that 
the member knows the difference between someone who has 
courage and someone who goes to sleep at night fearing how he’ll 
get disciplined by the Minister of Finance for his latest gaffe on 
the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
I fear that this aspect of the proposed legislation may be in the Bill 
simply to remove Dr. Draper from the political landscape on the 
health issue. We all know, or at least I’m sure the members 
opposite are aware, that Dr. Draper now resides in Moose Jaw at 
the Midtown motel where he and his wife operate the facility, and 
he has a practice. It’s my understanding that he still owns a house 
in Gravelbourg, but does not normally reside there. I’d like to 
know whether it’s the aim of this government to have Dr. Draper  



2510  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

disqualified from serving on the South Country Health 
District. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to ask myself, why the members 
would have a double standard? Is it because they want to get 
rid of a gentleman like Dr. Draper, who isn’t afraid to speak 
his mind and speak up for rural people, unlike so many of 
the members opposite? 
 
I’d like to take a moment and read a few quotes of some of 
the things which Dr. Draper said in the past which 
undoubtedly infuriated the members opposite. Dr. Draper is 
one of those people who was quite critical of this 
government’s first responder program. And as a professional, 
I’m sure his opinion is that much more feared by this 
government. In this one letter to the editor, Dr. Draper says, 
and I quote: 
 

I have no problem with volunteers being trained under 
the first responder program. I recommend that everyone 
be taught CPR and the Heimlich manoeuvre. My point 
is that first responders should be an addition to our fine 
professional staff and not instead of them. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government wants to 
preserve its party reputation as a protector of medicare, and 
they want to do it while destroying medicare. That task is 
difficult enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s taken some 
pretty careful planning and coercion on this part of the 
government to try and do it. Well we all know this plan is 
destined for failure. Such a plan doesn’t allow room for a 
gentleman critic like Dr. Draper. Not only is he a credible 
critic, but with his elected seat on the South Country Health 
District, he also has a platform from which to criticize this 
government. And I know the Minister of Health is pretty 
uneasy about that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that weren’t reason enough to put a 
clause in this Bill to get rid of Dr. Draper, I’d like to read 
another of his comments which I believe, although true, is of 
no annoyance to the members opposite. It’s unfortunate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the members opposite so greatly feared 
Dr. Draper’s honest and candid nature on the health issue. 
Dr. Draper says in this same letter that: 
 

The minister considered it only fair that Department of 
Health staff be guaranteed their jobs, but not those of 
hospital staff. How about some justice for hospital 
staff? 
 

The former member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg then goes 
on to commend 98 nurses and hospital staff who lost their 
jobs in Moose Jaw two years ago, along with others in North 
Battleford and Kincaid. He also commends all of them for 
their years of service and their commitment to making their 
rural communities better places in which to live. I’m sure Dr. 
Draper would likely extend his thanks to the many people 
who this year are losing their jobs thanks to the minister’s 
cuts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s plausible to believe that the 
members opposite would put a clause in this Bill to rob Dr. 

Draper of a platform just so they can silence him and stop him 
from pinning the blame for health care’s problems on the 
provincial government. Dr. Draper knew where the blame for the 
ills of health care rightfully belonged and he knew this was the 
truth and he wasn’t afraid to say it. 
 
The members over there on the government’s benches, including 
the apparently mute members that I spoke of before, know exactly 
what Dr. Draper is speaking of. The only difference between them 
and Dr. Draper is they don’t have the courage and would toe any 
line put in front of them. 
 
Maybe the only other difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that these 
members that always wind up mute on health issues have that 
blame-everything-on-the-federal-government line memorized 
better than Dr. Draper did. As a consequence, the members 
opposite drove Dr. Draper out of their caucus. And it wouldn’t 
surprise me if they’re not using this Bill to disqualify him from the 
South Country Health District. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure Dr. Draper’s remarks about the 
double standard between the Department of Health staff and the 
hospital staff is a point that the members also are concerned about. 
They’re concerned about it because they fear the truth. Earlier this 
session, myself and the member from Wood River raised the 
matter of health care consultants, including the 17 consultants that 
this government has to spy on our health districts. 
 
This government wastes about 1.2 million on people who serve no 
real purpose in the health system. They don’t deliver care. All they 
do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is take notes and write briefs for the 
minister. I believe these members of the district support branch are 
also known to be able messengers for the minister when the odd 
threat or ultimatum has to be sent to a district health board 
thinking of expressing some significant opposition to the minister 
or his government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a shameful situation. Here we have 
districts forced to cut acute care services in Canora, Central Butte, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Weyburn, and Moose Jaw. Long-term care 
homes are being cut in Swift Current and Regina and 
wellness-oriented programs like geriatric rehabilitation in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, many people in this province kind of wonder 
why the government slashes hospitals, and even program delivery 
people in the Department of Health, but yet these political hacks 
kept their jobs and many of them got substantial raises. When Dr. 
Draper alluded to issues like this, I’m sure it greatly concerned the 
members opposite. 
 
The district support branch and all these health care consultants 
are not only an important issue with respect to the way that the 
government caucus treats Dr. Draper and our health care workers, 
but it shows how this government is not interested in community 
involvement. 
 
I’ve said before, this Bill isn’t about providing for more 
community control. It’s about wrenching more control from our 
communities. Until the health consultants in the district support 
branch are removed, it's impossible to say that this government has  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

any interest in providing community control. 
 
I find it amusing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this past week in 
Moose Jaw, the Providence Place board and the district 
board met with each other and the consultant from the 
district support branch. These consultants only appear to 
serve in a useful function, or to get involved in a district, 
when there’s some sort of a political problem that the 
minister wants to see dealt with. They cajole the districts, 
and they do whatever the minister wants them to do. Above 
all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they help the minister get what he 
wants while still allowing him to keep his distance. 
 
In Regina we see that one such consultant, Deb Jordan, 
delivered the bad-news ultimatum that told the district that 
they had to close the Plains or else the government wouldn’t 
provide the operational funding they needed to manage their 
deficit that year. 
 
I say to the members opposite, where is the community 
involvement there? How is that consultant’s job worth 
keeping when so many nurses in this province somehow are 
less important enough to keep them? 
 
I’d love to hear the members opposite explain themselves on 
these issues. But in the case of the member from Regina 
South, it’s pretty hard to explain yourself when you remain 
silent on these issues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to the Providence Place 
geriatric unit, the district support branch is there not to solve 
the people’s problems, but to solve them for the minister and 
for his colleague, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. If 
the minister was sincere about solving those problems, he’d 
keep his funding promise and let the community solve its 
own affairs. But because he’s created a political problem, 
well the district support branch has to come in blazing and 
help the minister try and pit people in this community against 
one another. 
 
That’s shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t think 
people in Moose Jaw are buying it. In fact they’re so turned 
off by it, one of the members of the health board recently 
said publicly she believes the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow is “done for politically.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I move on to other aspects of the 
Bill, which are also of great concern, I would like to make a 
note of one portion which deals with defective appointments. 
The Bill before us basically states that the decisions made by 
boards remain in place and are of full force regardless of 
whether an appointment of a member wasn’t made according 
to the proper procedure. 
 
What brought my attention to this clause is that it’s obvious 
from reading it and by the fact that this particular one is 
retroactive, that this government obviously goofed on at least 
one appointment. I look forward to Committee of the Whole 
when I’m sure the minister would be delighted to answer 
some more questions on that very issue. 
 

The general flaw in this legislation is that it will allow the 
government to try and wrench more control from districts while 
also trying to saddle this same organization with more blame for 
the government’s own actions. 
 
While I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must also say that the 
section of this Bill which concerns me the most deals with affiliate 
boards. Mr. Speaker, in my constituency there are two major 
affiliate boards that have a religious affiliation and this proposed 
legislation is certainly worrisome. Some people suggest this 
government wants nothing to do with affiliate agencies. While 
some would argue that this government would love to see these 
agencies gone, I would argue that at times the Minister of Health 
finds them politically convenient. 
 
Take Moose Jaw, for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The minister 
repeatedly gets up in this House and says that problems in that 
district simply are a dispute between two boards, when he knows 
his words are not believed in the community and in fact are about 
as low and ill intended as any comments could be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government wants affiliate agencies, at 
least, because I believe they find them convenient for their 
divide-and-conquer strategy. While they might find them 
politically convenient to keep around, the members opposite still 
hold little respect for them. That lack of respect is evident in this 
Bill. 
 
If one looks the Bill over and spends any time reading the new 
section 39.1, they will be just as concerned as I. In particular, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the greatest concern in this regard is clause 17 
which will create a new section 39.1. If one looks down to 
39.1(1)(d), you’ll notice that the government will be able to 
appoint an administrator to oversee the affairs and control the 
assets of an affiliate for virtually any reason. Well it’s pretty 
common to have a catch-all phrase when drafting legislation. This 
one place where such a phrase is, is hardly necessary. 
 
(1630) 
 
The Bill gives the cabinet the right to appoint an administrator for 
several defined reasons. Those include a situation where the safety 
of patients is jeopardized. It also includes a situation where the 
affiliate board has resigned, and a new one is not in place. Lastly, 
it allows a cabinet to appoint an administrator where the affiliate 
facility is not carrying out its responsibilities. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
those reasons were enough, in that they covered every imaginable 
circumstance where the government could justify appointing an 
administrator to oversee an affiliate agency. 
 
Apparently the Minister of Health felt this didn’t give him enough 
power, so he had to add a catch-all subsection in the Bill that 
would allow the cabinet to appoint an administrator for any reason 
whatsoever that they feel is in the public interest. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that clause is wholly unnecessary, and it should be a 
matter of significant concern to all affiliate agencies in this 
province. 
 
Not only is that section disconcerting, but it also flies in the face 
of traditions developed in our health system. In this province, 
we’ve been fortunate to enjoy the service of religious orders like  



2512  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

the Grey Nuns and the Sisters of Providence who constructed 
various facilities. While they constructed these facilities to 
serve the public, it should be remembered that they and other 
groups from other denominations continue to own these 
assets. Why therefore should the government even consider 
seizing these assets and appointing an administrator? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s rather amusing that the members 
opposite are concerned about property rights when it 
concerns gun control, but they’re not concerned when it 
comes to health facilities that were built by charitable and 
religious groups. While every party in this House is 
concerned about gun control, this government should make 
sure that its position on property rights on that issue extends 
to others, like seizing land for SaskPower high voltage lines, 
and affiliate health agencies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill also addresses the need for 
affiliate agencies to have agreements with their respective 
district boards. While that’s fine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
probably necessary for the sake of efficiency, there’s a flaw 
of considerable concern in those provisions of the Bill. The 
flaw in this portion of the Bill deals with the eventuality 
where the district health board and the affiliate fail to come 
to some agreement. Before this occurs, a mediator is 
appointed, and if this individual fails, the mediator writes a 
report and the whole matter is turned over to the minister. 
The minister is then left with power to make a decision and 
impose an agreement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this aspect of this legislation concerns 
me because in the case of the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek 
district and the geriatric unit, this would provide the 
government with but one more tool to help deflect blame. 
Once this Bill is passed, the government could say that the 
problem with the unit is that there is no operating agreement 
between this GARU (geriatric assessment rehabilitation unit) 
and the district. This would force the two sides into a 
situation of negotiation when both agree that the 
government’s underfunding is basically the problem. 
 
As a consequence, the minister could force both sides into 
negotiating and allow the government to make it appear that 
the whole problem is a problem between two boards rather 
than one of government funding. If the two sides fail to agree 
and the matter was forced into the hands of a mediator, this 
impression would simply be raised to new heights by this 
clever, if not underhanded, aspect of this particular 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this is wrong. Why should 
we allow this government any more loopholes? Isn’t it 
enough for the members to have some 30 district boards to 
blame their problems on without having a need for this 
additional tool? The other problem with this particular 
clause, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that it not only allows the 
government to escape responsibility, but it allows the 
minister to be the final arbiter of disputes between affiliates 
and district boards. 
 

Not only can the minister use this aspect to create the appearance 
of disputes, where the only disputes that exist are between local 
boards and the minister, but he can also use it to wrench more 
control from local boards. The minister should not be settling 
disputes between boards and their affiliates. Instead the minister 
and this government should either put their faith in negotiation, or 
they should allow for binding arbitration by an impartial third 
party. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the wise thing to do. 
 
That being said, however, we shouldn’t be surprised that the 
minister wants more power to meddle into the affairs of district 
boards. This aspect of the Bill shows that this government has no 
interest in fostering and furthering community involvement, except 
in so far as it allows them to pass the blame for their unpopular 
decisions to someone else. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other matters that should concern 
affiliate agencies in this Bill. I’ve taken the time to get some input 
from the Catholic health association and they make some very 
valid points. One point that they make with respect to this Bill 
concerns the ability of the health district board to appeal to the 
minister to appoint a mediator. We all recognize that in the event 
of a dispute, what everyone wants is to see any matters outstanding 
resolve quickly, as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before getting to my point, I have to say 
however that if there were as many disputes in this province’s 
health system between affiliate agencies and boards as the minister 
claims there is, I would really have a serious doubt about that. 
There will be a lot of overworked mediators once this Bill is 
passed. 
 
Every time the minister’s underfunding problems cause cuts and 
problems in any community in this province, the minister’s first 
reaction is to say it’s a local dispute between boards. If it’s not 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then the minister likely believes the 
problem is somehow the federal government’s fault. That, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is an abdication of responsibility, and people in 
this province expect and deserve better treatment from their 
politicians. 
 
That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a significant problem 
with the provisions in this Bill which allow for a mediator. The 
basic problem with them is that the Bill only allows the district 
boards the right to request a mediator. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
creates an imbalance between the affiliates and the district boards. 
These boards should be equals or at least partners in health care in 
their respective communities. 
 
Given that, it only seems fair that they be given the same sort of 
rights and privileges in the event of a dispute. In these 
circumstances, the government should allow the affiliate equal 
opportunity to request that the minister appoint a mediator. 
Without this right, the boards could delay and delay and possibly 
dig in their heels to get what they want to the detriment of 
affiliates and the health consumers they are trying to serve. That’s 
only a possibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but nonetheless these 
boards should be treated as equals in the event that a dispute 
occurs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while we all realize that disputes between  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

affiliates and district health boards are much more rare than 
the minister says they are, there are other problems with 
respect to the way affiliates are treated within this Bill. 
 
For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Catholic health 
association makes a point that, with regard to the 
appointment of a public administrator, there is a lack of 
equality between the affiliates and the district health boards. 
If an affiliate for example breaks an agreement with a district 
health board, according to the proposed legislation, it leaves 
itself open to having its board removed and a public 
administrator appointed in its place. At the same time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the district health boards do not face this 
same punishment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the way this Bill is 
drafted, a district health board could break an agreement 
with an affiliate, and they won’t risk facing the same 
consequences. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if affiliate 
agencies are partners, they should be treated as partners and 
as equals. They shouldn’t face any greater or any less 
punishment for breaking an agreement as do their partners in 
district boards. I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government has no desire to face punishment for breaking its 
own agreements, so I have no idea why it wants to see 
affiliate agencies singled out for severe punishment if they 
break part of an agreement. 
 
As an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Moose 
Jaw/Thunder Creek District, this government broke a 
contract with both a district board and an affiliate board to 
provide separate funding for the geriatric assessment and 
rehabilitation unit. The minister over on the government 
benches had a signed agreement that he broke at will, but yet 
he faces no punishment for doing so. He didn’t even have to 
give any warning for breaking this promise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But yet he feels, as shown in the Bill before us, that 
affiliate agencies should be punished severely, when he and 
his department get off scot-free for the very same sort of 
actions. Over the years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government has shown itself quite adept at breaking 
agreements with different groups. Whenever it does so, its 
first interest is to avoid blame, avoid blame and avoid 
responsibility. 
 
Anyone who behaves in that fashion should hardly think it’s 
fair to single out one party for extra punishment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, while others get off for committing the very same 
crime. Among the many agreements this government’s 
broken are contracts with farmers and more recently a 
promise not to claw back the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) overpayments. 
 
On the health care front, they’re broken agreements with 
affiliates in the district health board over the geriatric unit in 
Moose Jaw as I mentioned. More recently, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we had a number of concerned residents from 
across the province come to this legislature and protest this 
government’s decision to break an agreement that it had with 
the Rural Health Coalition. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite signed an agreement to 
maintain levels of service in the 52 communities that lost their 
acute care hospitals in 1993. It should come as no surprise to 
anyone that this government broke its word on this agreement as 
well. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has some pretty stern 
rules for affiliates in this proposed legislation that it would not 
ever dream of imposing on itself. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a couple of 
problems or inequities in this Bill with respect to the provincial 
government’s power to appoint a public administrator. I mentioned 
earlier that I disagree with the way in which these provisions are 
drafted. It allows the minister too much breadth to appoint a public 
administrator and remove the board of an affiliate. I also 
mentioned that I believe it isn’t an appropriate way of recognizing 
that affiliate agencies are privately owned, often by religious 
groups and religious orders. 
 
Two other aspects of the provisions dealing with public 
administrators also are of concern to me. Both of these concerns 
were raised to the minister by the Catholic health association. 
 
The first of these is that this proposed legislation forces the 
affiliate agency to pay for a public administrator out of its own 
funds. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister knows full well that 
health care budgets are very lean. In districts that lost money, 
thanks to this government’s unfair needs-based funding system, 
matters are just that much more difficult. At the beginning of a 
budgetary year, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure affiliate agencies do not 
plan for the added cost of having a public administrator. If they 
had to pay for such a person, it’s likely that they will either run a 
deficit, or worse yet they’ll have to lay off more staff. Money spent 
on an administrator will be money that’s not spent on patient care. 
 
Thanks to this government’s needs-based funding system, if these 
agencies are spending less money on patients and delivering fewer 
services, they won’t receive as much money in the following year. 
Because they didn’t deliver as many services, Mr. Speaker, the 
theory among the members opposite entails that the district doesn’t 
deserve as much money as it had the year before. One can also 
imagine that if the board had to be removed in favour of a public 
administrator, it’s also likely that one or more members of the 
affiliate agency’s senior staff would likely also be laid off. 
 
(1645) 
 
I say this, Mr. Speaker, because senior staff play a large role in the 
focus of such an agency. In addition, this Bill makes it perfectly 
clear that the administrator would also have the same powers as an 
executive director of an affiliate agency in so far as such an 
administrator would gain control of the daily operations of an 
affiliate or a program operated by an affiliate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if an affiliate agency has to lay off senior staff, there 
again is money that will not be directed towards patient care. 
Thanks to needs-based funding, that very agency will face more 
cuts in future because it spent money on administration that it 
would rather have spent on patient care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the solution to this problem is to have the  



2514  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

government pay for the administrator. There’s no room in the 
district board budget or in an affiliate agency’s budget for 
this surprise expense. As a consequence, it’s the government 
that should provide the money for this unforeseen expense. It 
would also be useful to add to that comment by noting that if 
the government feels it’s in the public interest to appoint 
such an administrator, it must likewise be in the public 
interest for them to pay for any administrators they feel that 
they must appoint. 
 
With respect to provisions regarding a public administrator, a 
second problem was raised with the minister by the Catholic 
health association. While the minister feels it is imperative 
that we have this power to appoint a public administrator in 
extraordinary circumstances, he neglected to create a means 
to handle concerns in the event that this power is used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, affiliate agencies I think would feel more 
comfortable if this Bill contained provisions which 
guaranteed them an opportunity to express their views to the 
minister in the event that the powers is ever used. It’s only 
fair, Mr. Speaker, that in the event that a public administrator 
is appointed to oversee an affiliate that the owners of the 
facility and the board be given a chance to make a 
presentation to the minister before such an appointment is 
made. Likewise, Mr. Speaker, in the event that the 
appointment of an administrator is about to end, the same 
party should have an opportunity to make a presentation to 
the minister with regard to the orderly return to their control 
of the affiliate. Those concerns seem reasonable and, Mr. 
Speaker, they would provide a balance to the heavy hand of 
the minister in the event that a public administrator was ever 
appointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I move on to some other details of 
concern in this Bill, it would be appropriate to put the Bill in 
a larger context. Mr. Speaker, in this session the government 
made some decisions that had a decidedly negative impact 
on health in this province. Each of these decisions was made 
in such a way as to avoid responsibility as well as continue 
the process of wrenching control over health from local 
people. 
 
This Bill is but one part of this government’s design for 
health care. Needs-based funding comprises much of the rest 
of their plan to seriously downgrade health services, 
especially those in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Earlier this session, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
introduced a Bill regarding health facilities. One can’t look 
at this Bill without at least making some mention of the Bill 
dealing with health facilities. I say that because while the 
members opposite are trying to wrench control from local 
people with this Bill and further evade their responsibilities, 
they put the health facilities Bill before this House because 
they believe that this government needed to make some 
positive news on the health front. Their hopes for positive 
news rested on the health facilities Bill. While that Bill was 
designed to make the government look good, this Bill to 
amend The Health Districts Act is strictly . . . help the  

members opposite to achieve their purpose of more control and 
less accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it tells you something about Bills like this and this 
government’s overall handling of the health care when they have 
to introduce and pass a Bill on health facilities just to make 
themselves look good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Bill is designed to force any private health 
facilities that might spring up in the province to acquire a 
government licence. It also prevents these people from extra 
billing and therefore virtually eliminates the possibility that private 
facilities will come to this province. 
 
I said earlier, while this Bill is designed to wrench control from 
districts, that Bill was supposed to make the government look 
good by drawing a line in the sand. It was supposed to show the 
members opposite, we’re opposed to extra billing and in favour of 
medicare. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we all support publicly funded medicare and 
we all support the community involvement that health districts 
were supposed to provide to Saskatchewan people. That, Mr. 
Speaker, brings me precisely to my point with respect to how these 
Bills all fit into the greater picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve shown today that this government talks a lot 
about community involvement but its actions more often than not 
run to the contrary. When we see pieces of legislation like the one 
before us, we should be suspicious of the rhetoric that this 
government is feeding us. The members opposite introduce a Bill 
to draw their line in the sand to show they are committed to 
medicare and to a publicly funded system, but at the same time are 
underfunding some 19 districts in this province, thanks to their 
cuts. Other districts are facing tough times or are saddled with 
deficits that are forcing them to make other service cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, basically we have a government that passes a Bill to 
show its support for publicly funded medicare when they’re 
responsible for underfunding the very system they claim to protect. 
That is a matter of not living up to one’s own rhetoric. 
 
The larger picture, Mr. Speaker, that I’m trying to get across to the 
members opposite is that they must realize that no matter how 
often they repeat their rhetoric on health care, it won’t for one 
moment change the harmful impact of their actions. An example 
of just how pointless their rhetoric is can be seen with regards to 
the health facilities Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, put forward a Bill in this 
House to ban private facilities that extra bill for medical services. 
Just the fact they introduce the Bill is an indication of just how 
much trouble they are in with regard to health care in this 
province. 
 
Health in this province is tax supported and people don’t pay 
directly for services they use. If a system is set up where people 
don’t pay on a service basis, one has to wonder why the 
government would worry about private health facilities at all. This 
government is worried about them, Mr. Speaker, and is legislating 
against them because the members opposite over there know that  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

their underfunding of the health system is forcing people to 
consider paying privately to get the care that they want. 
 
If the members over there were really committed to a 
publicly funded universal system like they say they are, there 
would be no need to legislate against private health facilities. 
If we had adequately funded health care, we wouldn’t have 
the waiting-lists and the gaps in service that are driving 
people to the desperate measure of wanting to privately pay 
for health care outside of our publicly funded system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should start making good 
on their rhetoric. Quit giving us a line, and start throwing a 
lifeline to our health care system that is now starting to slip 
under the waves. With respect to this Bill to amend The 
Health Districts Act, it’s time this government start making 
sure its actions were similar to its rhetoric. If the members 
opposite want community involvement, then I would say quit 
trying to pass legislation that takes away from local control. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I still have a couple more 
detailed concerns about this Bill. I understand this Bill will 
provide more regulatory power to the government. The 
additional powers will allow the government to set standards 
for districts. I would like to see these additional regulations 
or at least hear in Committee of the Whole why the minister 
feels that these additional powers are necessary. At a time 
when the Premier is frequently gathering with his provincial 
colleagues and discussing ways to destroy national standards 
for all sorts of federal powers, it’s ironic to see the Minister 
of Health moving in the direction of more centralized 
control. 
 
I’m also curious about the regulatory power this Bill 
provides to the government with respect to summary 
offences. I would like to know what circumstances there 
could be under The Health Districts Act to punish anyone for 
a summary offence. Why is this necessary especially when 
most professional bodies already discipline their members? 
And there are already other laws in place, such as the 
Criminal Code, to deal with all variety of wrongdoing 
without giving more powers to government to make 
additional matters an offence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last but not least is the matter of the 
Lloydminster Health District. This Bill will help set up a 
district but it still remains quite unclear as to when that 
district will at least enter the semi-democratic age now 
experienced by other boards. While this mutated form of 
democracy is less than sufficient, it’s better than none. That 
being said, I look forward to posing some of these questions 
to the minister in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, before I would adjourn this debate, I 
find this government continues to waste its time and energies 
on the wrong things. If it spent as much time trying to make 
health care boards more autonomous and itself more 
accountable as it does trying to wrench powers from local 
people and hide its political dealings, our health system 
would face much fewer problems. 

Mr. Speaker, no matter how many times the minister or the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow get up and blame their 
mistakes on other levels of government and local groups, it will 
not ease them of one ounce of responsibility. That burden will 
remain on their shoulders where it rightfully belongs. This 
opposition will continue to fight for the interests of average people 
in this province who are concerned about the health care system 
they built and paid for. We will continue to ensure, despite any 
measure taken by the members opposite, that this government 
remains accountable for what it’s done to our health system. 
 
No icons, no clever plans, and no group of political consultants 
put forward by this government will stop us, Mr. Speaker. We will 
remain dauntless in our efforts to ensure that our health system 
isn’t destroyed by this government. I ask the members opposite to 
consider the points I’ve made with regard to this Bill. More 
importantly, I ask them to reconsider their silence and their fear of 
speaking out against this government’s health care policies. 
 
While I hold no hope for some of these members I still believe 
some of them are committed to representing their constituents. To 
them I say, you have faced tough times for your silence in recent 
months and you will face many more. Make something of those 
experiences by using them to find the courage within yourself to 
speak up and give your constituencies hope that politicians really 
do care. 
 
More particularly I say to the members opposite, show them you 
really care about our health system. Show them you can think for 
yourselves and stand up for them rather than just remember the 
line about who’s to blame on everything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the members opposite to look into themselves. 
I ask them to take a second look at this proposed legislation. This 
legislation continues us on the path toward an unresponsive health 
system that’s driven by financial and political demands rather than 
basic human need. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is not what this country was built on. This 
country was built on common goals among all peoples be they rich 
or poor, rural or urban. Health care has become a part of our 
Canadian fabric and for that very reason it’s up to every Canadian 
to use it wisely. It’s up to all of us to protect it for our well-being 
and for the well-being of generations to come and that we’ll call 
Canada and this province our home. 
 
And for those very reasons I would ask at this time that we be able 
to adjourn this debate because we’ll have more . . . So I would at 
this point move adjournment of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training  Vote 37  

Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2469 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2469 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2478 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2483 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2484 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2484 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2476 
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
Johnson .....................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................2485 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2485 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................2485 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Best Wishes to the Minister of Labour  

Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2486 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2486 

Alternate High School Program  
Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2486 

Regina International Children’s Festival  
Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................2486 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Homecoming Celebration  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2487 

Company Develops Arts Education CD-ROM  
Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................2487 

Mrs. Barbara Wasylciw’s 100th Birthday  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2488 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2488 

Underground Fuel Tanks  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2490 
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2490 

Highway Maintenance  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2491 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................2491 

 



 

Crown Prosecutor Investigation  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2491 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................2491 

Autism Therapy  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2491 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................2491 

Gaming Addictions  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2492 
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2492 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS  
Agricultural Biotechnology International Conference  

Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................2492 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2493 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER  
Resignation of MLA for North Battleford  

Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................2493 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2494 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2496 

Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their 
Affiliates 

Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2497 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2499 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 
Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts  

Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2500 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2501 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2503 

 


