
















































May 8, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1451 

 May 8, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of concerned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan to save the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 

various constituencies throughout the city of Regina. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The centres that people have signed names from are Regina, 

Balgonie, Pilot Butte, Edenwold, Balcarres, and numerous 

southern Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions are all from Regina, 

Mr. Speaker, and I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan residents 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the names that appear on this petition are all from 

the city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names of people from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina and 

from Ituna. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition of names from people throughout 

south-western Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health 

Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure . . . the 

decision to close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

The petition is signed virtually by people from Swift Current 

and area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

across Saskatchewan. On the east side, Wawota; we have 

Regina, Avonlea. Then we go on to Mankota, Aneroid, Swift 

Current, and all the way down through Climax, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

from Fort Qu’Appelle, they’re from Indian Head, they’re from 

Regina, they’re from Swift Current, and all throughout 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 

day number 47, the 47th time I’ve been with my colleagues and 

the people of Saskatchewan in defence of the closing of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, I see 

almost all of them are from Downey Crescent right here in 

Regina. I’m not sure where that is. I assume it’s in Regina 

Albert South. The rest of them are all from Regina. 



1452  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

privilege for me to rise today with a petition that states as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the Department of Social 

Services of the province of Saskatchewan to reconsider the 

decision to reduce the programs of the Saskatoon Family 

Support Centre which provides essential health services 

through parent education and support programs that serve 

to break the cycle of family dysfunction that is passed 

through the generations and to reduce or eliminate violence 

and abuse in the family structure, and to return these 

programs of the family support centre to their previous 

level of delivery of services. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 52 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Health: (1) where in Canada can an 

individual diagnosed with four- stage multiple chemical 

sensitivity syndrome obtain treatment; (2) if treatment is 

available in Canada but outside of Saskatchewan, are 

out-of-province patients accepted; (3) if treatment for 

four-stage MCS is not available in Canada, where is the 

nearest treatment centre; and (4) are the costs associated 

with such treatment covered by Saskatchewan medicare? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hereby give 

notice that I shall on Friday next move the first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to repeal The Service Districts Act; short title, The 

Service Districts Repeal Act. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation regarding provincially funded housing in 

northern Saskatchewan: (1) how many housing units are 

administered and owned by the Saskatchewan government 

and northern administration district; (2) how many of these 

housing units are mortgaged and how many are rented; (3) 

what are the total amount of money derived by Sask 

Housing from these mortgaged and rented homes in one 

fiscal year; (4) what portion of any of this money is from  

reserve or northern municipal communities; (5) what is the 

annual administration fee charged by the province for the 

administration of these northern housing units; and (6) 

given the anticipated increase in demand for northern 

housing in the next few years, what long-term plan does 

Sask Housing have in place to meet these needs? 

 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker:  Earlier today at Government House, a tribute 

was paid to 11 Saskatchewan recipients of national and 

provincial honours. These 11 recipients and their guests are 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery this afternoon. We want to 

recognize them in the Legislative Chamber today. 

 

In a moment I will invite the Premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, and the Leader of the Third Party to make a few 

brief remarks. MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

will then have an opportunity to introduce their constituents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, and our distinguished 

guests in your gallery, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise 

on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan to pay tribute 

and to welcome these distinguished Canadians to our Assembly 

and our proceedings today. They are the most recent 

Saskatchewan recipients of the various orders and awards  

the Order of Canada, the Royal Victorian Order, the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, earlier today as you know, sir, myself, you, 

and a number of our colleagues on all sides of the House had 

the opportunity to congratulate these individuals for the 

lifelong, generous gift of time and energy that they have 

devoted to our province and to our people. And I would just 

want to, on your invitation, to briefly reiterate this afternoon 

just how proud we all are of them and their contributions to our 

country. 

 

Today’s event, first at Government House with the presence of 

Their Honours, and now in the legislature, is a very small one, 

but I think nonetheless a very important one because it’s a way 

to show our appreciation for their outstanding contributions  

contributions which are too many and too varied to list here 

today. 

 

But whether we’re talking about an individual who spends time 

visiting with shut-ins or one who heads corporations, the point 

is the same  the pursuit of excellence, commitment to 

community, and service to one’s fellow human beings. That’s 

what it’s all about and that is what we’re recognizing today. 

And it’s this kind of selfless dedication that makes 

Saskatchewan, as has been said by others, the very best place in 

the whole world in which to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Greek philosopher Socrates believed that: 

 

All human virtues increase and strengthen themselves by  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

the practice and experience of them. 

 

I like that. Human virtues increase and strengthen themselves 

by the practice and experience of them. 

 

Well we’re very fortunate indeed to have among us those who 

put the highest human virtues into practice and experience 

them, as Socrates said. In the result, they strengthen not only 

their own characters, but their neighbourhoods, their 

communities, their province, and this great country of ours 

called Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

welcoming our guests to the legislature and in warmly 

congratulating our honours recipients this afternoon. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with the hon. 

members of this Assembly and to our honoured guests, on 

behalf of my colleagues in the official opposition, I too would 

like to extend our congratulations to all the men and women we 

honoured at Government House this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 12 people that we are recognizing today come 

from all walks of life. Each have enjoyed great achievements 

throughout their lives in many different fields. However, Mr. 

Speaker, each and every one of these fine people have one thing 

in common. Through their dedication and hard work throughout 

their entire lives these people bring a sense of pride to all of us 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

As I’ve stated in this House on previous occasions, Mr. 

Speaker, people like those we honour today represent all that is 

good in our province and are a testament to the attitude that has 

always made Saskatchewan the best province in all of Canada. 

 

These honours we hand out as a province and a nation are only 

a small token of the thanks those folks deserve. They have also 

achieved a far greater honour however, Mr. Speaker; they have 

won the respect of their family, their friends, and their 

neighbours. And it is with a great deal of pride that we are able 

to stand here today and say thank you to each and every one of 

them. Thank you for making our province a better place to live. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition in congratulating these people here today. I was also 

pleased earlier today to take part in the proceedings at 

Government House in honouring the special guests at the 

luncheon, and the special pleasure of proposing a toast to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s often said that Saskatchewan’s greatest 

resource is its people, and the individuals we are honouring 

here today are proof of that. It’s people who make communities 

strong. It’s people who make our towns and cities wonderful 

places to live and raise our families. It’s people who make the 

difference. 

The individuals we are honouring today, who have received the 

Order of Canada, the Royal Victorian Order, the Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit, the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, are the 

kinds of people that have done their part to build our 

neighbourhoods, our province, and our country. 

 

I would like to sincerely congratulate and thank all of the 

recipients for your efforts and for what you have meant to 

Saskatchewan families. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly, Dr. Robert Coupland, Officer of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Willem De Lint, Member of the 

Order of Canada, and his wife Sharon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour for me 

to introduce to the Assembly, Mrs. Irene White, Member of the 

Royal Victorian Order, and her husband Stewart. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure today to 

introduce to the Assembly, Dr. Lloyd Barber, Member of the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit and Companion of the Order of 

Canada. Please welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it my 

pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, the Rev. Robert Ogle, 

Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, Officer of the 

Order of Canada, and also his sister, Mary Lou. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

present to you and to the members of this Assembly, Mrs. 

Theresa Stevenson, Member of the Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit, Member of the Order of Canada. She’s accompanied by 

her sister. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

is my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Ted Turner, 

Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, Member of the 

Order of Canada, and his wife Mel. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly, Mrs. Marion Buckler, recipient of  



1454  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, and her husband, Mr. 

Buckler. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce to the Assembly, Nina Moore, recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. And she is accompanied by her 

husband Harvey today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Some 

individuals who are present today I too would like to 

acknowledge because they’ve not only enhanced the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, they’ve enhanced my life from knowing 

them as well. 

 

We have honoured them already, but I would like to join with 

my colleagues in welcoming Dr. Lloyd Barber and Mrs. Barber, 

Dr. Ted Turner and Mrs. Turner, and Father Bob Ogle and his 

sister Mary Lou. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If other members have completed 

introductions of honoured guests, it’s my privilege to introduce 

to the Assembly, Mr. Russ McKnight, recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel:  Mr. McKnight is accompanied by his 

mother, Mrs. McKnight. 

 

And I will now invite for other invitations . . . other 

introductions I should say, of guests of the Assembly. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to this Assembly a 

group of students in the east gallery who are from the Humboldt 

constituency. We have with us 18 brilliant grade 12 students 

from the Aberdeen School and they are accompanied by their 

most capable and dedicated teachers, Donna Duriez and Clark 

Bymoen. 

 

Welcome to each and every one of you. I look forward to 

meeting with you a little bit later. And so I ask all the members 

of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming the students and 

the teachers from Aberdeen to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and to all the members of the 

Assembly today, in the west gallery a group of 22 grade 3 and 

grade 4 French immersion students from Connaught School, 

which is located in the riding of Regina Centre. The students 

are seated in the west gallery accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 

Jeannette Revet, chaperons Lori Foster, Jonni Turner, Barbara 

Miazga, and Lorraine Skinner. 

And these students spend 80 per cent of their school day, Mr. 

Speaker, speaking and learning in French, and so they’re well 

on their way to becoming fluently bilingual. And as adults they 

will be more prepared to help this country meet the challenges 

that lie ahead, and I applaud this early commitment. 

 

I look forward to visiting with you after question period. I 

understand they walked here  10 blocks  from their school. 

So I ask all members to join with me in extending an especially 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, besides 

the honoured guests in your gallery, we have 17 very important 

people. They are grade 10 students from Muenster. There’s 17 

of them along with their teacher, Richard Leuschen. And I’d 

like you to welcome them, along with the rest of my colleagues 

in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in your gallery, I should like to introduce to you and through 

you to the members, another distinguished group of 

Saskatchewan citizens and some visitors from other provinces. 

These are members of the Saskatchewan association of city 

clerks. They have come to the Legislative Building today to 

meet with the Clerks of the Legislative Assembly. I look 

forward to meeting with them myself later on this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I should like to introduce them 

individually. From the city of Melfort, Joanne Forer, and if you 

could stand; from the city of Melville, Ron Walton; from the 

city of Moose Jaw, Brian Hamblin; from the city of North 

Battleford, Doug McEwen; from the city of Prince Albert, 

Charmaine Code; from the city of Regina, Randy Markewich; 

from the city of Swift Current, Delores Cox, and the assistant 

clerk, Dianne Hahn; from the city of Weyburn, Fred Martin and 

Cheryl Heisler; from the city of Yorkton, Laurie-Anne Rusnak; 

and from the city of Medicine Hat, Larry Godin; and from the 

city of Brandon  my old home town, Mr. Speaker  Ian 

Ford. 

 

I would ask all members to extend a very warm welcome to 

these clerks. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

noted when I came into the Assembly today that there is 

someone in your gallery who has just been acknowledged by 

the hon. member from Regina Victoria. But I would like to 

extend my warm welcome through you to Doug McEwen, who 

is pivotal in keeping the wonderful city of North Battleford run 

well. 

 

So if all of us would once again put our hands together to 

acknowledge . . . oh, and the hon. member from North 

Battleford, we’ll give a slight acknowledgement to participating 

in that, Mr. Speaker. Please join with me in welcoming Doug  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

McEwen one more time. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly, a political veteran, not in the front lines of elected 

politics but in the even more important role of following 

through on all of the commitments we elected people make, and 

that is my constituency secretary of 10 years. Not very many 

people can stick with me for 10 years but she has. Carol Rowan 

from my Watrous office. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to the Assembly through you, a constituent of mine from the 

village of Regina Beach, Mrs. Lloyd Barber. I’d ask the 

Assembly to welcome her here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Relocation Project at Cando School 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 

example of education dollars being spent wisely in my 

constituency. Recently I had the pleasure of participating in an 

open house for a relocation project at Cando School. A six unit, 

relocatable facility, known as St. Gregor School, was moved to 

Cando School to provide additional classroom space. 

 

Everything fell into place for this project. At the time the 

Biggar School Division expressed an interest in the facility, St. 

Gregor was closed. This addition to the school demonstrates 

cooperation between all partners in education. 

 

The total cost of the project was just over $594,000. A 

permanent addition of comparable size would have cost over 

$800,000. That’s a saving of more than $200,000  good news 

for taxpayers and money well spent because the addition means 

better facilities for students and teachers. 

 

This project also proves the value of the Education 

department’s policy of approving relocatable schools. I would 

like to congratulate all school board trustees, teachers, parents, 

and children, for their involvement in this project. 

Congratulations should also go to the Biggar school district. By 

spending our education dollars wisely, we are ensuring quality 

education for our children. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Community Spirit in Camsell Portage 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

congratulate the residents of Saskatchewan’s most northerly 

community of Camsell Portage for their tremendous community 

spirit. This small northern community of only 40 people has 

managed to accumulate over $100,000 in savings over the  

many years, and that’s from an annual small operating budget. 

Camsell Portage local advisory board is spending some of this 

money to send five students on an educational trip to Ontario. 

The students also held some fund-raising projects to pay for the 

rest of the trip so they can go out but at no cost to their families. 

 

Camsell’s town council is also conscious about the appearance 

of the community, and every year it hires local people to carry 

out clean-up duties and a clean-up project in general. Camsell is 

also doing other things to provide stimulating activities for 

children in the area by extending a local playground and 

playground activities. 

 

I would like to congratulate the people of Camsell on their 

positive management of their small community and for 

providing an encouraging environment for youth in the area. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lloyd Johnson Memorial Centre 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, on Monday, May 6, I was 

honoured to take part in the grand opening celebration of the 

healing lodge located in my constituency. It is called the Lloyd 

Johnson Memorial Centre, named after an elder who was a 

member of the Sturgeon Lake First Nations. Mr. Johnson has 

suggested that such a facility was needed, and today the 

suggestion has become a reality. 

 

The healing lodge is a self-healing facility. It is intended to 

provide support through the use of traditional Indian customs, 

practices, and ceremonies. There are two sweat houses situated 

outside the healing lodge which are also part of the facility. The 

vision statement for the centre is to provide first nations 

families, individuals, and communities a secure and safe 

environment. The Lloyd Johnson Memorial Centre will serve as 

an example of how to heal and to nurture relationships. 

 

I extend my congratulations and best wishes to Sturgeon Lake 

Band, the elders, the workers, Mrs. Johnson, and those who 

helped this project develop from an idea into a worthwhile 

facility. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Safety Patrol Week 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

recognize this week’s designation as School Safety Patrol 

Week. 

 

Young students are often quite excited when they’re going to 

and when leaving school, so they are not always paying 

attention to nearby traffic. It only takes a few seconds for a 

tragic accident to occur. It has happened in the past and any 

preventative measures that need to be taken to ensure children’s 

safety must be done. 

 

That is why it is so important that many teachers, parents, and 

students volunteer their time to educate other children about  



1456  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

traffic safety and how to train them and how to operate a school 

safety patrol. 

 

I can certainly vouch for how seriously these young people take 

their safety patrol duties. Some of them wield those stop signs 

with lots of authority. Keep up the good work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Thomson Meats 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to bring to this 

Assembly another success story in value added processing in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The official opening of newly expanded facilities at Thomson 

Meats took place in Melfort today. The expansion, which cost 

an estimated $4 million, is expected to create about 30 new 

jobs, bringing the total number of employees at the plant to 100. 

 

The company’s production capacity will be tripled, allowing it 

to expand export sales to the Pacific Rim. This kind of 

development in Saskatchewan will ensure more jobs for the 

future and includes the components of our Partnership for 

Growth strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this expansion was made possible in part through 

a $500,000 investment from the agri-food equity fund and an 

investment of $286,000 from the Melfort and district 

community bond project. 

 

The economic spin-offs that will result for the Melfort area 

prove that partnerships like this can benefit Saskatchewan. The 

expansion will increase Thomson’s purchases from local 

suppliers in all aspects of the business. 

 

This is an excellent example of how an innovative company can 

diversify rural Saskatchewan and be known internationally as a 

competitive producer of quality products for the world market. 

 

I would like to congratulate president Lorne Thomson and all of 

the employees of Thomson Meats; Michael Mahon of the 

Melfort and district community bond corporation; and the Hon. 

Ministers of Economic Development and Agriculture who 

participated in officially opening the expansion today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Volleyball Teams 

 

Mr. Krawetz: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

recently two Saskatchewan provincial junior volleyball teams 

were chosen, after a series of try-outs and competitions. I am 

proud to report that a young man from my constituency, Mr. 

Kenneth Kotyk has been successful in his efforts to secure a 

position on one of those teams. 

 

Ken is 15 years old and is currently attending grade 9 at the 

Invermay School in my home town. He has always been a 

hard-working and dedicated young man and obviously a  

fantastic volleyball player. I would like to take this opportunity 

to congratulate Kenneth and other members of the 

Saskatchewan provincial midget volleyball team. 

 

The group’s first tournament will take place in Manitoba from 

August 9 to 11, which after, I hope, Mr. Speaker, that I will be 

able to allow everyone to see his gold medal. Until then, please 

join me in extending best wishes to these young men as they 

prepare to represent Saskatchewan at the national level. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Wood Product 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we know that 

the future prosperity lies in value added processing and seeking 

markets for the new products. Mr. Speaker, one company in my 

constituency has succeeded in finding new uses for a tree many 

Saskatchewan farmers long have regarded as a weed. I’m 

referring to the poplar. 

 

L & M Wood Products of Glaslyn, a locally owned company 

that produces lumber and treated fence posts and building 

material as well as purchasing over a million dollars worth of 

timber from local, small operators in the area, has been working 

to create a niche for the company’s new aspen flooring, 

panelling, and moulding. Aspen is a good material because it is 

cheap and it can be given a good finish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating L & M Wood Products for their initiative and for 

their ongoing contribution to Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lifetime Award for Excellence in the Arts 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 

congratulate one of my constituents, an outstanding man, a 

talented artist, and a fine friend  McGregor Hone  who 

received a Lifetime Award for Excellence in the Arts from the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board this past weekend. 

 

Mac Hone has created and exhibited his art during a career that 

has spanned more than 50 years. He taught art at Central 

Collegiate in Regina from 1947 until 1979 and founded the 

Cenarts program which attracted students from all over the city. 

He retired to Lumsden in 1979, where he continues to paint and 

make prints full time. 

 

His painting, “By the Radio”, was the very first painting 

acquired for the Saskatchewan Arts Board permanent collection 

in 1950. Now his name has been added to the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board’s honour roll of exceptional people, people who 

have contributed so much to the arts in Saskatchewan, people 

who have received a Lifetime Award for Excellence. 

 

The other winners this year were writer and poet Elizabeth 

Brewster from Saskatoon; the late Mary Ellen Burgess, who 

contributed so much to drama in the province; and Cree artist  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

Allan Sapp, whose paintings about life on the Red Pheasant 

Reserve are exhibited around the world. 

 

I’d like to congratulate and thank all the award winners for their 

tremendous contribution to the arts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, one year ago the Minister of 

Economic Development told delegates to the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce annual general meeting to give the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement one year. He 

promised that the results would be reviewed after one 

construction season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is one year later. The chamber’s annual meeting 

begins today, and the results are clear. The CCTA (Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement) is hurting construction 

firms. It is detrimental to job creation, and it is costing 

Saskatchewan taxpayers a great deal of money. 

 

Will the minister confirm in this House today that this 

agreement will be eliminated? Or is this yet another in a long 

string of broken promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for 

her question. Mr. Speaker, earlier this week we answered a 

question from the member from Melfort-Tisdale  I believe it 

was  and I indicated to him at that time that there was a 

meeting the very day that he’d asked the question between 

officials from the Crown Investments Corporation and the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association. 

 

That meeting in fact did take place. There’s another meeting 

that’s going to take place later on this month. We felt that the 

review had almost been completed, but there was a willingness 

for further discussions on the part of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association. Those discussions will be ongoing. 

The Minister of Economic Development and myself will be in 

North Battleford tomorrow at a session with the chamber of 

commerce where we will further answer the question that the 

member poses here today, and we feel that the review is almost 

concluded and we’ll have a report very shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday a member of our 

caucus was removed from this Assembly for defending 

Saskatchewan’s seniors and challenging this government for 

breaking promises to care for our elderly. As a result, we’ve 

received an overwhelming response from the public who are 

tired of the government’s broken promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a 1991 NDP (New Democratic Party) election 

platform document promised, and I quote, “fair and open  

tendering for government contracts.” The Minister of Economic 

Development promised a review which, if done properly, will 

result in the elimination of CCTA. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, when can we expect a true, fair, and 

open tendering policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well first off, before addressing the 

direct question, I want to address the preamble of the member. 

To set the record very straight, the member from 

Melfort-Tisdale was not removed from what she said yesterday; 

he was removed because of unparliamentary conduct on the 

floor of this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now hon. members on both 

sides of the House will know that it is inappropriate to comment 

on Speaker’s rulings. I caution the hon. member for 

Kelvington-Wadena that she comes dangerously close in doing 

that in her question. Order. And I advise the hon. minister that 

he is directly offending that principle of the House, and I will 

ask all members to conduct themselves honourably without 

conduct . . . in a conduct that is not commenting on the 

proceedings and the conduct of the Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  In direct answer to the question, Mr. 

Speaker, I find it quite amazing that the Liberal Party would 

come off with something like this when the review is still in 

progress and they say scrap something before it’s even 

reviewed. 

 

I mean we know they did that with their leader. We know that 

they act irresponsibly within the legislature and in the province, 

and that’s the very reason why they’re plummeting in the polls 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highways Budget 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, prior 

to the 1991 provincial election, the now Premier toured 

Saskatchewan making fun of Grant Devine’s public golf course 

 the provincial highway system  and indicated that there 

were 18 holes to the mile. 

 

However since taking power under his NDP government, the 

highway budget has plummeted from a 1991 level of $212 

million to an estimated $169 million this year. In addition, 

today only 40 per cent of gas tax revenues go back into 

maintenance and construction. Only six years ago, Mr. Speaker, 

all such funds were directed back into the system. And most 

recently we saw this government close 26 highway maintenance 

depots. 

 

Mr. Premier, our highway system or golf course  whichever 

term you use now  is now 72 holes to the mile in many areas 

of our province because of your government’s lack of  



1458  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

commitment. Will you explain why once again you have failed 

to live up to another promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, through you to 

the member opposite, I want to tell the member that’s a very 

interesting day that he asked that question. Because you see 

yesterday I was in Ottawa  just arrived back a little while ago 

 meeting with the Senate committee on Bill C-14. 

 

Of course that’s the new transportation Act that the federal 

government is going to pass, and hopefully the Senate will 

listen to us. But what that Act will do, Mr. Speaker, is allow 

railways to abandon track a lot faster than they do now. That 

will have immense impact on the roads of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know the member would like us to spend more on highways, 

but he should be talking to the members over there, the third 

party, Mr. Speaker, who spent like drunken sailors and we have 

$851 million in interest to pay each year. That’s who he should 

be directing his question to. 

 

And he should be directing his question to the federal 

government, who is passing Bill C-14, and not only that, but is 

taking away money from health, education, and social programs 

that we have to back-fill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are dozens of 

examples of highways within this province that pose a very real 

safety hazard for motorists. A few examples, Mr. Speaker: 

Highway No. 44 from Davidson to Loreburn; No. 19, the 

Elbow corridor; No. 13 from Weyburn to the Alberta border, 

also known as the Red Coat Trail, and I guess a trail it is 

becoming; No. 42 from Tuxford to Eyebrow, and No. 15 from 

Melville to Outlook. 

 

Will the minister explain why, when our highways are virtually 

falling apart and pose a significant risk to those travelling these 

routes, that this government is not taking immediate action and 

living up to its promise to address these safety concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell 

the member opposite that we are doing a lot of things in 

Highways. We’re looking at new technologies in tire inflation 

programs. We’re looking at partnerships with the private sector, 

and these partnerships are working. We’re working with 

regional councils, with RMs (rural municipality), to better plan 

highway spending. And also internally, Mr. Speaker, the last 

budget, the member will know that we took $6 million out of 

administration in Highways, money that will go directly into 

roads. 

 

But he should be questioning the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker, who is taking money away from health care and social 

programs and education, forcing our departments to take some 

of our money to back-fill what his federal government is doing.  

He wants us to cut taxes, but then spend more. If he was on this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I know we would be in the 

same boat that we were 10 years ago under the third party that 

sits over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, a sign at each of our border 

crossings welcoming visitors to Saskatchewan is really not 

necessary anymore. Tourists only need to feel that familiar 

thump that Saskatchewan residents all know too well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government claims to have a commitment to 

building tourism into a major industry in this province. Yet they 

do nothing to address the safety concern that will discourage 

visitors from travelling the province. A perfect example is Lake 

Diefenbaker, renowned tourist destination, with no proper 

highway system for people to get to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister and his government are truly 

committed to tourism, will he stand in this House today, live up 

to a promise, and make a commitment to properly fund our 

provincial highway system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 

member is fairly familiar with accidents. I remember one just 

outside this building not too long ago. Mr. Speaker, there was 

not one bump in that road. 

 

But I want to remind the member opposite again about Bill 

C-14 and with allowing the railways to abandon track very fast. 

We have 25 per cent of all the roads in Canada right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We have a million people. Not all of 

those people pay taxes. We have to look after those roads. 

 

The federal government is telling us, we will allow the railways 

to abandon rail line in the sake of efficiencies. In the sake of 

efficiencies to who? To profits for the railways. No 

consideration at all for municipal governments and provincial 

governments for road damage  not one consideration, Mr. 

Speaker. He should be talking to Mr. Anderson in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce is 

indeed holding its annual meeting this week, and last year at the 

meeting you promised personally to review your 

union-preference tendering policy. Now this review has also 

been promised on several occasions by your Minister of Labour 

and by the minister in charge of CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan). Well, Mr. Minister, we’re still 

waiting. Today your Minister of Labour tells us that in fact 

there is a review ongoing. 

 



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

We would like to know, Mr. Minister, is this review coming to 

some sort of a conclusion sometime or are we simply waiting 

and dragging our feet until the session is over? Or are you just 

waiting so that we won’t have a chance to put your feet to the 

fire in this Assembly because you have reneged on your 

promise? 

 

Mr. Minister, you said that you are close to completing this 

review. When will this review be released? When will we find 

out what is going on, the rest of us who live in this province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Same answer as to the other questioner 

 very, very soon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we will continue our 

question to the Minister of Economic Development because 

obviously the Minister of Labour wants to duck. 

 

Mr. Minister, the chamber of commerce is holding its annual 

meeting now. In last year’s meeting, you promised that you are 

going to take care of this problem. You promised to review this 

policy and to make your necessary adjustments for this year so 

that the construction season could go ahead unimpeded by this 

terrible policy that you put into place. 

 

Now they say, over at the chamber of commerce, and the 

president says, that the union-preference policy should be 

cancelled, and it should be cancelled because it’s preventing 

chamber members, particularly people in small towns, from 

bidding on contracts, and we agree with what he is saying 

because, Mr. Minister, quite frankly, it’s not only affecting the 

small communities. It’s now affecting all the bigger 

communities as well  Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

We want to know when you will come to your senses and get 

your Minister of Labour under control, Mr. Premier, and have 

him answer a few questions in this Assembly and come clean 

with the people in the chamber of commerce. And in fact when 

will you cancel this ridiculous and foolhardy policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The party opposite, Mr. Speaker, would 

understand ducking quite well, and I don’t want to be accused 

of that, so I’ll elaborate a bit on my answer to the hon. member. 

 

We felt that the review of the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement was almost concluded. We had some indication 

from the Saskatchewan Construction Association they want to 

have further discussions. There was a discussion this week 

between the executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association and at least one official from the 

Crown Investments Corporation. They’ve scheduled another 

meeting for later this month, in the month of May. And we feel 

that the end of those discussions will be the end of the review. 

And in due course, we will be making an announcement as to 

the disposition of the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. 

But calling a spade a spade and not to have the party opposite 

ducking around, what they want is not a review of anything. 

What they want to do is, any progressive legislation that we 

have in Saskatchewan, they want to scrap it. They want to end it 

all. They want to be Alabama North, and that’s the long and the 

short of it. They should be the ones to come clean with the 

legislature and not play these silly games they do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential Home Care Workers’ Strike 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, home care 

workers have voted to go on strike. I guess that’s not too 

surprising after the sweetheart deal cut with SaskTel workers. 

As we had said earlier on, it’s obvious most other groups are 

going to want as much if not more. 

 

Mr. Minister, everyone’s going to be looking for similar pay 

hikes. Your destruction of the health care system means more 

people are being cared for through home care than ever before. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to prevent this strike? What 

are you going to do to ensure the sick and the elderly are not put 

in danger because of a possible home care strike? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with the 

member when he characterizes the settlement with the SaskTel 

workers as being outside of the mandate, because it wasn’t. 

 

And I want to say to the member that comments are made when 

there are collective bargaining disputes, comments have been 

made by parties in the context of a collective bargaining 

dispute. 

 

I think what is most important is that we encourage the parties 

to continue negotiating, as I know they will. And I believe that 

the union and management are people of goodwill and 

reasonable people. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they will 

talk out their differences and successfully bargain a collective 

agreement. And that’s what they should do; that’s what I’m 

sure they will do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question, Mr. 

Minister. It’s obvious, Mr. Minister, that as we saw with the 

SaskTel situation, while you talked about mediation and 

working out their differences  it didn’t until they went on 

strike and then you came up with a sweetheart deal. 

 

It appears to me, Mr. Minister, in this situation we’re going to 

have many people . . . and we’ve talked about it over the last 

number of days regarding home care services in the province 

and the problems that people are facing today. What’s going to 

happen when a strike takes place? 

 

These people are in jeopardy because of the threat of a home 

care strike and they’re in jeopardy because of your actions 

regarding our health care system. 



1460  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

Mr. Minister, the Manitoba government has just announced that 

it intends to pass essential services legislation to outlaw 

full-scale strikes in a number of essential services, including 

home care. And listen to this, Mr. Minister: before you 

condemn this Bill on political grounds, you should know that it 

is modelled on legislation passed by the former NDP 

government in Ontario. Mr. Minister, immediately after 

question period, I will be moving an emergency motion calling 

on your government to introduce similar legislation here in 

Saskatchewan, legislation that will . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 

has been very lengthy in his preamble, and I’ll ask him to put 

his question directly. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will you 

support this emergency motion that we propose to bring 

forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I was already aware of the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that the member’s party did not believe in free 

collective bargaining and the right of people to take job action. 

 

But I want to say to the member that free collective bargaining, 

I believe, will be successful in Saskatchewan in achieving a 

resolution as between the union and management. I have every 

confidence that the parties will continue to get together to 

resolve their differences. That’s what they should do. That’s 

what we should encourage them to do. It is not an issue that we 

should inject ourselves into or that we should politicize. It is an 

issue of collective bargaining, and I’m confident that the parties 

will resolve their differences, unlike what is occurring in the 

province of Manitoba where I believe the government there is 

privatizing home care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highways Asphalt Purchases 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

answer a question that was given to the Minister of Economic 

Development who took notice on my behalf on day 39 from the 

member from Cypress Hills, and I would like to provide that 

answer now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Cypress Hills was enquiring as 

to purchase of asphalt emulsion from Koch Oil. Koch Oil is one 

of several companies which have been awarded tenders from 

the Department of Highways in the 1995-96 budget year. Other 

suppliers include Husky Oil and Ace Industries. 

 

Given the Agreement on Internal Trade, we cannot prohibit bids 

from Canadian companies, including those that use external 

sources of input materials. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hospital Closures 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday one of our members stood up in this House to speak  

up for the seniors of his constituency. He asked a very serious 

question, and all he received was a snide answer from an 

arrogant government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the time to stand up to this arrogance is long 

past due. People in my constituency are also asking questions. 

In their first term, this government forced the closure of the 

Spalding Hospital. Then this spring, they shut down the 

Rose-Valley centre, forcing seniors out of their homes to 

communities throughout the area. Now my constituents fear that 

Kelvington is next on the chopping block. 

 

Will the minister tell the people of my constituency, now, if this 

is indeed the plan, or will he promise the sick and elderly that 

he will commit to the funds to keep this facility open? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I find it unfortunate that the 

opposition would get up in the House on more than one 

occasion and suggest that this government or local health 

districts would have people turned out of their homes onto the 

street. That has not happened; that will not happen. 

 

I also find it unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite do not respect the right of people in their own 

communities to come up with health care plans that meet the 

needs of people in their districts. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

government funds health care better probably than just about 

any jurisdiction in Canada. The Liberal government in Ottawa, 

as I acknowledge has been said many times, is cutting back 

dramatically on health care spending. We are putting in a dollar 

for every dollar the Liberals have taken out. Conservative and 

Liberal governments across the country are cutting back on 

health care. Mr. Speaker, we are not doing so; we will not do 

so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the hospital closures are 

changing the total structure of rural health care in 

Saskatchewan, and people are scared. And with this 

government’s arrogant attitude, they have a right to be scared. 

 

In my constituency people are now faced with over an hour’s 

drive to get to the nearest facility. The golden hour of health 

care has disappeared. Now, thanks to this government’s 

destructive actions, it’s more like a golden week in some cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Melfort-Tisdale was standing up 

for his constituents and trying to get a straight answer from the 

Health minister. What do we have to do to get a straight 

answer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, what always amazes me 

coming from the members opposite, is that they get up and say 

that they are protectors of a system that they fought tooth and  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

nail to prevent from coming into being in the first place. 

 

And I was reading the Hansard from 1962 last week, Mr. 

Speaker, and I was reading what the Liberals said in 1962 when 

this party wanted to introduce medicare. And the irony, Mr. 

Speaker, is what the Liberals say today is the same as what they 

said in 1962 in many respects. 

 

The last vestige of the Liberal Party when it’s on the run is to 

engage in fearmongering. They will tell people that your 

doctors are going to leave, your nurses are going to leave; 

you’re not going to have medical care; you’re going to be 

thrown out onto the street. This is a 30-year history of this 

party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to say to the member that we invented medicare and 

we’re going to keep the medicare system healthy in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Collective Bargaining 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan nurses’ association is preparing to resume 

bargaining on behalf of 6,700 employees next week. 

 

As the Minister of Health is aware, safe patient care is one of 

the issues SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) is taking to the 

negotiating table. SUN president, Judy Junor, says this is 

because, and I quote: 

 

Safe care is being jeopardized every day by having too few 

nurses, no nurses on call to cover emergencies, and nurses 

are not being replaced if they are ill. Combine this with 

more cuts and we’ve got a health system in crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government embarked on its so-called 

health care reform it promised  it promised — the 

continuation of a safe and reliable health care system. The 

people of Saskatchewan are seeing anything but. Will the 

Minister of Health explain how his government plans on 

addressing yet another broken promise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member 

that the comments that have been made concerning the situation 

are made in the context of a collective bargaining dispute. 

 

And the union of nurses and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association 

of Health Organizations) are good people and reasonable 

people, and they will get to the table and talk about their 

differences. And what they don’t need is the member or myself 

injecting ourselves into that situation. That situation should be 

allowed to take its natural course and I’m confident that the 

natural course will be a successful resolution of the 

negotiations. 

 

But I want to say to the member, what are we doing? This is 

what we are doing. For every dollar that your party is taking out 

of the health care system we’re taking one of our dollars and 

putting it back in. And what we are not going to do is what the 

members opposite advocated last week. And I’m quoting from 

the member from Arm River who said, “If there are people that  

are prepared to pay, then I think we have to let them pay.” 

 

That’s not the kind of system we want. We do not want 

American-style health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Brian Morgan, 

the chief negotiator for the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, has indicated that this government has made it 

clear that any negotiated salary increases will come out of 

existing district health board operating budgets. 

 

As a result, health districts, many of which have already 

received a reduction in funding from this government, are 

poised to cut and slash even more services and staff to meet 

their shrinking bottom line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised  he promised — prior to 

the 1991 election that the NDP government would be, and I 

quote, “committed to the fundamental principles of medicare 

and hospitalization.” District health boards cannot possibly 

provide a proper level of health care services given the 

continual reduction in funding. 

 

Given this fact, will the minister explain how he can stand in 

this House and truthfully tell the people of Saskatchewan his 

government has honoured this promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have no difficulty standing 

in this House saying that this government has honoured its 

commitment to the people of the province to make health care 

spending its number one priority. Over one-third of the money 

that we spend, Mr. Speaker, is spent on health care, and we 

have back-filled the Liberal cut-backs to health care. 

 

It is not this government, Mr. Speaker, that has a difficult 

position to take standing up and defending health care. It is that 

party, Mr. Speaker, that is in a difficult position because it is 

that party that is cutting back on health care and it is that party 

that has a record of opposing public medicare. It is that party 

that is advocating a two-tiered system of health care  an 

American style of health care which we don’t need in this 

province. 

 

We are going to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we keep the medicare 

system that we pioneered in this province and which is the envy 

of the rest of North America, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order! Order! Order! I will ask 

all members on both sides of the House to come to order when 

the Speaker is on his feet. 

 

Order. Order! Now I will ask, I will ask the Opposition House 

Leader and I will ask the Deputy Premier to come to order. I’ve  



1462  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

called for order and I’ll ask for the cooperation of all — Order! 

— of all members, all members including the third party. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 86  An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act be introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 87  An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Power Corporation Act, 1995 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now the hon. minister was moving 

second reading of a Bill . . . or first reading of a Bill and the 

Speaker was unable to hear him because of noise coming from 

both sides of the House. Order. 

 

Now the best that the Speaker is able to do is to assume what 

the minister has said, and I’m not prepared to do that. I will ask 

the minister to move the Bill again and I will ask for the 

cooperation of all members of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I will try again. 

Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The Power 

Corporation Act, 1995 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

pursuant to rule 46 to move a motion of pressing and urgent 

necessity. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. The hon. member for 

Moosomin has requested leave to present a Bill pursuant to rule 

46. I will ask the hon. member for Moosomin to briefly present 

to the House the reason why he wishes to have it considered in 

a priority manner and also then to advise the House of the 

content of the motion that he would like to move. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Home Care Services 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 

the health of thousands of Saskatchewan people is at risk.  

Home care workers have voted 86 per cent in favour of strike 

action. Mr. Speaker, such a strike could be devastating to 

thousands who receive care daily from these health care 

providers. Considering the essential services provided by home 

care workers, Mr. Speaker, I believe this issue should be 

debated immediately and that the government needs to 

immediately declare home care services as an essential service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Manitoba announced two days ago 

that essential government services would be protected during 

strikes, and I believe the same is needed here. Therefore, I move 

the following motion, seconded by the member from 

Cannington: 

 

That this Assembly, in order to protect the health of 

Saskatchewan seniors and individuals receiving home care 

services, urge the government to immediately declare home 

care services as an essential services. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The hon. member has a good idea. 

 

The hon. member for Moosomin has described to the House 

why he feels it should be considered on a priority basis and has 

advised the House of the motion that he wishes to move. It 

requires leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, we table the answer to 

question no. 86 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Open and 

accessible government, you’re quite right. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 86 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to this question as 

well. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 87 is tabled. 

 

The answer to question 88 is converted to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

Order. Order. All hon. members will come to order, please. It’s 

highly inappropriate for members to be shouting across the 

floor, and I will ask for the cooperation of all members. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to 

repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments 

to other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

move second reading of The Health Districts Amendment Act, 

1996. Three years ago, the government introduced The Health 

Districts Act. This Act has been fundamental to health renewal 

in Saskatchewan, making our health system better able to serve 

the needs of our people and securing our high quality health 

system for future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation has been truly trail-breaking, and 

as is typically the case with trail-breaking legislation, working 

with it has been a learning experience. In the course of this 

learning experience, we have been able to identify a number of 

places where improvements are needed. The amendments 

before you, Mr. Speaker, are intended to improve this 

legislation. 

 

To start, Mr. Speaker, the government proposes amendments 

which reflect what we have learned about the election and 

appointment process. For example, we have identified a 

legitimate need to ensure continuity of board members. This 

can be achieved through staggered terms of office. 

 

As well, the cross-border relationship in Lloydminster requires 

a unique approach; therefore regulation-making powers in this 

Bill will establish the process for electing and appointing future 

Lloydminster Health District board members. 

 

This Bill will also define grounds for the disqualification of 

elected board members. 

 

Another matter dealt with in this Bill is the continued 

responsibility of municipalities for outstanding debenture debt 

of the former union hospital boards. This Act will provide some 

remedy for the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in case a 

municipality fails to pay required amounts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the major topics addressed in this Bill is 

that of affiliates and their relationship with the district health 

boards. This amendment will establish a formal set of 

obligations between both the district health boards and their 

affiliates. For the purposes of this Act, an affiliate will be 

defined as a person or organization in charge of institutions or 

homes which are not directly operated by the health board. 

 

There are a number of key sections affecting affiliates and their 

relationship with district health boards. First of all the Act will 

require that an affiliate and a district health board enter into a 

written operating agreement before funding will be provided to 

the affiliate. If a district health board finds it cannot reach an 

agreement with the affiliate, the district health board can ask 

that a mediator be appointed. If mediation is unsuccessful, the 

mediator will issue a report to the minister. The minister will 

have the option of setting the terms of an agreement which will 

be binding on both the district health board and the affiliate. 

 

As well, the Act will provide for the minister, under certain 

circumstances, to appoint a public administrator, someone with 

appropriate powers to manage an affiliate’s operation. Affiliates 

will also be required to provide districts with any information 

they need to carry out their reporting responsibilities. With 

these amendments in place, the accountability provisions for 

affiliates will be equivalent to those that exist for district health  

boards. 

 

In addition, the Act refers to standards that should be applicable 

to all health service providers. Where these references occur, 

they must apply equally to affiliated agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these provisions for affiliates build on work done 

last year to develop an accountability framework for defining 

roles and relationships within the health system. And important 

component of this accountability framework is the notion of a 

clear legislative base. 

 

These changes with respect to affiliates recognize what will be 

an ongoing relationship between the health districts and 

affiliates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also addresses the matter of model district 

medical staff by-laws. For the past several months, many groups 

have been working on developing such by-laws, including 

representatives from the Department of Health, the 

Saskatchewan college of physicians and surgeons, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Saskatchewan 

Association of Health-Service Executives, and finally district 

health boards. 

 

The work of these groups has resulted in a model for district 

medical staff by-laws — by-laws which, among many things, 

recognize the shift from a facility-based model of health 

delivery to a broader, community-based approach. This 

amendment proposes to formally ensure that district health 

boards and affiliates will have such by-laws in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new appeal process for medical, dental, and 

chiropractic staff is also being proposed. It will replace the 

appeal mechanisms currently available under The Hospital 

Standards Act. 

 

Further, a number of changes or additions to regulatory powers 

are being proposed. These will apply to both district health 

boards and affiliates. 

 

Included are powers to establish and monitor the standards for 

services and operating facilities. As well, the Bill provides for 

the appointment of bodies such as accrediting agencies to 

monitor and enforce the standards. 

 

(1445) 

 

In addition to the changes I have discussed so far, Mr. Speaker, 

the continuing development of The Health Districts Act 

requires changes to other health-related legislation. This 

includes repealing The Union Hospital Act to reflect the fact 

that union hospitals as separate entities no longer exist; 

repealing The Lloydminster Hospital Act to reflect the 

establishment of the Lloydminster District Health Board; and 

repealing a number of obsolete sections of The Hospital 

Standards Act. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I believe the amendments in this Bill 

will support and improve upon the operation of our health  



1464  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

system in Saskatchewan. They will provide a high degree of 

accountability and they will help ensure similar terms and 

conditions for health services throughout our province. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Health Districts Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the chance 

to discuss the government’s proposed changes to The Health 

Districts Act. This Bill only touches on the legal aspects of the 

health boards. It doesn’t even begin to address the underlying 

concerns people in this province have about changes to the 

health boards themselves. Although our caucus will address the 

specifics in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, we also must address the 

radical changes health boards have gone through with the 

government’s so-called health reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that the NDP government has ripped 

apart the health care system in this province. The members 

opposite have stood back and watched as hospital after hospital 

shut its doors on rural residents. These same members have 

listened to the protests of people throughout Saskatchewan but 

have turned a deaf ear, all in the name of politics. They have 

chosen to ignore people’s objections  objections that cuts 

were just too deep and too quick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this government’s administration nothing has 

hurt them more than their barbaric treatment of the health care 

system  not cuts to agriculture, not patronage appointments in 

Crown corporations, not even its dismal job creation record. 

Although the NDP government has made so many bad choices 

that have cut deeply into Saskatchewan, the health care system 

is the heavy cross they will be forced to bear. When history 

books are written, it will be this NDP administration that is 

identified with the complete, utter devastation of rural health 

care in this great province of ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is particularly ironic given that party’s 

reverence of the late Tommy Douglas. The father of medicare 

would roll over in his grave if he knew how the 1990s 

right-wing version of his party has decimated health care. Mr. 

Douglas would hang his head in shame if he saw how the NDP 

members have ignored rural Saskatchewan. His grass roots 

party has been ripped up and replaced by the sidewalks of urban 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues surrounding district health boards have 

done little to help the NDP salvage any trust from 

Saskatchewan people. Let me read a quote from the September 

30 edition of the Prince Albert Daily Herald: 

 

From the day district health boards were created there have 

been complaints. The obvious NDP leanings of many of 

the original appointees was a sore point. The major 

decisions made by those board members, including the 

consolidation of acute care services at one hospital in 

Prince Albert, was another. The ongoing tendency to close 

the doors to the public is yet another complaint. 

 

Is yet another complaint. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, these 

complaints are not rare nor are they limited to the Prince Albert 

area. People in every area of the province express similar 

concerns. The provincial government may have thought that 

they could deflect some of the criticism by creating health care 

boards that were elected instead of appointed. This is what 

people were calling for, after all. 

 

And we agreed with the people. We wanted to see health care 

decisions made by true representatives of people and not by the 

government. Unfortunately this government could not 

relinquish that control. They allowed for some members to be 

elected, but made sure that appointed members would still be 

part of those boards. This way the government still controls the 

purse-strings. 

 

Look at the Plains Health Centre for example. The new district 

health board supposedly has a say in what will happen to that 

facility. Unfortunately their say means that they have to toe the 

government line, no questions asked. In the case of the Plains 

health care centre the government line is shut it down; don’t 

talk about it; and for goodness’ sakes, don’t protest. It’s a clever 

system this government has created  make unpopular choices 

and use the health boards as your messengers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be a lot more honourable if the 

members opposite would do their own dirty work and take 

responsibility for their own bad choices. Mr. Speaker, this 

government is becoming renowned for its smoke and mirrors 

policies. They will spend thousands of dollars to sell the 

message that people have a say, but we’re not buying that 

message, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province are 

starting to see it for what it is. It all boils down to government 

control, very simply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 76, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 

makes minor changes that shouldn’t cause much concern, and 

some major changes that could affect the district boards. I’ll 

maybe just touch briefly on some of the major changes today, 

but we are still trying to digest a large number of implications 

involved in this Bill. 

 

One of the most important new subsections in this Bill deals 

with the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. If this Act is passed, 

the Municipal Board will be responsible for the outstanding 

debt of former union hospital boards. In other words, the board 

will have the authority to portion off this debt to municipalities 

that were part of the union hospital districts. 

 

I understand that in the past some municipalities have out and 

out refused. The government will be using this Bill to enforce 

those payments. Mr. Speaker, I imagine that this could trigger 

harsh feelings in some municipalities, and understandably so. 

Not only have they watched their funding cut by this provincial 

government, now this same government is taking over more 

control. We’re back to the control issue, Mr. Speaker. Imagine 

that. 

 

Before we approve this new subsection, we have to talk to 

municipalities; we have to talk to lawyers and other interested 

parties that will be affected rather seriously. We will not pass a  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

Bill that is simply a government bid for greater power in any 

respect. 

 

This Bill also proposes the addition of new sections dealing 

with medical, dental, and chiropractic staff. This Bill would 

make the passage of by-laws mandatory and would replace the 

appeal mechanisms currently outlined in The Hospital 

Standards Act. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 

introduce a former MLA from my constituency and a 

government leader in the ‘70s and a continuing contributor to 

the Saskatchewan community, Mr. Elwood Cowley. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Should I start from the 

beginning again? 

 

Mr. Speaker, another new section in this particular Bill will 

allow the Lieutenant Governor to appoint a public administrator 

to replace a district health board and to manage the affairs of an 

affiliate in certain circumstances. We will most definitely want 

these certain circumstances clarified before this Bill is passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because this government formed the Lloyd Health 

District and District Health Board, The Lloydminster Hospital 

Act can now be repealed. We would like to take a greater 

amount of time to see what implications this will have on the 

people in that area. With this Bill as well, The Union Hospital 

Act will also be repealed now that all union hospital districts 

and boards are dissolved. 

 

But I have just started to touch on some of the points outlined 

in what is a very complex and a very important Bill, and we 

recognize that. This is a Bill we are not willing to pass without 

careful consideration and extensive input from outside parties. 

 

The changes this Bill makes are too important to just merely 

gloss over, Mr. Speaker. They will not only affect health care 

workers  the changes in that Bill  throughout the province; 

they will also affect the level of health care every person in 

Saskatchewan receives. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

debate on Bill 76, The Health Districts Amendment Act, be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

This Bill is intended to fulfil a commitment made by this 

government when we signed the framework agreement between 

ourselves, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations in April 

1995. In particular, we are fulfilling our commitment to 

introduce legislation that ensures all physicians who provide 

clinical payment services in Saskatchewan pay dues to the SMA 

(Saskatchewan Medical Association). 

 

Mr. Speaker, through its many activities, the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association provides benefits to all physicians of 

Saskatchewan. This Bill gives proper recognition to that fact. 

 

In 1986 a legislative amendment was made to The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act which gave initial 

attention to this matter. Prior to the 1986 amendment, only 

those physicians who belonged to the SMA were required to 

pay dues to the organization, yet all physicians receive benefits 

from many of the SMA’s activities. In order to address this 

discrepancy the 1986 amendment was made to provide for a 

system of mandatory dues, check-offs, for all fee-for-service 

physicians who did not voluntarily join the SMA. 

 

While membership in the SMA was not made mandatory, the 

legislation requires Saskatchewan Health to deduct SMA 

membership dues from payments to physicians who are not 

SMA members, and to submit this amount to the organization. 

 

The Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, simply extends this 

provision to non-fee-for-service physicians providing clinical 

services. This not only extends proper recognition of the SMA’s 

activities on behalf of all physicians, it also recognizes the 

ongoing shift to alternative methods of payment in 

Saskatchewan, such as capitation and salary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should also mention that as part of the 

framework agreement, the SMA was required to hold a 

referendum of all non-fee-for-service physicians on this matter. 

That referendum was indeed held in December of 1995. In this 

referendum, 70 per cent of the ballots cast were in favour of 

mandatory dues check-off. This provides a clear indication of 

support for this initiative among those who will be affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 

few moments today to discuss the amendments indicated by the 

Minister of Health to The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Due to the fact that this Bill deals with the very important issue  



1466  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

of health care and the health care system in our province, I feel 

that a considerable amount of time should be spent in analysing 

the changes that are proposed to this Bill, as well as the 

potential outcome of these changes. 

 

This Bill deals directly with the form of remuneration of 

physicians who practise in our province receive. Our physicians 

are an extremely valuable commodity. Most of them graduate 

from our own University of Saskatchewan which offers a 

top-notch medical school. We are currently watching these 

recent graduates flock out of the province and out of our 

country to practise their trade. This Bill, as it suggests the 

movement towards capitation as a form of payment, will 

drastically affect all physicians who practise medicine in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The current Saskatchewan medical insurance Act deals with the 

responsibility of the minister in establishing and administrating 

a medical insurance plan to the people of this province. 

 

This Act deals in considerable detail with the powers of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations. The 

section in question in the Bill before us today, also deals with 

the Lieutenant Governor’s power to make regulations regarding 

payments from the minister to the physician with respect to 

insured services provided by that physician. 

 

The current legislation requires Saskatchewan Health to deduct 

a percentage of the amount of the normal Saskatchewan 

Medical Association membership dues from the payment to the 

physicians who are not members, and to submit this amount to 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association. This is done in order to 

recognize and to pay for the benefits that these physicians 

receive from the SMA even though they are not members. 

 

The entire section dealing with the Lieutenant Governor’s 

power to make these regulations is repealed by this Bill and is 

replaced by another section that also deals with regulations with 

respect to payments. 

 

The reasoning behind this minor change to The Saskatchewan 

Medical Care Insurance Act is due to the 1986 amendment to 

the same Act that provided for a system of mandatory 

check-offs for all fee-for-service physicians who did not join 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association on a voluntary basis. 

 

Even though membership to this association is not mandatory, 

legislation requires that Saskatchewan Health deduct a 

percentage of the amount of the membership fee to the medical 

association from payments to physicians who are not members. 

 

This amendment also extends the dues to non-fee-for-service 

physicians that provide clinical and direct patient services. This 

has been done in order to recognize the faint possibility of an 

increasing number of alternate methods of payments to 

physicians, such as capitation and salary. 

 

In reading this Bill and the explanations that were provided, 

many questions came to mind. The first question that arose was 

why physicians are not required to be members of the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association if they have to pay  

membership fees — although indirectly — anyway. In my 

mind, if you’re going to deduct the fees indirectly from their 

remuneration, why not simplify the system by making 

membership and payment of membership dues mandatory? 

 

The entire premiss of a physician practising in Saskatchewan 

without being a member of the SMA is a bit ludicrous, due to 

the simple fact that the individual could not get insurance if that 

person is not a member of the association. 

 

The next question, or could be concern, that comes to my mind 

is the actual need for this change. It is my understanding that 

there is an extremely limited number of physicians practising in 

Saskatchewan who are not part of the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association for the simple reason that one cannot get insurance 

if that person is not a member. It also is my understanding that 

there are literally no physicians being paid by capitation in 

Saskatchewan currently. 

 

This brings me to the point that there really is no reason for this 

amendment at all. There is a limited number of 

non-fee-for-service physicians who practise at community 

clinics and who are paid on a salary basis, but that hardly calls 

for the tabling of a new Bill. 

 

We have consulted with physicians who are currently practising 

medicine in Saskatchewan and the main concern that came out 

of our discussions were the fear that Saskatchewan may move 

to a system of capitation or rostering when it comes to paying 

physicians for their services in this province. 

 

The system of capitation, or rostering, as it referred to most 

often in the United States, is a system in which doctors are paid 

a flat fee to look after the health of a designated number of 

patients. It is an insurance-like system in which physicians are 

paid a fixed monthly fee per patient regardless of the number of 

times they see that person in any given month. 

 

Many states in the United States where capitation is used have 

found they need a much lower number of specialists to serve 

the needs of the people that live there. It is a well-known fact 

that Saskatchewan certainly does not have a problem with a 

saturated market for specialists. In fact with the closure of the 

Plains hospital, many people feel that it will become 

increasingly difficult to attract specialists to this province. 

 

Since it is not the over-saturation of specialists in Saskatchewan 

that is the reason for the consideration of capitation, it must be 

the fact that capitation is by far the most powerful cost-saving 

instrument available to governments today. 

 

The possible implementation of capitation in Saskatchewan will 

undoubtedly cause even more of our physicians to go elsewhere 

to practise, as it is strongly opposed to by physicians, the 

Canadian Medical Association, and by many provincial medical 

associations. 

 

It looks to me as though the Department of Health is looking at 

every possible option for saving money. The problem with 

capitation, though, is that in order for it to work, hospitals, 

family doctors, and specialists will have to come under the  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

direction of a single authority. This will obviously not be 

acceptable to the newly formed and supposedly autonomous 

district health boards. 

 

In a province that already has a considerable amount of trouble 

in keeping our physicians, the implementation of rostering, or 

the threat thereof, may be enough to encourage the few who do 

remain here to practise to follow the rest of their classmates 

down south. There is a reason why no province in Canada has 

successfully approached the idea of capitation. The main reason 

is that . . . being population-based funding is just not the way 

health care in Canada was meant to be. Even though the faintest 

suggestion of capitation comes from a government that is 

adamantly opposed to a two-tier health care system and that 

desperately wants to see the current system of health care thrive, 

it is treading on dangerous waters. 

 

Due to the suggestions that have been hinted at through this 

Bill, I feel that it is necessary to look into the causes and the 

effects of the proposed changes a lot more carefully. We would 

like to consult further with physicians who will be affected by 

this Bill, and therefore I move that the debate on this Bill be 

adjourned. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to move second reading of The Health Facilities Licensing Act, 

an Act which speaks to the very heart of this government’s 

commitment to universal medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government believes in a publicly 

administered, single-payer health system. We reject totally the 

two-tier approach to health care. We believe that access to 

health services must be based on need, not the ability to pay, 

and that health services are not just for the wealthy. They must 

be for anyone who needs them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the publicly administered, single-payer health 

system reflects, as it always has, our values of cooperation, 

compassion, and community. When someone is ill in our 

community, we come together to help that person. We don’t 

care how much money they earn or about any other part of their 

background. We have a sense of responsibility to each other, 

and we want shared dignity, the dignity of good health, and 

proper care if we become ill. 

 

A two-tier health system runs contrary to those values. It creates 

one system of health services for those who can afford it, and 

another for those who can’t. Some make the argument that if we 

just start allowing a few medically necessary services to be 

offered on the open market, universal health services will 

remain unaffected in Canada. That is the position of the 

opposition. That’s a flawed argument. 

 

Once you allow medically necessary services outside the 

single-payer system, a universal health system simply no longer 

exists. The process is simple  those that can afford the extra 

cost of private services begin to opt for private schemes. 

Service providers drop out of a publicly funded system to 

operate in private settings. I might add that they do so in the 

areas that are easy and profitable for them, not in the difficult 

cases, Mr. Speaker, where people are chronically ill and in need 

of care. 

 

Those with money can access health services faster in the 

private setting and those without money have to wait longer in 

the public system. Access to some essential services through the 

public system would then be diminished or even lost. And as 

the wealthy use the private system more and more, their support 

for putting tax dollars into the public system would decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also opposed to the two-tier health care 

model because it would only add to the overall costs of the 

health system. One only has to look at the two-tiered American 

system to prove this point. Before our entire country adopted 

medicare in 1971, Canada and the United States spent roughly 

the same percentage of GDP (gross domestic product) on 

health. Since 1971 Canadians have consistently spent less. In 

1994 the U.S. (United States) spent 14.3 per cent of its gross 

domestic product on health compared to 9.7 per cent in Canada. 

Today the U.S. spends twice as much per capita on health, 

through taxes and private payments. 

 

Why is there such a difference? Because the single-payer 

system is more efficient. There is only one payer, not several 

private payers requiring extensive administrations. In the United 

States, 14 per cent of health dollars go to administration 

compared to less than 1 per cent in Canada. And on health 

outcomes, the single-payer system is better. For example, when 

compared to Americans, Canadians live longer and our infant 

mortality rate is lower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been corresponding with a retired physician 

in the United States named Dr. Gowin, and he wrote me 

recently and he said that he had been corresponding with a 

number of Canadians about our health care system. And after 

saying that people who write him say that they are satisfied with 

the medicare system as compared to the American system, he 

says: 

 

There is considerable indication from the letters received 

that Canadians are concerned about possible inroads being 

made to privatize some aspects of medicare, thereby 

producing a two-tiered system. It would be a calamity (he 

says) if your medicare were to be gutted. 

 

Because you know what they’re trying to do, Mr. Speaker? 

They are trying to develop the system that was pioneered in this 

province and that we have and enjoy in this province. 

 

I want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that in the United States 35 

million people have no health care insurance; 100,000 people 

join the ranks of the uninsured each and every month. I want to 

say also that health care costs in the United States continue to 

be the leading cause of personal bankruptcy. Mr. Speaker, that 

does not occur in Canada. 

 

And what we hear of course in the legislature  and it’s the job  



1468  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

of the opposition day after day to complain about the health 

care system we have and to pretend that they had something to 

do with bringing it about, even though they opposed it every 

step of the way. But you know, Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of the 

people who use the public medicare system are very satisfied 

with it because it’s a good system. We have a wonderful health 

care system; we have an excellent health care system. 

 

Are there problems with it? Yes, there are occasionally 

problems with it. There are problems with any system. There 

were problems before health reform; there will continue to be 

problems. But we have a system that is the envy of the world 

and we should never forget it and we should never take it for 

granted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Another advantage of the single-payer system, Mr. Speaker, is 

that each provincial government has the scope to make tangible 

policy decisions across many areas of the health sector. Private 

insurance companies in the United States just don’t have this 

ability. And this is important, because in Saskatchewan the 

publicly administered, single-payer health system was not 

created just to provide better access to health services. It was 

created to promote better health. 

 

For these reasons, we are introducing the Bill before us today. 

In the future, it may be the case that private facilities will come 

to Saskatchewan wishing to provide medically necessary 

hospital or physician services, insured services that are currently 

covered by our public system. This legislation will give the 

government the authority to ensure that any such facility will 

have to operate totally within Saskatchewan’s publicly funded, 

single-payer medicare system. 

 

Any persons who wish to operate a private facility of this type 

will be required to apply for a licence. No such facility will be 

permitted without one. And these licensees will be prohibited 

from charging a facility fee for any publicly insured health 

service provided in the health facility. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide the basis for 

supplying uniform quality standards. Any licence application 

will be reviewed by an accreditation program operator to ensure 

that the standards of the accreditation program will be met. Of 

course, alongside these elements are provisions for inspecting 

these facilities and fines for a person who contravenes the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that there are presently no 

private health facilities providing publicly insured hospital or 

physician health services in Saskatchewan. Therefore the Act 

will not impact on physician offices currently in existence; they 

will not be required to be licensed. 

 

Only those facilities defined in the legislation will require 

licensing, and it will generally include only those non-hospital 

facilities where the insured services to be provided are normally 

provided within a hospital, and new insured services which can 

be provided outside a hospital. For example, a private facility 

providing computerized tomography scans, CT scans, or MRI 

(magnetic resonance imaging) would be required to be licensed. 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to maintain our 

publicly administered, single-payer medicare system. If private 

facilities come to Saskatchewan in the future wishing to provide 

medically necessary hospital or physician services, they will be 

compelled to operate within the publicly funded system. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say something to the 

Leader of the Opposition who was talking about the late 

Premier Douglas and what Premier Douglas would say about 

the record of this government in health care. I want to tell the 

Leader of the Opposition and the other members of the 

opposition that before she died, Mrs. Irma Douglas wrote to the 

Premier of this province asking that the Liberals and 

Conservatives please stop using her late husband’s name in 

support of their arguments. She said that it was disrespectful to 

Mr. Douglas to use his name when he spent his entire life 

fighting those parties and what they stood for, which included 

very much, Mr. Speaker, fighting their opposition to public 

medicare in this province, which they now claim to be the 

champions of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Douglas fought against those parties and their 

values his entire life. Mrs. Douglas asked the Premier and asked 

the opposition parties to stop saying that Mr. Douglas would be 

opposed to what this government is doing and in favour of their 

values. And I ask the opposition parties and the Leader of the 

Opposition to respect Mrs. Douglas’s wishes in that regard. 

 

I know that this party is carrying on the work and the traditions 

of the late Mr. Douglas and Mrs. Douglas, and I’m proud, Mr. 

Speaker, to stand in this House and say so. 

 

As our counterparts intended in 1962, access to health services 

in Saskatchewan will continue to be based on need, not the 

ability to pay. And health services will not be reserved for the 

wealthy; they will remain for everyone who needs them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to hereby move second reading of The 

Health Facilities Licensing Act. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 

some time this afternoon to discuss the Bill before us today. 

The Health Facilities Licensing Act is a new piece of legislation 

that will have a drastic impact on private health facilities that 

may open in this province in the near future. The Premier 

himself has stated that this Bill is serving no immediate need 

and this of itself causes us to have some concern. We can be 

sure that with the implementation of this Bill there will be no 

private health facilities opening up in this province any time 

soon. There will be no new facilities to provide jobs for our 

nurses and health care professionals, nor will there be any new 

facilities to serve our ageing population. 

 

This Bill might not impact upon physicians or facilities that are 

currently providing insured health services in Saskatchewan, 

but I do believe that this Bill will have a large impact on new 

nursing and medical technology graduates that will be forced to 

leave Saskatchewan in order to find employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the purpose of this Bill is to attempt to prevent a 

two-tiered health care system, I’m afraid it’s too late for that.  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

Due to the increasingly long waiting-lists for elective surgeries 

in Saskatchewan, people are simply going to Alberta or to the 

United States to have the surgery done when they want and 

need it to be done. It’s naïve to think that by taking away the 

incentive for private facilities to open up in Saskatchewan that 

people won’t go elsewhere to get the type of health care that 

they require. 

 

This Bill gives the minister ultimate control over the health care 

system in Saskatchewan. The minister is responsible for 

supplying licences to these new facilities. The minister will also 

have the ultimate power to refuse to issue licences or refuse to 

renew them. The minister would be responsible for the 

appointment of an inspector that would ensure that facilities are 

abiding by the rules and regulations set out in the Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has to be referring to a different 

minister of Health. It seems odd because the current minister 

always wants . . . Why would the current minister want that 

kind of control? Because he’s always trying to duck out on 

responsibility for the failing health care system in our province 

today. So I can’t imagine that this current minister would want 

that resting on his shoulders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apprehension over this Bill is growing. The Bill 

targets all of the wrong people. It targets Catholic hospitals and 

private practitioners and facilities. There are valid concerns 

that, if the minister decides a facility is no longer needed in a 

district, the minister could revoke that facility’s licence. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that the spirit and intent of this Bill are 

somewhat misguided. The minister is allowed unconditional 

power when dealing with private facilities, facilities that would 

be operating in health districts that should really fall under the 

authority of the supposedly autonomous health district boards. 

 

The Department of Health and these private facilities are 

supposed to enter into mutually acceptable agreements before 

the facilities are open to the public. Why then should it be 

necessary that the minister, who is head of the Department of 

Health, be able to instruct an inspector to search and seize 

property of a private facility? Why should only one member of 

a service relationship be able to search and seize a property of 

another member of the same agreement? It doesn’t make sense. 

 

This government just cannot decide what it wants to do. 

Supposedly it turns over all of the decision-making power to the 

district boards so that it doesn’t have to be accountable for all 

the problems that are plaguing our health care system. Yet it 

still wants ultimate control over private facilities that may open 

here in order to meet the demand of our ageing population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many question with regards to this 

Bill that do demand answers. Since the Bill was first tabled, 

there has been a good deal of public concern expressed as to 

what the Bill really means for the people of this province. In 

short, the Bill means that there will not be any private health 

care in this province as along as the NDP government is in 

power. It means that elective surgery waiting-lists will continue 

to grow. It means that more and more people will continue to 

leave the province to get better access to elective health care 

services. 

The Bill also targets doctors that perform MRIs and orthopedic 

surgeries. And that should be of concern to the government 

opposite, a government which so often forgets that there is a 

province beyond the boundaries of the city of Regina. But the 

fact that Regina doesn’t have an MRI at this time — and with 

the implementation of this Bill never will — will come back to 

haunt this NDP government. 

 

This Bill ensures people can only receive health care at a level 

set by the NDP government, a level that many feel is 

unacceptable in the year 1996. This government is doing this at 

a time when more and more people are asking why they choose 

to irrationally ration health care in our province. They ask if this 

government is not prepared to adequately fund the public health 

system, then why don’t they ease the pressure on our public 

system, allowing it to be more responsive to those who are truly 

in need. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, more people need to be consulted 

and more in-depth research into the actual demand for these 

changes needs to be done. Due to the controversial nature of the 

changes proposed in this Bill, I move that the debate on this Bill 

be adjourned. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

introduce on my right Ron Davis, the ADM (acting deputy 

minister) of the Department of Municipal Government; and 

behind me is Paul Rath, the director of the municipal 

development branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

welcome the minister’s officials here today. And I would maybe 

mention at this time that I have three amendments that I will 

pass across shortly. 

 

The first question, Madam Minister, that I’d like to touch on is 

clause 4. And what was the necessity of repealing section 

48(2)? Presently the minister is required to have her decisions 

published in the Saskatchewan Gazette. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the reason for the 

change there is simply to streamline the process. The intent to 

amend always has to be advertised in a newspaper that 

circulates in the relative area, and so publishing it . . . 

advertising in the Gazette after that is simply an additional 

expense, an additional administration that is deemed to be 

unnecessary. So this is just meant to streamline the process. 



1470  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Then if that’s 

not done, how does the affected municipality learn of them? 

Just minister’s decisions? Like how will they find out? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to have 

some clarification of the question. Does the member opposite 

mean how does the council find out, or how do the ratepayers in 

the area find out? To which group does he refer? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Actually, Madam Minister, I believe . . . 

I’m curious about both. Both the municipalities but also . . . 

That was my next question. How does the public find out? If 

this is not published, how is there a way of finding out now? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the notice of 

intent to amend is advertised, must be advertised, in a 

newspaper that circulates in the area. And that’s how the public 

would find out, outside of perhaps attendance at meetings or, 

you know, that sort of thing. But there is that requirement to 

advertise locally. 

 

Then in terms of how the council gets information about the 

by-law is that when it’s approved, a signed copy is returned to 

the municipality. So then they know, by that, the by-law has 

been approved. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay. 

Surrounding newspapers would have that in and I realize that, 

but then how will the other RMs or other municipalities in the 

area be able to keep up to date with some of the decisions that 

are being made? Will they be let know what has happened; 

what decision has been made here? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the intent of 

advertising in the newspaper is that it would be expected to be a 

publication that is the prominent newspaper in the area. And in 

terms of the details being transmitted to other municipalities, 

other municipalities wouldn’t be affected by a by-law that is 

passed in a neighbouring municipality. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Clause 5, Madam Minister, repeals section 

55.1  a reworded section  the definition of “capital cost” is 

changed. What was the purpose of this change? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this provision is being 

made in the legislation at the request of the large urban 

municipalities. Wherein, according to the wording of the 

existing statute, it could have a legal interpretation that levies 

within a subdivision would be confined to that subdivision. 

 

And in a large city what they wanted to do is to be able to 

spread the costs of capital costs, you know, through their 

general budget and not be area specific. So it was as a result of 

a legal interpretation within the large urban centres that that 

request came forward. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask, 

Madam Minister, in reference to section 60, does the minister 

have power to overturn decisions made by municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the existing provision  

provides that a municipality shall publish notice of the 

minister’s decision or approval after the approval. And it’s felt 

that because there’s already the requirement to publish the 

intent, that publishing the approval after the fact is a duplication 

and additional administration and expense. So that’s why that 

section 60 is being repealed. The reason I couldn’t find it is 

because it’s being repealed and it’s not there. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 

guess irrespective of the publication issue, I just need some 

clarification I guess, overall, on whether or not you as the 

minister have power to overturn decisions made by 

municipalities. Amen. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well the answer to that would be, 

generally no. As long as . . .well it doesn’t matter what the 

provision is, but particularly in the planning and development 

of The Planning and Development Act and zoning and 

subdivisions, if the municipality has followed all of its own 

by-laws and used all of the proper procedures, or in the absence 

of a zoning by-law, for instance for a rural municipality, as long 

as they have followed the provincial guidelines for, oh say for 

example, separation distances from other developments and that 

kind of thing, as long as they have used proper procedures and 

adhered to either their local zoning by-law or the provincial 

guidelines and framework, then the minister does not have 

power and indeed wouldn’t want power to overturn decisions of 

duly elected officials at the local level. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Is there any instance 

at all that the minister could overturn a decision or a by-law 

made by the municipality? Any instance whatsoever? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, just trying to think of 

some concrete examples. Normally there is no way that the 

provincial minister would want to interfere with the decision 

making at the local level. But when I said as long as a 

municipality adheres to, in the absence of their own zoning 

by-law, provincial guidelines . . . like some examples would be 

if a subdivision or a development was approved on a flood 

plain, for example, in a fly-way to an airport, or a situation like 

that where the public interest was clearly being jeopardized, 

then there would be the power to review and to not approve the 

subdivision plan or whatever the case would be. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I’d 

like to make a specific reference if I may. In the case of hog 

barns being constructed and distances from hog barns being 

regulated as such, there are provincial regulations I believe that 

are set out, and actually I understand that these things have to 

comply with provincial regulations. 

 

Now I’m just wondering whether municipal by-laws can be 

enacted that have to be adhered to. Which has more precedence 

here? Is it the provincial regulations or the municipal by-laws? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in the example that the 

hon. member refers to, intensive livestock operations, it falls 

under both. 

 

And some . . . Well this would obviously be a rural  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

municipality. You have . . . Most municipalities, or many, have 

their own zoning by-laws. And in the case of an intensive 

livestock operation, there are provincial regulations and an Act 

specifically regulating those, which require permission of 

adjacent landowners, environmental impact statements to be 

made, and a very strict set of guidelines actually and procedures 

that must be followed before an application can be made. And 

after that assessment has been made, then the municipality is 

asked to approve it based on that research that’s been done. 

 

And again, as long as all of the . . . whatever provincial 

guidelines apply have been adhered to and all of the procedures 

required have been carried out with diligence and documented 

and as long as the municipality has followed its own by-laws, 

then there is no place for ministerial or government interference 

in the local process. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. In the instance 

where in fact there may be some opposition to hog barns being 

constructed and so that municipality may end up making more 

stringent by-laws yet than in fact has been set out by provincial 

regulations and provincial guidelines, how then would a 

decision be made on who has the authority here? Or what may 

be done  would the minister then be called upon to determine 

what would happen in this case? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it certainly is possible 

for a municipality to make a by-law that would have the effect 

of being more stringent than the provincial guidelines. And as 

long as the municipality used the proper procedures to enact 

those by-laws, yes, then they would have precedence. 

 

And there are . . . I’m aware of some cases, for instance, where 

ratepayers in a municipality have used the provision in their 

rural municipal Act which permits ratepayers to call a public 

meeting by petition where views can be expressed and motions 

can be passed. These would then be conveyed to the council, 

but the results of votes at those meetings are not binding on 

council, and the vote of the council, the majority vote of the 

council, at the end of the day in some of these controversial 

situations is what stands. 

 

(1545) 

 

What really amazes about intensive livestock operations is that, 

you know, if we can put men on the moon, we can do all these 

marvellous things, and I guess because it’s not glamorous, we 

haven’t found a way to make manure not smell. And if only we 

could do that, we could solve a lot of these conflicts. 

 

I know there are other issues as well, and the environmental 

studies take these into account, like effect on the water table, of 

waste management and issues like that. But I think if only we 

could get some of our best and brightest minds to work on how 

to make manure lagoons smell like saskatoon pie or something, 

we’d all be better off. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 

don’t want to press you on this, I’m just trying to, I guess, like 

you, find some resolve to some situations that are at hand. And 

I’m just wondering if there, for instance, is a situation like this,  

is where there is very little resolve and there’s ongoing conflict 

even at the municipality level. Would the minister have the 

authority to come in and make a decision? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is 

no. And I think I have spoken to ratepayers who are in that 

situation and where they say . . . you know, particularly when 

people are opposed, they say, well surely there’s something that 

the government can do. And you know, my response is that, 

look, if your locally-elected council was doing something that 

you wanted them to do, and the government interfered and said, 

you can’t do that . . . You know, you put the shoe on the other 

foot. 

 

And so I think the answer comes down to that. I mean, there is 

respect for the local voter who elects the local council. And 

while there may be controversy . . . and of course decisions 

aren’t always unanimous, but the majority view of the council 

at the end of the day needs to be respected. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. In section 142(1), 

this section, in view of what we have just discussed, remains 

quite vague for me then. And we need some clarification 

because . . . I’ll wait until you get to that point, section 142(1). 

 

It says if a development has complied with conditions and 

regulations for development by environmental management and 

protection agency and Sask Water Corp, then granting of a 

permit by an approving authority should be automatic by the 

province, regardless of municipal by-laws which do not comply 

with provincial regulations. 

 

So if that is the case, and if those conditions are complied with, 

as stated here, then it would seem to me that developers would 

have the authority to go ahead, as long as they comply with 

these conditions, irregardless of maybe by-laws that come in 

after the fact that are stringent and maybe while the 

development is taking place. So I’m just wanting you to 

comment on that please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry. This is part 

of the existing statute, as the member will know, which is not 

being amended. And so I had to search for it because I don’t 

have the existing statute; I just have the amendments. And this 

section 142(1) relates simply to subdivisions and not to other 

developments, like intensive livestock developments. 

 

This relates entirely to subdivisions where, as we spoke earlier, 

where there may be a subdivision approval requested in a 

hazardous area, in an area that, for whatever reason, is not 

deemed to be in the public interest. But it goes to subdivisions 

only and not other kinds of development. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister 

and officials, I have a couple of questions for you in the same 

vein. I’m wondering the process and the steps of receiving 

approval for requirements to set up an intensive livestock 

operation . . . is it provincial steps that have to be adhered to 

first and then the local by-laws or vice-versa? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the process is really in  



1472  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

two stages. Usually what happens is that the proponent of a 

development will find out from the Department of Agriculture 

what obligations they have to do in terms of undertaking 

environmental studies and determining exactly what separation 

distances are and what kind of parameters are around the 

proposal that they want to make. 

 

Then usually what they do is they select the area that they 

propose to put this development in. They talk to neighbours. 

Sometimes they hold open houses. They try to get support for 

their project. And they might approach, usually do approach the 

council for an approval in principle for the type of development 

that they propose because obviously if they don’t get approval 

in principle, it would send them a signal that there may be 

opposition to the proposal. And they wouldn’t want to invest 

the money in the studies because some of the environmental 

studies and other steps that they have to undertake to meet the 

requirements of the Department of Agriculture for the intensive 

livestock permit are quite onerous in terms of financial 

responsibility and time. 

 

So usually they go for the approval in principle. If they get that, 

they take that as at least a signal of some support, and then they 

go ahead and spend the money on the other studies that need to 

be done in order to satisfy the requirements for the intensive 

livestock permit. Then having satisfied the issue . . . or the 

eventual or potential issues of the permit, that they’ve met all 

that. They would then go back to the municipality and ask for 

the resolutions for the approval of the final development plan. 

And I think in  we’re sort of going around the edges here  

but I think in the case that we’re probably all referring to that’s 

the stage that it’s at right now. 

 

The final approval, the final resolutions are yet to be made. In 

fact, I understand that the formal application has yet to be made 

to the Department of Agriculture for the permit even. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Madam Minister. I have 

another question, and you said that the approval of the adjacent 

landowners had to be received before they could get this permit. 

Can you tell me is it the approval of all of the adjacent 

landowners or a percentage of them? And how close do you 

mean by adjacent? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it depends on the size 

of the operation. What radius they would have to have approval 

for. And those . . . I’m not familiar exactly with the scale, but I 

know I’ve gone through this process a couple of times myself 

and having to go and get written consent from neighbours and 

written consent from . . . If for instance, you plan to spread 

waste from the operation in some more distant place, you would 

have to get permission from the people that surround that. Or if 

you plan to spread the waste on other people’s land, you’d have 

to demonstrate that you had their written consent and so forth. 

 

So those regulations are contained in the . . . I forget the name 

of it now. It used to be called The Pollution (By Livestock) 

Control Act, and I think it has a new name or different name 

than that now. But those are provincial guidelines contained in 

a statute that is under the jurisdiction of the Minister of 

Agriculture. And they’re quite explicit, and the information on  

those requirements is readily available to prospective 

developers. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. I don’t know if you 

answered the question for me. Do you have to have consent 

from 100 per cent of the landowners within the designated 

area? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I wouldn’t want to 

comment too specifically on it because it’s not legislation that’s 

in our jurisdiction. But to my knowledge in the past, if you had 

an adjacent landowner who objected or refused to grant 

permission, that would certainly be given very serious 

consideration by the issuers of the permit. 

 

I can recall having to get permission from about eight different 

agencies, like nearby communities, the water corporation, 

because it was a certain distance from the river, and I don’t 

think they left any stone unturned. And all of that information 

. . . I suppose, you know, one negative in the whole package 

might not be enough to overturn the whole thing, but certainly 

the people who are issuing the permit in the Department of 

Agriculture would take all of those factors carefully into 

account before issuing a permit. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I’d just like to comment on a couple of comments you 

made a few minutes ago, and I know the members opposite will 

find this odd, but I agree 100 per cent with you. When you had 

mentioned here before that the local council should be the 

people that make these decisions . . . and I realize, having been 

one. And I realize that also, I think, your experiences with an 

RM is coming through, and I’m appreciative of that. 

 

But I would say that these decisions should be made at that 

level because they’re more in touch than the minister probably 

could be. I’m not saying that in this case, Madam Minister. But 

in some cases, most councils out there would be much more in 

touch with these problems. 

 

I would like to touch on one other thing you said, that if 

someone could come up with something to do away with the 

odours from these extensive livestock things. I can also vouch 

for that one again. I agree with you, and I know this is really 

hard, but I have a hog barn a half a mile from my place, and if 

somebody could come up with something I would make them 

. . . myself be rich. So we agree on a couple of things. 

 

Madam Minister, I’d like to touch on section 57 that has been 

repealed. And my question is, is how would this change the 

council’s capital works planning? Like, what effect would it 

have on that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. member will 

recall in his experience that there was a requirement to send in a 

capital plan to the department on a regular basis. And that’s still 

required under the urban Act but it’s no longer a requirement 

under the rural Act. It was felt to be redundant. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Then I guess the follow-up to that would 

be, will it help the council then become more efficient or  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

budget better? Will there be effect on that at all or not? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I guess there’s still a 

requirement for them to prepare it, but they don’t have to send 

it in. It used to be a five-year plan, if you remember, and there’s 

a lot of guesswork in it when you get to four or five years out. 

And we always go through the exercise. And as you know, 

nobody plans on a one-year horizon, but it was felt redundant to 

have to submit it to the department for approval. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 9 

deals with section 96, the right to appeal a zoning by-law. 

Could you explain the reasons for the changes in subsection (3), 

particularly clause (b), Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is a consequential 

. . . What we have done is we have changed or made stronger 

the enforcement provisions. And so then as a consequence of 

that, we need to set up an appeal mechanism for those 

enforcement decisions. And that’s what this section is designed 

to do. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 10, 

there are a fair number of changes under section 134. Could 

you give me an explanation of the purpose of the changes more 

fully, so we fully understand what you’re doing here. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Okay. This is intended to make 

subdivisions or plans that affect a parcel of land that’s intended 

for use as a highway, road, a right of way, irrigation canal, 

pipeline, utility lines, and so forth. 

 

The registrar will receive a copy of the certificate approval of 

the approving authority, and the chief surveyor will receive the 

plan of survey for registration under The Land Titles Act. It’s 

intended to make the relationship and the work that the Land 

Titles Office and the master of titles has to do less onerous on 

the rural municipality. And it reduces the need for subdivision 

for minor pipelines and utility distribution. I think that’s really 

the gist of it, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just one thing 

further then to clause 10 is, are the restrictions placed on the 

chief surveyor under subsection (12)(b)? Was this done for 

safety reasons? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this was to reduce the 

need or do away with the need for a subdivision for minor 

pipelines and to streamline the process for distribution lines that 

are a certain distance away. I think it’s two  two and a half 

kilometres?  two and a half kilometres away from an urban 

centre. And it’s designed to streamline the process for 

easements agreements for right of ways for sewer, water, 

natural gas, power, telephone, cable TV  that kind of minor 

utility. It reduces the need for a subdivision plan from a rural 

municipality for those purposes. This does not apply, obviously, 

to major transmission lines. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam  

Minister, subsection (12)(b) is a new section restricting the 

chief surveyor’s right to approve a request that’s within 2.5 

kilometres of a group of occupied buildings. How did they 

come up with this 2.5 kilometres? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the 2.5 was in the 

previous Act, and it’s just kind of historical, I guess. And there 

was no need seen to change that. And this is designed to 

streamline the process and allow the application to go straight 

to the chief surveyor. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Clause 12, 

section 141 has been repealed and replaced with a new five-part 

section dealing with a certificate of approval. How do the 

changes benefit either the occupant of the land or the 

municipality, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is something that 

has been requested again by the major cities. And it seems to be 

quite complex, but it’s actually  believe it or not  designed 

to make things easier. 

 

For instance if there is an application for a utility easement or a 

temporary lease, that kind of thing, and it’s been applied for and 

it’s been approved, and then maybe the zoning by-law changes. 

This would relate mostly to newly developed areas in a large 

urban centre. Then if the zoning by-law changes, the certificates 

of approval do not have to be reapplied for. 

 

So it doesn’t affect anyone else really, except the complex 

subdivision and utility situations in major urban centres. I’d say 

this wouldn’t have any impact whatsoever, for example, on a 

rural municipality. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ll have to 

take your word for it that it made it simpler. 

 

Clause 13, in the amendment to section 143 you’ve been very 

explicit as to what a municipality is to do with service 

agreements. What was the motivation behind this, and what was 

the reason for it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think basically a lot 

of these provisions are for clarification and to clarify 

particularly that levies paid are for capital costs that are 

consistent with the definition of capital cost for development 

levies. So there’s some clarification meant there. And also it 

clarifies the intent that monies collected under a servicing 

agreement shall be held separate from other municipal funds. 

And this too has been requested by the major cities. 

 

There are some other provisions. For instance there was a 

change made in 1993 to provide direction on the use of 

payments and accrued interest received in a servicing 

agreement. 

 

So really they are clarifications and remedies to some previous 

changes, and nothing really dramatic  just clarification and 

housekeeping. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you  



1474  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

maybe just clarify what some of these service agreements may 

be, or some examples thereof. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, they might be, 

depending on the nature of the subdivision, they might be the 

provision of roads, sidewalks, recreational facilities. It would 

not be anything to do with the operations of a municipality like 

garbage pick-up or snowploughing or anything like that. It 

would relate to costs incurred in a development and in the 

servicing of a development. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The reason 

for this . . . has there been some difficulties in this area? Is there 

examples of difficulties that have forced this amendment to be 

brought forth? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I understand that some 

of these clarifications were asked for specifically by the city of 

Regina. So they must have been prompted by some difficulties 

that they were having, and I guess particularly with respect to 

the moneys collected pursuant to a servicing agreement being 

held in a separate fund and then what happens to any the 

interest that might accrue to that fund. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I just 

have one supplementary question to the member from Saltcoats. 

If money put from a servicing agreement is put basically into a 

separate account, is interest earned on that monies? Is that left 

in that account, or does it go into the general revenues? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it would accrue to the 

account, and it might be a matter of agreement between the 

parties. 

 

Like there are instances . . . I can give you an example for 

instance where the developer might be asked to make a deposit 

in advance to demonstrate that they actually do have, you know, 

the financial wherewithal to keep their commitment to fully 

provide the service that they’re contracted to do. So while 

they’re doing the work, the deposit would be sitting there, you 

know, accruing interest. 

 

So it could be both ways. It would either accrue to the account 

or else there would be agreement between the parties at the 

outset as to what would happen to the interest. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Would the agreement have to be made at the 

outset, or is it something that, you know, halfway through they 

could decide it’s going to end up in a different account? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is exactly what 

these provisions are meant to clarify. But usually in the case of 

a servicing agreement for a subdivision, it’s made crystal clear 

upfront for the protection of the municipality, the contractor, 

and future residents of the area that the contract will be 

fulfilled; the services will be provided. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to refer back to 

some of the questions that I was presenting a few minutes ago,  

Madam Minister. From the comments that you gave me I gather 

that municipal by-laws and municipalities have the ultimate 

authority in determining what kind of regulations that they 

would put forward, according to what their municipality wants 

to see, their council. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well generally speaking it is the 

by-laws of a municipality have to be guided by the provisions 

of the Act respecting rural municipalities. So they find their . . . 

local councils find their authority for making by-laws within the 

parameters of that Act. 

 

And as long as any by-law that they make does that, then it is 

considered constitutional and their authority to make that 

by-law, depending what it is  I mean there are various 

avenues of appeal if someone is offended by it  but generally 

speaking they have a great deal of autonomy and that should be 

respected. And as the member from Saltcoats said, we all agree 

with that. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s not a matter, for 

my part, of agreeing or disagreeing; it’s a matter here of I see 

some conflict. 

 

If in fact the section I referred to earlier, section 142(1), is 

standing as is already in this Act and is not being amended at 

all, then the wording of 142(1) is contrary to what you have just 

said. 

 

So how will we have both  the municipal authorities having 

the ultimate authority, and according to 142(1), the granting of 

a permit will be approved and automatic by the province 

regardless of municipal by-laws which do not comply with 

provincial regulations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I haven’t got that 

wording in front of me now but I did refer to it earlier, and my 

wording doesn’t have the word “automatic” in it. So I just 

would like to ask the member opposite if she could provide me 

what it is that she’s reading from. 

 

Because the answer would be the same as I gave before on 

reading 142(1), that the only exception to that would be  I 

think the member would agree  that if a municipality, for 

instance, knowingly or unknowingly approved a subdivision in 

an area that was hazardous, like too close to the fly-way of an 

airport or something like that, then it wouldn’t be in the public 

interest for the provincial authorities to approve that 

subdivision plan. 

 

But beyond that aspect of the greater public interest, the 

municipal by-law would certainly stand. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe my 

colleague has got the original  I hope he has  in front of 

him and I would appreciate if you would review it because as I 

read it, if this does stand as is, this 142(1), it reads, if a 

development has complied with conditions and regulations for 

development by environmental management and protection 

agency and Sask Water Corp, then granting of a permit by 

approving authority should be automatic by the province  



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

regardless of municipal by-laws which do not comply with 

provincial regulations. 

 

So the way I read this, this is contrary to in fact what you’re 

saying or what you have said before. 

 

Do you have . . . Madam Minister, do you have the original Act 

in front of you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I do have the Act and 

nowhere does it contain the word “automatic” and that’s the 

part that concerns me because we’re talking here to go back to 

the previous section, because this is a subsection. It starts at 

section 137, subdivision by-laws, and then these are all . . . and 

subdivision approval  they’re all under this heading. So these 

relate just to subdivisions, not to applications for building 

permits or development permits or intensive livestock permits 

 it’s subdivision only. 

 

And what I read in section 142(1) and I quote from it is: 

 

Where an application for subdivision approval is in respect 

of land that the approving authority considers to be 

potentially hazardous or unstable, the approving authority 

may, in consultation with the minister responsible for the 

administration of The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act and with the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation, direct that any such development on that land 

is required to comply with specific development standards 

formulated by the approving authority for that purpose. 

 

So I don’t read anything in there about automatic approval. 

What I . . . my interpretation of that would be that if a 

development has been approved by a local council in an area 

where these “potentially hazardous or unstable” conditions 

prevail, that there would be requirements to either change the 

application to avoid the problem or there could be a denial of a 

certificate of approval for that subdivision plan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Clause 16, 

could you explain the changes you’re proposing to section 187, 

subsection (3), Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this provision 187(1) 

refers to buffer strips and the proposed change would allow the 

minister to authorize the sale of a provincially owned buffer 

strip without a request from the municipality. This relates 

specifically to where there is no municipality. The amendment 

would address buffer strips located in provincial parks, and in 

northern Saskatchewan where no municipality exists to request 

a sale, as the existing provision currently requires. 

 

The Act requires that the request for a sale come from a 

municipality, and in the North or in a park where there is no 

municipality relevant, then this is designed to remedy that. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It seems that 

this proposed amendment, if I’m reading it right, would give the 

minister the vehicle to authorize the sale of Crown property  

without a consultation with the affected municipality. Am I 

right in reading that into it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, no, because this 

is only designed to address the situation where there is no 

municipality, where there is provincially owned buffer strips, 

where the land is in the Crown and there is no municipality. 

 

So it doesn’t affect the organized municipalities in southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 

won’t refer you to any sections this time. I’m just going to ask 

you a question. If an operation is being built and already in 

progress, is it allowed for the municipal authorities then to 

impose a by-law that they have come up with since the onset of 

construction of this whatever it may be? 

 

Do they have the authority to come up with a by-law once the 

construction is taking place  to determine whether or not the 

development may continue to take place if, for instance, a 

municipality comes up with some disgruntled people who do 

not really want that to continue  is it possible for the 

municipality to then impose a by-law at that time in the 

procedure? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it wouldn’t be. I mean 

normally, if a municipality . . . if all the proper procedures are 

followed and the municipality grants a permit for a certain kind 

of construction or a certain kind of development, and then part 

way into the project when the proponent has incurred some 

costs, the municipality would take some other action which 

would cause them to discontinue, I mean they can’t be 

retroactive. And if a municipality ever attempted to do such a 

thing, they would certainly be liable for damages to compensate 

the developer for the cost they’ve already incurred. 

 

And I even recall a situation where a municipality acted on a 

rumour, if you like, that a certain development was proposed. 

And the people who were proposing . . . and this was not a 

livestock development. But they were proposing . . . actually it 

was a Hutterite colony, and the municipality that they were 

rumoured to be buying land in  this happened a number of 

years ago  made a by-law respecting the style of residences 

they would permit which would have prevented any kind of 

communal living development. 

 

The colony said that, claimed that, the municipality had acted in 

bad faith anticipating their proposal or the sale, and the 

resulting permit for dwellings. And they took it to court, and 

they won. The bench said . . . I think it went to the Supreme 

Court. The Supreme Court said that you can’t pass laws in haste 

to prevent a specific thing from happening. And it was an 

interesting case. It happened almost 20 years ago, I think. 

 

But if you can’t get away with passing a by-law to prevent 

something that you anticipate, you’d be in real big trouble 

trying to pass it when it’s already half finished. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

Madam Minister, section 190 actually has new changes or some  



1476  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1996 

changes that are mainly housekeeping. But there is an addition 

of the words “regional park” to the subsection. And I’m just 

wondering if there’s a specific reason why regional parks were 

included at this time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this exempts 

developments in regional parks from having to provide for 

public reserve. Normally in a subdivision, depending on the 

extent of it, there’s always a proportional amount of land that’s 

set aside as a public reserve. And since the regional park is 

already a park area and the land is available for public use, there 

is no . . . it doesn’t make sense to have a requirement to set 

aside public reserves. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. The amendment to 

subsection 200(2) seems to take away municipal involvement in 

decision making. Could the minister explain the reasons for this 

amendment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is the same, 

exactly the same, as the previous explanation wherein the 

amendment clarifies that the minister may authorize the sale of 

provincially owned public reserves without involving a request 

from a municipality. But this is necessary to address public 

reserves located in provincial parks, and in northern 

Saskatchewan where there is no municipality to request the 

sale, as the provision currently requires. 

 

Ms. Draude:  When the municipality wishes to change a 

parcel of public reserve, the minister will give her permission 

subject to any conditions set by the minister. Could you explain 

the reasoning behind this initiative? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, as in the 

previous answer, this relates to public reserves where there is 

no municipality, be in a provincial park or a northern area. And 

sometimes there might be a situation where it's a public reserve 

that’s on a waterway or there’s some other public interest to 

address. And so this clause requires that those things, those 

factors, would have to be taken into account before permission 

would be granted to make the sale. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Madam Minister. Just one 

last question from me. Under section 221 clause 8, a provision 

was made to add the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to the 

appeal process. Can you tell me why? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry, I didn’t hear 

the end of the question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m just wondering why the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Appeal Board, why that board was added to the 

appeal process. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not . . . I don’t 

have the reference that the member is speaking to, but the 

Municipal Board has always been the appeal body. And we are 

making some changes to the legislation to streamline the appeal 

process. But as far as I’m aware, there’s no injection of the  

authority of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board into any part of 

the legislation where they didn’t have authority previously. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, if I could, just for a minute, I’d like to go back to 187. 

You had touched on your answer there and you had said that 

actually that clause was put in there . . . that amendment was to 

do with northern municipalities. But I don’t see anywhere in 

this amendment where it says northern. Would this not also 

then . . . if northern is not a part of this, would that not also give 

the minister the right then to effect these same things on 

southern municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no. The legislation 

provides for this change where there is no municipality. But if 

there was a buffer strip in a municipality, then the existing 

provision that the sale could only be made at the request of the 

municipality would stand. It’s only where there is not a 

municipality relevant that this provision would be operative. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At this point I’d 

like to present and: 

 

Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words “Subsection 48(2) is 

repealed” where they occur therein the words “and the 

following is substituted therefor: 

 

“(2) The minister shall, within 21 days of the date of his or 

her decision, cause that decision to be published in Part I 

of the Gazette””. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:37 p.m. until 4:47 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  11 

 

Osika Aldridge McLane 

Draude McPherson Belanger 

Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 

Toth Heppner  

 

Nays  26 

 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Johnson Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Koenker 

Trew Bradley Scott 

Teichrob Cline Serby 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Murrell Thomson  

 



May 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to: 

 

Amend clause 7 of the Printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words “Section 60 is repealed” 

where they occur therein the words “and the following 

is substituted therefor: 

 

“60 Within 21 days of the receipt of the decision of the 

minister concerning a development plan or amendment, the 

municipality shall publish a notice of that decision in Part I 

of the Gazette, and shall, within 10 days after the 

publication, forward a copy of the notice to the minister.””. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:52 p.m. until 4:59 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  11 

 

Osika Aldridge McLane 

Draude McPherson Belanger 

Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 

Toth Heppner  

 

Nays  24 

 

Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 

Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 

Crofford Renaud Calvert 

Pringle Koenker Trew 

Bradley Scott Teichrob 

Cline Serby Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Kasperski 

Ward Murrell Thomson 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report progress, and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 73. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1451 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1451 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1451 
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1452 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1452 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1452 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1452 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1452 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1452 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Wiens ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1453, 1465 
McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1453, 1455 
Pringle ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Van Mulligen .................................................................................................................................................................. 1453, 1454 
Bradley ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1454 
Hagel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1454 
Crofford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 
Upshall....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Relocation Project at Cando School  

Murrell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
Community Spirit in Camsell Portage  

Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
Lloyd Johnson Memorial Centre  

Langford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
School Safety Patrol Week  

Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
Expansion of Thomson Meats  

Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
Provincial Volleyball Teams  

Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
New Wood Product  

Johnson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
Lifetime Award for Excellence in the Arts  

Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 
Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 

Highways Budget  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 
Renaud ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 



Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 
Potential Home Care Workers’ Strike  

Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 

Highways Asphalt Purchases  
Renaud ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

Hospital Closures  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Collective Bargaining  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1461 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 86  An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act  

Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 
Bill No. 87  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2)  

Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1462 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46  

Home Care Services  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1462 
Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital 
Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts  

Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act  
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities  
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act  

Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1469 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1470 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 

Recorded divisions............................................................................................................................................................. 1476, 1477 
 

 


