
























































June 13, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2547 
 June 13, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
with us today 41 wonderful grade 6 students from St. Augustine 
School in Humboldt. Their teachers accompanying them are 
Lenora Bells and Terry Hladun. Plus I think there are some 
parents up there, I believe 12 in all. We welcome you to the 
legislature today. We hope that you have a wonderful time in 
Regina, and I look forward to meeting with you a little bit later 
on. 
 
Would the Assembly help me in welcoming the students from 
St. Augustine School, the parents, the teachers, and chaperons. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 70  An Act to amend 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair:  I will ask the acting minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Assembly is honoured to have 
with us today the following officials: John Edwards, director of 
municipal policy and legislative services; Sharon Markesteyn, 
senior policy analyst; Perry Erhardt, legislative officer; and 
Gordon Hubbard, who is senior municipal adviser. 
 
I ask the Assembly to welcome these people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
welcome the municipal officials here this morning. We have a 
fair number of questions to do with the urban Bill. I’ll try to be 
easy on you, Mr. Minister, because I realize you’re replacing 
the minister, but only to a point. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the concerns which the Bill has caused 
among urban municipal administrators and urban municipal 
politicians is that the classes of properties which the 
government may establish and the percentages of values which 
the government may set are all to be determined by regulation 
and not by statute. 
 

As you know, Mr. Minister, the regulations can be changed 
quickly and without warning and that has caused some 
administrators and municipal politicians to become worried that 
the government will create a long list of categories and assign 
complicated percentages of value to the list and alter the list and 
the percentages of value frequently. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Bill clearly gives the government the power, 
but I want to know what are your intentions for the use of this 
section as long as you are Minister of Municipal Government. 
And I’m realizing, Mr. Minister, that you’re filling in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The advantage of putting them in 
regulations is that . . . I suppose it does allow you to change 
them arbitrarily on a whim, but more to the point, it permits 
government to fine-tune them but also to draft this in close 
consultation with the municipalities. 
 
It’s really very difficult to do with legislation. You can present 
them with draft legislation but at the end of the day it’s very 
difficult to work in close concert with a third party with respect 
to legislation. The process doesn’t lend itself to that. 
 
Regulations allow us to work in close consultation with the 
municipalities. It also gives us the flexibility to fine-tune these 
regulations as municipalities have experience with it and as they 
begin to realize what works and what doesn’t. So regulations 
allow us to prepare them in close partnership with the 
municipalities and gives us the flexibility to change them when 
they find, through their experience, that there’s room for 
improvements somewhere or other. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think one of the 
concerns we have is maybe the categories that are going to be 
created to go through this process. How many new categories 
are going to be created? Is there any idea how many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Nine. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What percentage 
of value do you intend to set for each of these categories? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s one of the things that we will 
want to fine-tune in partnership with the municipalities. We’ll 
want to receive their advice on that, and then having the benefit 
of that advice, which, as the world turns, will be sometimes 
conflicting from various municipalities and so on — once we 
have their advice, we’ll be fine-tuning that. But that is yet to be 
determined. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that, that they are going to have input into that. 
 
I think another concern they maybe have is once these 
categories are set up, how long is the plan to leave them 
remaining? Like is there a five-year plan and then review them, 
or two-year or three-year or what is the plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They’ll be reviewed for the next 
reassessment in the year 2000. 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And how long 
will the percentages of value remain the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Until the year 2000, same period. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, I wasn’t quite sure of your answer. 
 
Are the categories now already established in the regulations, or 
are they just being worked on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just being worked on. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  I’m sorry, Mr. Minister; I didn’t get that 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just being worked on. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another issue 
that has caused concern among urban municipalities is . . . 
urban municipal politicians and administrators, is a series of 
rules governing the vacancy adjustments when there is no 
business tax. This is all going to be left to be governed by 
regulation as well. Here I’m referring to clause 27 which makes 
major amendments to section 240 of the Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question on this section is: why don’t you put 
the formula for calculating vacancy adjustments into the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We’re still in fact developing that 
with the municipalities. The officials have given to me a copy 
of a letter from the minister to His Worship Henry Dayday. I 
could read it because I don’t think there’s anything terribly 
confidential about it. I just point out that the minister has set out 
one view of how this might be, how this might look in final 
form, has invited the comments of the mayor on it. 
 
I can read it if you like. I think it’s not germane to very much 
because the mayor and other mayors, perhaps the mayor of 
Regina and so on, will also write back and will want to 
comment on it. So this is being fine-tuned. 
 
Again the same comment applies. And that is that this is being 
prepared in partnership and in consultation with the 
municipalities. These are extremely complex and esoteric, I 
might add, both complex and esoteric concepts, and they’re 
being done in partnership. 
 
I note that the carbon copies of the letter was also sent to Mark 
Thompson, head of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency), so they may well want to comment as 
well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would say 
complex is putting it very mildly. 
 
Is it your intention for your Bill, when the municipality decides 
to pass a by-law providing there will not be any business tax 
assessment within its boundaries, it must grant a property tax 
vacancy abatement where there is at least some degree of 
vacancy in business premises. 
 

How long must there be a business vacancy before the 
requirement to abate property taxes kicks in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again, to be determined in the 
regulations after consultation with the municipalities; current 
thinking in the department, I’m told, is three months. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is your plan 
then for the regulations setting out how long there must be a 
vacancy before the obligation to provide an abatement of 
property tax kicks in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, that was in fact what I 
commented on, three months. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  And do you have . . . in your mind, do you 
have an idea of what you would like to see? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, in a way. The department 
officials tell me that they have drafting instructions which, I 
think members may know, is a preliminary draft of the 
regulations. So they have a very preliminary draft of the 
regulations; they’ve circulated these, invited comments, and 
they hope to have it finalized within a matter of a very few 
months I’m told. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to 
welcome your officials today. Mr. Minister, I’m going to go to 
another question. Okay. An area of the Bill which has caused 
some worry and concern among municipal administrators and 
politicians is the new section 243 which is found in clause 28 of 
the Bill. That’s the new section which requires urban 
municipalities which decide not to collect a business tax to 
none the less continue to levy some form of a tax on behalf of 
the other taxing authorities for whom it would be collecting 
revenue if it were still collecting a business tax. 
 
Now first of all by using the term “other taxing authority” I 
presume that you are referring to school boards and district 
health boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s affirmative. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, what mechanism do you expect that 
the urban municipalities will use to collect the revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They’ll simply adjust the school levy 
or the health levy as the case may be. 
 
(1015) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Will that mean higher property taxes do you 
think? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No. No, not necessarily, no. No. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, if that’s not going to increase 
the property taxes, where is this new-found money going to 
come from then to replace the business tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well I may have misunderstood the 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

member’s question or he may have misunderstood my response. 
The total tax take is the same and therefore when you said does 
it increase . . . I think it was the member from Humboldt said, 
does it increase the taxes? No. But it will result in a different 
shift. If they take it off business taxes, they may have to put 
more on property tax. It doesn’t affect the total tax take from 
the municipality, but it may shift it from one kind of tax to 
another or from one class of property owners to another. Those 
are decisions which we feel are best made at the local level. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the new 
section 243(1) provides for regulations to be passed setting out 
how the revenue is to be calculated. My question is, are those 
regulations ready in draft form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Only in the form of drafting 
instructions. And I think I explained previously, this is a very 
early draft of the regulations which is then sent off to the 
various stakeholders to see what they think. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me what are the essentials of the formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The formula would take into account 
the amount of revenue that was previously raised and then 
would adjust the school levy accordingly, so that the total 
revenue accruing to the municipality remains about the same. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how are 
the urban municipalities and the other taxing authorities 
expected to reach agreements when they have not seen the 
regulations setting out how much revenue the municipality will 
have to collect on behalf of the school board and the health 
district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. This will . . . they don’t need to 
know here and now. They don’t need to decide this just yet. The 
proclamation of the Act and the implementation of this will all 
be coordinated so that they will have a reasonable amount of 
time. Once the regulations are completed, they will have a 
reasonable amount of time to adjust to it, to adjust their tax 
rolls. 
 
The Act, in short, comes into effect on the day it’s proclaimed, 
not the day of assent, so that we will implement the Act, 
coordinating that with the drafting of the regulations so that 
they have sufficient time to prepare themselves for it. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, how are the urban municipalities 
and other taxing authorities supposed to reach agreements when 
they have not even seen the detailed reassessment figures, 
which are not expected to be available until October or 
November of 1996? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  While it may pose a bit of a 
challenge, the department believes that that schedule is 
attainable, to have it in effect in 1997. Everybody’s working at 
full speed, SAMA included, the department really in some ways 
playing a supporting role to SAMA. They believe that that will 
give them sufficient time. It will, as I say, pose something of a 
challenge. But they believe and SAMA believes  and it’s 

really, in a sense, SAMA’s decision  they believe that that is 
a realistic goal, they can get the regulations in effect, and give 
the municipalities and school boards and hospitals and so on, 
time to make the necessary adjustments before it kicks in in 
1997. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you 
for that answer, Mr. Minister. I would just like to reiterate 
possibly what you said. I think that a lot of their concerns out 
there is the quicker they can see these things, the better. And I 
realize it’s complicated and time-consuming, so I think we’re 
all working to the same . . . or we’re hoping the same end 
comes there. 
 
I’d like to go to clause 30, and it contains the section 248 of the 
Act. The new wording states that: 
 

The assessor may, at any time, request from any assessable 
person any reasonable information or documentation that 
relates to . . . determination of the value of any land, 
improvements or business for the purpose of preparing an 
assessment . . . for any year. 
 

My question, Mr. Minister, is, does the term “assessable 
person” include appraisers and property managers? In other 
words, do assessors have the right to demand information from 
appraisers and property managers who may be employed by the 
property owner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, I’m told assessable person means 
the owner  the owners who pay the taxes. In the appropriate 
case of course, you might ask the agent or manager of a person, 
particularly where the person is a juridical person of a 
corporation. 
 
But an assessable person is an owner or their agent. It wouldn’t 
include an assessor. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The time limit for 
filing notices of appeal as set out in the new section 251(3) as 
set out in clause 31 of the Bill is both impractical, I think, and 
unfair. If a person receives his notice of assessment and wants 
to file a notice of appeal, he must do so within 30 days, if I’m 
understanding this right according to the new section. 
 
This is an increase from the present time of 20 days, but as we 
know now how bureaucracy works and the amount of 
paperwork involved with all of this stuff, you know, we feel 
this time is much too short. 
 
Before he can file a proper notice of appeal, a person needs to 
retain an expert who in turn must research, review the 
assessment process, and draft the grounds and the material facts 
of the appeal. Thirty days from the mailing or the posting at city 
hall or the publication in a gazette of the notice of assessment is 
simply unreasonable. In my estimation or in our estimation, we 
possibly feel that 90 days might have been a better number to 
be used here. And I realize naturally we’re dragging the process 
out. But, Mr. Minister, you know yourself how long these 
things take, and 30 days does not give much time. 
 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There’s a range of days in which one 
can appeal, whether you’re appealing to the Supreme Court of 
Canada or you’re appealing to a taxing assessment. There’s a 
range of days; 30 days is kind of the outside. The normal time 
for appeal is 15 to 30 days because there is a balance of 
interests here. It is true the assessed owner would like more 
time. They’d like time to research and all that. 
 
The municipality however, wants to finalize the tax roll. And if 
you were to put in a figure such as 90 days, first of all you’d 
have the longest bill period in the world. But apart from that 
and I guess on a more substantive basis, the problem is that the 
municipalities would not be able to finalize the matter. 
 
Municipalities want as short a tax period as possible so that 
they can finalize their tax rolls. Assessed owners want as long 
as possible for their own convenience so they can research it. 
Thirty days in this area, and in all others, has been found to be 
the maximum that is practical given the competing interests. 
And I don’t think I said earlier that 30 days is in fact an 
extension of the time period given in the old legislation, which I 
think was 20. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, I guess I can see 
where you’re coming from as being involved with a 
municipality. Naturally we like to expedite everything that we 
do from our end, but these concerns have been brought to us by 
others that would also like time to complete the work they have 
to do before their appeals are presented. 
 
Mr. Minister, often there is no mailing address of assessment 
notices. This means that the property owner must regularly be 
checking city hall, or town hall, or the village offices, or be 
checking the Gazette, just in order to make sure that he does not 
miss the notice. The 30-day time limit on filing the notice of 
appeal is completely, and again I say unreasonable, because 
when notices of assessment are not mailed . . . What other time 
limits would you consider in these situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  All property owners should 
understand, if they don’t, that it is their obligation to provide 
the municipality with a mailing notice. It is not the obligation of 
the municipality to whip around, back and forth, trying to find 
an address for a . . . the problem is normally corporations, 
particularly where they are of a less substantial nature, shall we 
say. 
 
It is the obligation of tax owners to provide the municipalities 
with a notice. If they fail to do so, they take the risk that they 
may not get the proper notices. Here the citizen and the 
taxpayer has an obligation to the taxing authority to provide 
them with an address. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m also 
particularly concerned about the proposal in this Bill that would 
make it mandatory for people to pay filing fees. The provision 
dealing with the payment of filing fees is in clause 31 of the 
Bill which amends section 251 of the Act, and in clause 32 of 
the Bill which adds a new section to be numbered 251.1 to the 
Act. The concern that has been expressed to me about these 
clauses, Mr. Minister, is that they could be used to impose  

filing fees on appeals that have already been filed but not heard. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is that, have you received an 
opinion as to whether these new and revised sections will give 
either the Lieutenant Governor in Council or the urban 
municipal right to impose filing fees on appeals to the board of 
revision where the notices of appeal have already been filed 
before this legislation is passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes we have, and the opinion which 
I have is that is not retroactive. So the problem which you 
envision could not arise. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, in subsection 7 of 
the newly revised section of 251 . . . states that the fees that an 
urban municipality may charge for filing notices of appeal may 
not exceed the prescribed maximums. By that term, I presume 
that you and your department intend to pass regulations . . . will 
set out a maximum for the fees that may be charged for filing 
notices of appeal. What are these maximums? Can you tell us 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We don’t have figures yet. We’re 
still doing some consultations. We want to establish a 
maximum which is at the upper end of covering the costs of 
these appeals. The municipalities have a right to cover their cost 
of the appeal. 
 
On the other hand, what we want to prevent is a filing fee so 
high as to make the appeal prohibitive. So we’re trying to 
establish the maximum at the maximum cost of the appeal to 
any municipality. We’re doing that in consultation with the 
municipalities and they generally agree with the goal. 
 
And so here again, I know these are perhaps a series of 
circuitous answers, but we are fine-tuning this as well in 
consultation with the municipalities to achieve the goal which I 
just enunciated. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think though, 
what this reiterates again is the concerns of not only urban 
municipalities, but I think rural municipalities too, is that we’re 
leaving so much to the unknown here yet, and yet we’re trying 
to pass these Bills without really realizing that, because a lot of 
the meat and potatoes of this stuff is going to be brought in in 
the regulations. 
 
And I think this is a lot of the concerns that are being brought to 
us right now, is because people can’t really judge on what this 
is going to do until they see these regulations. 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s a legitimate concern really, 
and I think all municipal governments have this concern about 
the provincial government, I suspect. When dealing with the 
feds, we always have this problem with the feds. The spectre 
that always haunts us is that they’ll make rules and regulations 
and put them in the mail for us after the matter is an 
accomplished fact. 
 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

All I can say to you, and through you to the municipalities, is 
that you should take some comfort in the minister who’s 
actually here. The minister has been a reeve; is steeped, I would 
say, not only in the law with respect to municipalities, but the 
practical problems. She’s one of them. And I think the 
municipalities could take some comfort in the current occupant 
of this office who is very aware of the problems and will, I 
think, go to extraordinary lengths to ensure that the 
municipalities are fully consulted before these things are 
finalized. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and welcome to the minister 
sitting in and to his officials this morning as well. 
 
One of the questions that I have is with the business tax which 
is basically going to disappear with this whole situation. There 
was always a concern that the evaluations or the amounts that 
different businesses would be taxed on business tax based on 
approximately how much money they could earn, let’s say on 
square footage, that there was a certain amount of unfairness 
there. 
 
I’m wondering what is in this new, particular situation that 
businesses will find themselves in with variable mill rates and 
things that will make that a more fair situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I would point out first of all for the 
benefit of the member opposite that the new system is optional. 
It’s up to the municipalities. They can stick with the old system 
if they prefer. But you’re right  it’s based on the square 
footage. 
 
The new system would have it levied as a percentage of the 
property assessment, and thus, the theory is, more closely 
related to the ability of the owner of the property to earn income 
on that property. The new . . . The property tax has always been 
based on the usage and thus its potential to earn profits. 
 
By making the new system a percentage of property assessment, 
the theory is that the municipalities, if prefer they can do that, 
and that is more closely related to the ability of the owner or 
occupant of the property to make money with it. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  I seem to sense a bit of a difficulty here when 
we’re dealing with property assessments. So you can buy a 
particular building; it has a certain assessment. That doesn’t 
relate in any way to the kind of business that you’re going to 
operate within that building. And so you can end up with a 
situation that’s very unfair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There’s an attempt in the system to 
. . . There is an attempt in these changes to make the system 
more market orientated. I concur however, with the member. 
It’s a long way from being perfectly reflective of the market. At 
times it’s capable of being a crude system. I think it’s probably 
as good as you can make it though. 
 
A perfect system, I suppose, would be an income tax system 
directly related to the income you make. The difficulty is, that’s 
a very complicated system to administer, well beyond the  

capacity of the municipalities. So you have a balance here of 
simplicity, therefore ease of administration by the 
municipalities, versus on the other hand a more true and perfect 
reflection of the market. 
 
And the officials have pointed out to me just now that there will 
be three-year updates of these assessments hereafter, so we’ll 
never again, hopefully, be in the position we’re in now where 
they get so far out of date. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And having been involved in 
municipal politics I’m quite aware of the difficulties that do 
come in with some of these assessments. 
 
Moving into the area of residential situations. As I understand 
it, the reassessment on residences is tied to market value. And 
the main determining factor seems to be the age of the house; 
older homes will have their taxes remain the same or decrease. 
However, recently residents were warned of some trendy older 
neighbourhoods, such as Regina’s Cathedral area, that this rule 
of thumb may not apply to them. 
 
Can you tell us what other factors will affect assessments on 
those residences. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are two factors in the broad go 
into this. One is the land, the market value; the other is the 
building, the depreciated replacement cost. 
 
The factor which you mentioned, the Cathedral area of Regina 
which becomes trendy, that I think would be reflected in the 
land value because it’s there the lots are worth more because 
they’re in that area. So that would be taken into account in the 
first of those factors  the land. 
 
And so I think that’s covered off actually. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Has your department studied how this 
assessment will impact the average home-owner in 
communities under 5,000 and in communities over 5,000, and 
in the two major urban centres? It seems to me that smaller 
communities will have older homes and therefore would create 
few new tax changes in small towns. Would the SAMA 
assessment confirm that observation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, it does in fact. In fact it’s the 
market which reflects this. The values in small communities are 
declining relative to the values elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  An issue that’s been brought to me by a 
number of businesses and relating a little back to what we 
discussed earlier, in changing the tax structure for businesses, 
some businesses, and I think I’ve been approached by a number 
of car dealerships on this one, need a lot of property, while 
others, such as office-based services, need relatively little. The 
amount of property does not necessarily relate to profitability of 
the business or ability to pay. What is the present rebalance and 
will there be a rechecking of that situation as time goes on to 
make sure that if there’s a glitch in the system that it can be 
corrected? 
 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The system is in a way 
self-correcting. You’ve got the three-year updates and then the 
broader review in the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. The Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business has expressed concern that the provisions 
for variable mill rates may offset the business benefits for 
eliminating a local business tax. What’s the response to that, 
and how are we addressing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again the thrust and the philosophy 
behind this is that these decisions are better made at the local 
level than in this Chamber or through regulation. This is being 
left to the municipality. The municipalities will have the 
discretion. They are elected and accountable to their public. 
They can tailor their tax systems to what they believe to be the 
needs of their business community and the citizens in their 
community. 
 
So this is the case of local discretion, local autonomy. To that 
extent I think the government takes issue with the CFIB 
(Canadian Federation of Independent Business). We believe in 
local autonomy and we believe that this will provide . . . overall 
this will provide a system which is much better attuned to the 
needs of any individual community. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
my thanks to the opposition members for the leave. I want to 
introduce this morning, seated in the east gallery, Mr. 
Chairman, are 28 students . . . in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker 
 seated in the west gallery are 28 students from the city of 
Yorkton, from the Dr. Brass School. Accompanying them this 
morning, Mr. Chairman, are Glenda Lazurko and Val Robertson 
who are the teachers. 
 
The students are going to be visiting other sites in Regina this 
morning as part of their educational tour. I look forward to 
meeting with them in the next few minutes for some 
refreshments, and we’re going to have some photographs and 
some really tough questions, I know, that they’re going to have 
of me. 
 
So I want to ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in welcoming the students and teachers from Yorkton this 
morning, wishing them a great day here in Regina today as they 
tour all of the other sites, and a safe journey home. And I look 
forward to meeting with them in the next couple of minutes. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and members of the 
opposition. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 70 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. The individual reassessment on 
residences will not be started until January of next year. This is 
going to leave a lot of people in the dark, especially those 
people who are buying homes and who will want to gauge 
whether they can afford the taxes on new residences, especially 
if some of them will have some substantial changes. 
 
The question is on the fairness of that situation that’s being 
created. And is there any way, other than a few rules of thumb 
which you admit are unreliable, for home-owners to get a clear 
idea in advance of the taxes that they’ll be facing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No really perfect system. The home 
buyers could ask the . . . a prospective home buyer . . . First of 
all, I think the real estate agents, hopefully, will be relatively 
adept at providing general information: if you buy this home in 
this new area, a new home in this new area, you may expect the 
property tax to rise; we want to tell you that before you buy it. 
 
The prospective home buyer may be able to get additional and 
better information from the municipality. But at the end of the 
day, buyers are going to have to take this into account. Many 
risks in buying a new home or in buying another home; this will 
simply be added to it until after January 1. The taxes may go up 
and your information about it may not be perfect. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you for that answer. And I think 
there’s a certain amount of risk there obviously. And hopefully 
some of the solutions that you answered and the people that 
could give some advice to new home-owners will do that. 
 
You’ve said that home-owners should not worry too much 
about reassessment because of the new tax tools for 
municipalities to cushion that particular blow. Could we review 
those particular tools that are out there, or that are going to be 
given to municipalities, and go over the logistics of how they 
could be implemented in a major urban centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, there are a number of tax tools. 
The variable mill rate is certainly one of them, allows rates to 
vary. There is minimum taxes allowed that can be set with 
respect to various properties. 
 
And the other factor which we think will be significant is that it 
can be phased in over three years. So it will allow the 
municipalities and the property owners to adjust to the changes. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Another question that deals with 
differential that’s going to occur . . . or the difference that will 
occur between older and newer homes and how that 
reassessment will happen. I’m wondering if there’s, in general, 
an age bracket where people could say if my home is older than 
this, it will probably go down. If it’s newer than this, it’ll 
probably go up, realizing there’s exceptions such as that trendy 
area we talked about earlier on. 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2553 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, there’s no such rule of thumb. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, I’m just going to kind of touch on some of the 
things that my learned friend has also asked you but to a 
different aspect of it. 
 
The Bill will give you and the department the power to set the 
. . . determine different classifications of property and then 
impose different percentages of value to be used in the taxation 
of those different classes. This indicates an intention to tax 
different property types at different rates. 
 
Instead of using different percentages of value for the different 
classes, wouldn’t you consider simply employing better 
assessment techniques in the first place, including the 
assessment of commercial properties using, say, income and 
expense analysis methodology? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The percentages, the fundamental 
purpose of permitting them to apply percentages, is really to 
cushion the changes. Some cases they could be very, very 
dramatic without being able to set a percentage. So the function 
of the percentages is to enable the municipality and the property 
owners together to cushion the changes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize that. I 
think where the concern comes, and from the people that feel 
100 per cent should be held across the board, is that the minute 
we bring in flexible variables here with percentages  and as 
we all know, everyone’s human  that it could favour one set 
over another. 
 
I think the difficulty with placing  for an example, say 
hardware stores, just using that as an example all across the 
province  in one class and then stating that they’re all going 
to be taxed at the same rate is that some hardware stores may be 
placed in a much more valuable, from an income and expense 
point of view, than others. Placing all hardware stores in that 
same class may prove to be too arbitrary a method of 
proceeding. 
 
Wouldn’t it be better to evaluate all hardware stores using 
whatever sophisticated appraisal tools may exist, including 
income-expense analysis if necessary, and then use the regular 
standard percentage of value of tax hardware stores along with 
other businesses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member is coming very close to 
suggesting the income approach. This has been a subject of . 
but moved . . . really I think what you’re getting to  this has 
been a subject of some considerable discussion within the 
department and the municipalities. I think everyone agrees that 
this is an idea which is interesting but which, at best, is not 
ready to go yet. 
 
It is going to be the subject of discussion, and if it can be 
brought to completion  and here a primary problem is the 
complexity in administering an income approach  but if it can 

be brought to a final form, perhaps at the next reassessment in 
three years it could be done then. So you’re really suggesting 
the income approach . . . I think everyone agrees is not ready 
yet. Perhaps it may be ready in three years time, the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, I sympathize with 
that because I realize it would be hard to end up with that. But I 
think in the end it may be fairer because just take the income 
projections for a hardware store in one of our small urban 
towns and if you compare that with a larger city one, I don’t 
think it would really work out very fair. 
 
Another concern, Mr. Minister, that has been brought to our 
attention is in the cities, especially in the larger towns, is the 
apartment owners, apartment block owners, and even ones that 
have duplexes and stuff like that that they rent out. How does 
the vacancy rate work out in here that if, say, two out of ten are 
empty and that, but yet they’re taxed on the whole thing, how 
are we going to adjust for that or is there an adjustment in here 
for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, there’s no adjustment for 
vacancy purposes in that context. 
 
Ms. Draude:  And welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. 
I’m wondering if you can tell me what impact the new 
assessment will have on heritage buildings, heritage buildings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They’ll be one of the benefactors of 
this. There will be a greater appreciation of the depreciation, 
and so they’ll actually benefit. Because the depreciation will be 
taken into effect, the taxes will be lowered, and so the status of 
heritage buildings will actually be improved. 
 
Just a personal note if I can be forgiven  I’m a veteran of this. 
Back in the ‘70s, we spent a lot of time when I was in old 
Department of Culture and Youth trying to design something 
called The Heritage Property Act, which still is with us actually. 
We did . . . but the taxes were a real problem because they often 
did not reflect the value of the building, but more important, its 
ability to earn income. That will now be reflected in a far better 
fashion. So the heritage buildings will be one of the benefactors 
of this whole system. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Was the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation a 
part of the deliberations when you were working with this 
agreement or with this new proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, they were consulted. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A new section, 253.2 
of the Act, sets out in clause 36 that examinations for discovery 
are available to applicants who wish to know what the assessor 
was thinking when he actually conducted the assessment. The 
examination for discovery process is a welcome addition to the 
Act. Some would say that it’s actually long overdue, and still 
the process is long and tedious. 
 
My question is, is there any less expensive way for an appellant 
to find out how the assessor reached his original evaluation 
rather than the formal process involved in an examination for  



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

discovery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes there is. The examination for 
discovery should only be used where all other methods fail. 
First method of doing it is to pick up the phone and ask them. 
And if that provides a satisfactory response, that’s the end of it. 
If it doesn’t, one side or the other appears to be evasive, then 
the next step I guess would be to write them a letter and say 
please put your approach in writing. 
 
If all that fails, only then do you go through the examination for 
discovery. The examination for discovery is sort of a final 
method of doing it if more informal and obviously less 
expensive approaches don’t work. 
 
Ms. Draude:  What do you think the cost is when you have 
to go to the approach and the examination for discovery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It depends how formal it is. It can be 
a lot. If you hire legal . . . if you hire counsel to conduct them 
and you get a court reporter to transcribe the notes, it can be 
very expensive. On the other hand, I suppose the examination 
for discovery could be done fairly informally. 
 
It depends how formal it is, but it can range from a very little to 
thousands of dollars depending on how formal it is. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
The Chair:  Is this the amendment that was sent to the Table 
earlier, introducing new clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. 
 
The Chair:  I would prefer that. According to Beauchesne’s, 
all clauses of the Bill should be considered before any new 
clauses are added. So I would prefer to go through the Bill and 
then add the new clause at the end. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 61 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair:  We will accept the amendment now. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This 
amendment, House amendment to section 12 of The Urban 
Municipality Act, 1984 will allow for the dissolution of villages 
and resort villages to take place by order in council in three 
different sets of circumstances. 
 
First, where the village or resort village requests that a 
dissolution be ordered. Second, where there is a failure to elect 
a council. Or third, where the population falls below 100. A 
dissolution won’t take place for each and every instance that 
I’ve just described, but the ability to effect the dissolution is 
there when it is requested or required. 

Most of the amendment restates the existing provision. 
However, the ability to comply with requests for dissolution 
from villages with over 100 population is being added. There 
have been a number of villages inquiring as to their ability to 
seek dissolution even when their population exceeds 100. 
 
The town of Fleming which borders the rural municipality of 
Moosomin is one example and has expressed an interest in 
dissolution. These municipalities cannot be accommodated as 
the Act is currently worded and it is in response to their request 
and desire that this amendment is advanced. 
 
Our government is committed to working with local 
governments to help them achieve economies. I hope that 
everyone will join me in supporting this amendment for the 
benefit of local governments. 
 
And I believe I have provided opposition members with copies 
yesterday and had some brief discussion with them on the 
intent. 
 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair:  I don’t believe that the minister has read the 
amendment. Would she please read it into the record, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the proposed House 
amendment for Bill No. 70 of 1996, An Act to amend The 
Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
I move that: 
 

New clause 5 of the printed Bill 
Add the following clause after clause 4 of the printed 
Bill: 

 
“Section 12 amended 

5 Subsection 12(1) is repealed and the following 
substituted: 

 
‘(1) On the recommendation of the minister, the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order, 
dissolve a resort village or village: 

 
(a) if the council of the resort village or village, by 
resolution, requests it be dissolved, or there is a 
failure to elect a council; or 

 
(b) if the population of the village is less than 100 
or the number of persons within the resort village is 
less than the minimum required pursuant to clause 
4(1)(a)’”. 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I think we need to do a little bit of clarification before we allow 
this to go ahead. The new section of course alludes to 4(1)(a),  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

and I would like first of all to know what that number is. I just 
don’t have it with me and so I’d like you to tell me what that is. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s in the definition of 
the current statute where it describes the requirements to 
achieve village status, being a population of 100 or the number 
of dwellings being 50. And those are the provisions that it 
refers back to. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The only real 
difference then is that it includes the restriction of 50 dwellings 
then because we’ve already had the 100 population mentioned. 
 
So my question then is, it’s fine and dandy for the village to 
say, well we want to disband; we’re tired of taking care of our 
own affairs. But obviously somebody’s going to take care of 
those affairs. So is it then the responsibility of the local 
municipality that surrounds that village to take them over and 
take over responsibility for their municipal needs. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this amendment 
is simply enabling. And it would respond . . . it would enable 
the government to respond to a request from a municipal 
council pursuant to a resolution of their council. So it is 
presumed that until satisfactory arrangements had been made 
with neighbouring municipalities, or whatever the case might 
be, to provide services to the people in that community, that 
they wouldn’t pass a such resolution asking for dissolution until 
they were already satisfied that such arrangements had been 
made. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, I’m sorry, but that’s 
not what the Bill changes say. It says, if the council of the resort 
village or village by resolution requests to be dissolved, then 
you are allowed and empowered to grant that request. 
 
It doesn’t say anything about the rural municipality that 
surrounds them being involved at all. And yet they will be 
saddled with the responsibility, I think, of taking care of the 
affairs of this village that they may not want. Is that a fact or is 
it not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would say that’s not 
an accurate interpretation because it says, section 12(1) says 
that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order, dissolve 
a resort village or village. 
 
And if there was a resolution by the council of the resort village 
or village that was relayed through the minister, then the 
reference wouldn’t be made, or the request to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, until the neighbouring municipalities had 
been consulted and until there was satisfaction that 
arrangements for the continuity of the appropriate level of 
services to the people in that community had been arranged for. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With leave, 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 46 grade 
5’s from the McLeod-Churchill School in Moosomin, seated in 
the east gallery. They are accompanied by Mrs. Geraldene 
DayDay and Mrs. Ann Norgan, and including six chaperons, 
some of which . . . I’m not sure if they’re bus drivers or if 
they’re car drivers, because some of the groups come in by 
private vehicle. 
 
I would ask everyone to welcome them here today, and I look 
forward to meeting with them later for refreshments and for 
some discussion. Please welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 70 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I don’t know if you’re deliberately trying to be evasive and cute 
with us or if you’ve suddenly become a lawyer and want to use 
these kind of evasive tactics. But the truth of the matter is we 
can read; we understand what’s in your proposal. 
 
What we want to know is how you’re going to apply it, because 
you say you may take the action if requested by the resort 
village. But you say you will reserve the option to either grant 
that request or not, after you consult with the rural 
municipalities surrounding them. 
 
Well that’s fine and dandy that you’re going to go and consult. 
Consulting doesn’t mean anything though if at the end of the 
day you simply say, well we consulted; we have the request; 
now you’re taking them over. 
 
What if the rural municipality says flatly, no thank you, ma’am, 
we don’t care to take over this village; we don’t want it. Will 
you then honour that request from the rural municipality and 
say, that’s it; we’re not going to do it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in the proposed 
amendment, there is no change from the current statute except 
that the statute will now apply to communities of over 100 
rather than just communities of less than 100. 
 
And I want also to share with the members opposite that I have 
spoken personally to the presidents of SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) about the wording of this 
and the House amendment that we intended to bring forward. 
So that in the spirit of the memorandum of understanding that 
the three parties have signed; this is seen to be consistent with 
that. And they have agreed, and they have no problem with this 
amendment going ahead in the case of either organization, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Madam Minister, I don’t think that the word  



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

“amalgamation of municipalities” has really gone away. This is 
just a back-door attempt to get exactly what we had you pull 
from the order paper with your larger Act of amalgamation. 
There’s no question in my mind that you’re playing games with 
rural municipalities here, and the games of course are that you 
are now going to have amalgamation of villages with rural 
municipalities whether they like it or not, because every village 
with a hundred or less people is going to want to get rid of the 
responsibility of having to run their own affairs, if they can 
saddle the local rural municipality with providing the goods and 
services that they’ve had in the past. And they will attempt to 
do that. 
 
And I’ll go straight back to home, so I know what I’m talking 
about. The village of Carmichael gets a grant because they are a 
village. They get a grant from the government, and that grant 
goes into providing water and sewage services for that village. 
 
Do you think for one minute that after you dissolve that village 
council and make them, by compulsion, a member of the rural 
municipality of Carmichael, do you think for one minute that 
those people are going to tolerate not having those same 
services in the future? They are going to want those services 
provided. At the present time though, no farmer in the rural 
municipality of Carmichael gets water and sewer services 
provided by the municipality. They buy and pay for their own. 
But in those villages, they get a grant that helps them, so they 
don’t pay for their own, only partly. 
 
So what you’re doing is providing an option to amalgamate 
municipalities so that you can stop paying the grants that you’ve 
committed yourself to to those villages and hereafter saddle the 
rest of the rural community with the taxation to provide those 
goods and services to that village. And so you are 
amalgamating through the back door with this amendment, and 
you’re going to force rural municipalities to take over a 
responsibility that they’ve never had nor do they ever want. 
 
Because we have had the situation where these villages have 
asked, will you take us over? And after the rural municipalities 
looked at it and said, no thank you; we don’t need an added 
expense for the rest of out ratepayers. And there’s no possible 
vehicle available for us to recover those costs from the people 
who are going to get that service. No thank you, we don’t want 
you. 
 
It’s been a loud, clear message all through the years, and it was 
a loud, clear message from SARM, SUMA, and all of the 
people that you’ve met with in the last month telling you they 
didn’t want amalgamation. And yet this particular Bill, tried to 
be slipped in the back door in the last dying days of this 
session, gives you the power to amalgamate a whole lot of 
municipalities whether they like it or not. And I challenge you 
to stand in this House today and say that it is not so. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I accept that challenge, 
and I say that this is not so. And we are not changing anything 
at all from the current statute, except that the provisions for 
dissolution would be able to be applied at the wish of a council 
in cases where the community is over 100. 
 

Without this amendment, we would be placed in the position 
where a community might come . . . a community with over 100 
population might have complete agreement with some 
neighbouring municipalities that they wanted to form a different 
unit and they wanted to reduce their status or dissolve their 
village status. And if they had a population of more than a 100, 
we would have to say no. 
 
That wouldn’t be acceptable when we’re asking people to look 
at the way they do business and the way they deliver services if 
they came to us and voluntarily, having made an arrangement 
with their neighbours, wanted to dissolve. But under the current 
statute without amendment, we would have to say no, since 
your population is over 100, we cannot permit you to do that. 
 
And I want to repeat again that I have, in the spirit of 
cooperation that was demonstrated by the signing of the 
memorandum of understanding between SUMA and SARM, 
that I have spoken personally with the presidents of SUMA and 
SARM about the wording and intent of this House amendment, 
and they have both agreed on behalf of the people they 
represent that it is reasonable and in fact desirable that this 
amendment should go ahead, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
very simply, does the RM (rural municipality) that would be 
involved in this scenario have the right to refuse to take over the 
village that is being disbanded? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, of course where the 
legislation is enabling and where it says the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council may, then nobody in their right mind 
would allow a dissolution that would place a burden on a 
neighbouring municipality. Before the “may” was exercised, 
everyone who was responsible for those actions would want to 
be assured that it is voluntary, that the resolution of the council 
requesting dissolution follows upon their cooperating with their 
neighbours and making an arrangement which was acceptable 
to all the parties involved. And these are the kind of details that 
will be worked out in the plan of action at the municipal round 
table. 
 
And I say again that this is enabling, it is not meant to be 
mandatory in any way, and it has absolutely nothing in the 
world to do with amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Madam Minister, this is the first time that I’m 
going to have to say this, but I don’t believe you. I absolutely 
do not believe you. This time you’re pulling my leg. Now you 
have never done that in the past, but this is just not acceptable. 
You have skirted the issue by not using the words that 
definitively tell us what the intention will be that alleviates our 
fears. 
 
If the RMs do then have the right  and you haven’t said that 
 if the RMs have the right not to accept these villages and 
take over the responsibility of their operations, if they do have 
that right to turn that down, where do these villages go after 
you’ve cancelled their councils and dissolved them? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is no intent, and  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

in fact there is no ability in this legislation to arbitrarily dissolve 
the status of any community in Saskatchewan. The legislation 
clearly says that it is upon the resolution of a council. It says, “if 
the council of the resort village or village, by resolution, 
requests it be dissolved . . .” 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member opposite knows that members of 
local government  having been a reeve himself  knows that 
members of local government, rural or urban in this province, 
are responsible people and they would not do anything that 
would not be in the best interests of the people they’re elected 
to serve. 
 
It’s in that confidence, knowing that a council of a village or 
any municipality, urban or rural, they would not make such a 
resolution asking for dissolution unless they were satisfied that 
it was in the best interests of the people that they serve or the 
people in their municipality surrounding them. There is nothing 
arbitrary about this. 
 
And I wish the member opposite shared the same confidence in 
the wisdom of the people that are elected in local governments 
as I do, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, I’m sorry but this 
time I don’t believe you and I don’t trust you. And I’m not 
going to go into why. The important thing is here that you are 
skirting the issue. You will not definitively stand up and say 
that the rural municipalities that would be involved in this 
situation have the right to say no. 
 
You imply that they do. You try to suggest that they will, 
because we’re all going to be nice and we’re all going to 
discuss it and we’re all going to go around the round table. You 
know that’s bunk. You know that’s bunk as well as I do. It is 
not going to happen that way. 
 
You are sneaking in amalgamation through the back door, and 
you will not be the minister that will probably put it into effect 
because you will likely slip into another portfolio and let 
somebody else take the lumps for it. 
 
And I can see the member from Rosetown gleefully looking at 
the opportunity to use this kind of legislation to ram through the 
kind of amalgamation that your party has stood for and has 
wanted all along, clearly demonstrated by the fact that you tried 
to put through a Bill earlier in this session that got such 
resistance in this province that people came out so hard against 
you that you felt you had to drop it. And now you’re sneaking it 
in the back door. 
 
You’re going to do the honourable thing and maybe not do 
anything to RMs because you have this integrity and I believe 
you want to uphold that. But the next minister in your seat 
simply takes this piece of legislation and rams it down the 
people’s throats, because then it’s on the record and it is 
legislation and it is law. 
 
And you will not stand here and definitively say that the RMs  

will have the right to turn down the responsibility of taking over 
these villages and the responsibility of providing services under 
the municipal Act to those villages. You will not definitively 
say they have the right to say no. 
 
And as long as you don’t do that, we know that this is an 
intended piece of legislation for a forced amalgamation at some 
levels, and that is at the lower levels, which is the villages and 
the resort villages. 
 
Now there may be some sense for some of them to disband, but 
we already have that. We already have the ability for people to 
cooperatively sit down and decide that they want to take over 
one another. It’s been there for a long, long time. 
 
I was a reeve a long time ago for quite awhile and we always 
were approached by the village of Carmichael to take over their 
affairs. 
 
But they always wanted to have goods and services provided to 
them that we didn’t provide to the rest of our ratepayers, and we 
weren’t prepared to start providing them to one group of 
ratepayers and not to the others. So we said no, you take care of 
your own business. And it’s been that way and it’s stayed that 
way. Because we didn’t want to take over their responsibilities 
because they were getting more services than we were willing 
or able to pay for. 
 
And in order to be fair, you now have to stand in this Assembly 
and say to us definitively, that the rural municipalities  no 
matter who requests it; no matter how good your intentions are 
 have at the end of the day the ability to stand in their place 
and say, no thank you. And that that will be considered to be 
the last word on it and they won’t have to take over the villages 
and the responsibilities involved. 
 
Now let’s hear you stand up in this Assembly and say that the 
rural municipalities that might be forced to take over  or 
might not be forced but even if they’re just requested  if they 
decide they don’t want them they have the right to say, we’re 
not taking them. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to clarify 
for the member opposite that in this proposed change to the 
statute, there is no change whatsoever in the rights of rural 
municipalities. 
 
He cites an example. I’m very familiar with the example. In fact 
I recently visited, as he knows, that part of the province. And 
the amount of intermunicipal cooperation that’s going on there 
between a large group of municipalities is highly commendable. 
 
And the rights of the rural municipality to not accept 
responsibility for a dissolved urban municipality remains 
exactly the same under this proposed change as what the 
member cites right now, is that the rural municipality in the past 
had the right to say they would not accept the responsibility for 
the citizens of a dissolved village. Those rights remain 
unchanged in this amendment. 
 
And I want to say that I did cite one example when I introduced  



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

the amendment, but there are other examples of where 
communities as large as 800 have spoken to us about looking 
into a reorganization. They have spoken to their neighbours. If 
that happened . . . And there’s one case of 200, one of 800, that 
have spoken to us about exploring this. 
 
We would have to say, without this change, if they came to a 
complete agreement with their neighbours and came to us and 
asked for a dissolution to make a new organization, we would 
have to say no on the basis that they’re over a hundred. This 
would be silly. 
 
And so we are trying to put in some enabling legislation so that 
when communities make an arrangement to come together 
that’s mutually acceptable, that we can agree to that, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude:  With leave, to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude:  To you and through I take great pleasure in 
introducing a group of constituents of mine from Pleasantdale. 
There are 22 grade 6 and 7 students there. Marg Carlson is the 
teacher; assistant, Emily  and I don’t think I can say your last 
name right so I’m not even going to try; and the bus driver is 
Harvy Wood. 
 
And these students are going to tour the building and then we 
have an opportunity to talk for a few minutes. So enjoy your 
tour and we’ll talk to you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 70 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, we’re not 
ready for the question, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And we probably might never be ready for the question, 
because quite frankly this time the minister goes too far. Her 
explanation is not acceptable to rural Saskatchewan. It is not 
acceptable to the people who have spent hours and weeks and 
days and months lobbying hard through this province to have a 
Bill removed from the order paper that would provide the 
government with the opportunity to amalgamate municipalities. 
 
They spent many days, many hours, thousands and thousands of 
dollars, in this lobby attempt. And now with one quick stroke of 
the pen in the last dying days of this Assembly, an amendment 
is slipped through the back door of what seems to be a very 
inconspicuous, uninteresting, and not too important Bill that 
allows the minister basically the same powers that she was 
lobbied to stop. That’s not acceptable, Madam Minister. 

No matter how good you are at convincing people with your 
persuasive voice at saying that you would never do anything 
silly . . . and obviously you won’t. I have the highest regard for 
your integrity but the point is that I don’t have integrity for the 
party . . . I don’t have any kind of faith in the party that you 
joined. 
 
And there is an absolute principle direction in your government 
to take this province into a more consolidated process  larger 
this, more centralization, less and less out in the country, less 
and less of everything for all rural areas, and more and more 
concentrated into the cities. 
 
That principle and that process lies as the underlying factor in 
everything that your government does. You yourself may never 
stoop to the point of being silly because you are not a silly 
person, and I believe that. But I don’t believe you will be the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs for very long if you get this kind 
of legislation passed, because you won’t put up with enforcing 
it. And so the Premier will slip you into another more important 
portfolio to make you feel good and he will promote you out of 
the job by promoting you up to something else. 
 
And he will slip somebody into your chair that believes in the 
principles and philosophies of socialism and they will go ahead 
with this amalgamation process and it will hit like a heavy 
hammer when nobody can stop it any more. This is the day that 
we have to challenge you because you are being used as a pawn 
by a determined government that has a determination to 
centralize things rather than to expand things and to allow 
people to run their own affairs. 
 
We also have in this country at the present time, and in this 
province, legislation that allows municipalities to do exactly 
what is written here by voluntary measures. But as the 
legislation provides now, municipalities can say no. We don’t 
want any more responsibilities. We have the right to say no. 
What you are trying to change is to take away the right of 
municipalities to say no. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, very simply put, if you decide to cancel 
a small town or village  you’re going to wipe it out and it’s 
no longer going to be there  will the rural municipality who 
takes them over be required to provide services to that 
community, services that municipalities normally provide  
the building of roads; the maintenance of roads; provision for 
garbage disposal? Will they have to provide snow removal, dog 
catching, all those things that are in the by-laws of all of the 
communities in our rural areas? Will that include providing 
water and sewer services? Will it include providing whatever 
municipalities have to provide? Or can the municipalities say 
no, we’re not going to provide services. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this time the member 
opposite goes too far. First of all, I’d like to tell him that not 
only did I join this party, I was born into it. And I believe in 
what we’re doing for Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan 
and walking hand in hand with Saskatchewan people into the 
21st century instead of having our heads buried in the sand. 
 
I want to say too that the paranoia . . . and the idea that there’s  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

something sinister about this legislation and that I will be 
moved to a more important portfolio. I want to tell you that I 
don’t think there is a more important portfolio in this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  And I think that . . . and it is because 
we have so much respect for the people who are elected at the 
local level, and their ability to make common-sense decisions 
on behalf of the people that elect them, that we want to make 
sure that there is enabling legislation to allow them to exercise 
that wisdom and experience and common sense in order to 
provide a decent level of services in rural Saskatchewan into the 
future in spite of some changes to the landscape which will 
happen and are happening. I’ve lived in rural Saskatchewan all 
my life  and that’s getting to be a longer time than I like to 
admit  but I think that I understand people in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as far as the member opposite saying that as a result of this 
amendment that all kinds of villages and towns are going to 
want to dissolve and abdicate their responsibilities and become 
part of the rural municipalities, it’s simply not true, Mr. 
Chairman. Because there’s a great deal of pride involved in the 
autonomy of small villages and small urban communities. They 
are very proud of how they serve their people and the level of 
services that they provide, and they don’t want to give up their 
status easily. 
 
So this is not going to start some kind of a bonfire across 
Saskatchewan of dissolution of incorporated towns and 
villages. It’s simply enabling, where those communities see that 
there is a better way to organize themselves to provide services, 
that they will be able to do that. And there is absolutely no 
change in this proposed amendment that would change the 
ability of rural municipalities or any municipalities to exercise 
their autonomy in expressing how they want their affairs to be 
ordered, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would like 
to follow up on what my counterpart has started, Madam 
Minister, and I think you are really asking us to trust every 
minister to come, no matter actually what government is down 
the road, if this legislation is in. 
 
What happens if a village cannot create a council or if for one 
reason or another refuses even to try to, and wants to dissolve, 
that they refuse to try to form a council. Now we have said that 
the RM, or you’ve said that the RM has the right to say no, they 
don’t want them. What if this village does dissolve? Where do 
they go, Madam Minister, then? They’re in the middle; they’re 
dissolved; they do not have a council. The responsibilities that 
the member has said come along with the villages, but the RM 
doesn’t want them — who accepts responsibility for this village 
if it does really get to the point where it refuses to govern itself, 
they are left in the middle without any form of government, and 
the RM refuses to take them. 
 
(1130) 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are several 
isolated examples actually, of what has happened in the past 
where the population of a small, formerly urban community or 
one that had at one time achieved enough population to apply 
for village status and had done so, and there wasn’t the ability 
to raise a council because the population had dropped and 
perhaps the handful of souls who were left were elderly and 
didn’t feel as if they wanted to seek seats on a council, and they 
were not able to raise a council. In those cases, the experience 
that we have so far is that those communities have reverted to 
hamlet status, and they have become a part of the RM. 
 
Usually though, in the cases we’ve had so far, they’re very 
small communities, and they don’t have such things as a water 
treatment plant or a sewage lagoon or the kind of things, the 
kind of services, that would provide liabilities for the rural 
municipality in which they’re located. And usually there has 
been contractual arrangements, such as in the case that the 
member opposite cited in the village of Carmichael, where they 
have already contracted for some time with the rural 
municipality in which they’re located to do some maintenance 
work on their village roads and that sort of thing. So there are 
already cooperative arrangements in providing services. So 
that’s what has been the case in some isolated incidents that 
have happened. 
 
One of the stumbling blocks to this is something that we have 
already addressed at the round table — which is not yet 
resolved but which we will work through — is particularly 
those liabilities like underground fuel tanks, leaking lagoons, 
the sort of liabilities that obviously rural municipalities would 
not want to volunteer to accept, and we need to find ways to 
deal with those outstanding issues, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would 
imagine in that situation that you were talking about, those 
grants would still be there because of hamlet status. Would 
they? And therefore I can see the RM accepting them. 
 
I think what maybe the problem that we’re all discussing here 
is, if they dissolve, these grants would dry up, whether for 
water, roads, what ever. And the RM would have to accept the 
whole, complete responsibility for these people. And I can’t in 
my wildest dream see why any RM would want to do this  to 
pick up the added responsibility and provide services that they 
aren’t providing for their own people now. And they would 
have to do that if there was no grants that come along. 
 
So the ones that you were talking about, the examples, did 
grants follow them along? And if so, I can see why the RM 
would want them. What happens if they dissolve and there is no 
grants? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there would still 
be, if a village reverted to hamlet status within a rural 
municipality, there still are some grants existing, and this is one 
of the important issues that we want to address at the round 
table. 
 
And one of the provisions that’s expressed in the memorandum 
of understanding is that we need to come to a joint resolve  



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

about the future of the revenue sharing pool and how it will be 
distributed in the future, whether we’ll continue to provide base 
grant to villages in the same amount that it is now. Will it be an 
equalization formula that will sort of prop up and assist small 
communities, or will it be diverted to growing communities? 
These are, you know, philosophical questions that need to be 
resolved in cooperation around the round table because none of 
us have a crystal ball about the future. But that is the case right 
now . . . is that the grants do continue in a different form but to 
flow to the hamlet within a rural municipality. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, I got to think about a couple of statements you made, 
and I can only offer to you my deepest sympathy that you feel 
that you have to remain with the political party that you were 
born into. I think it is a tragedy when a person feels that 
because they were born into a certain family that they have to 
vote a certain way for the rest of their life. I mean that has to be 
the ultimate destruction of the democratic process because, after 
all, we only have to trace our roots back for three or four 
generations and say well everybody’s got to vote that way, and 
we’ll determine who the government is by the fact of your 
heredity. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, as I say, I can only offer you the deepest 
sympathies because obviously your philosophy is not, as I’ve 
known you for a long time, consistent with the political party 
that you sit with. That’s just a plain fact of your actions and the 
way you’ve lived. And you are out of tune with the party that 
you represent. 
 
And so I say to you quite simply this. In all honesty, you may 
have every intention of doing the right thing, and I believe you 
will. I honestly believe you will, and I believe you won’t be 
silly. And I believe you won’t use this amendment to hurt 
people or to force a philosophy and a principle on people. 
Unfortunately you will not always be the minister of Municipal 
Affairs. I don’t care, you know, how you argue that. It’s just 
going to be a simple fact that everything that starts must end. 
And the next minister sooner or later will use this Act to force 
amalgamation of municipalities at this level. 
 
Now on the other hand, if you are so adamantly convinced that 
I’m wrong, then I challenge you to prove the point by 
supporting my amendment, which I will now introduce, that 
will clearly define that all municipalities involved will very 
simply have the option to say no. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move the proposed House sub-amendment for 
Bill No. 70, 1996, An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other 
Acts, moved by myself: 
 

Amend proposed Clause 5 of the Printed Bill by adding 
after subsection 12(1) as being enacted therein the 
following: 
 

“(1.1) An order may be made under subsection (1) only 
if the municipalities affected thereby agree to the 
dissolution.” 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we would not be able 
to support this amendment. I would like to ask the member 
opposite to show us in the amendment, as compared to the 
current statute, where we’re taking anything away from rural 
municipalities. We are not. 
 
And have we ever, under the existing statute, ever acted 
arbitrarily to dissolve a community? Never. The answer is 
never. And nothing changes in the amendment to the current 
statute except the current statute can now apply to communities 
of over 100 instead of being limited to those of under 100. So if 
the member could show us where we are taking anything away 
from the current powers of rural municipalities, then we would 
be interested in looking at the amendment. But we are not 
taking anything away, and on the basis of that, Mr. Chairman, 
we cannot support the proposed subamendment. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Madam Minister, I take great pleasure in 
telling you exactly what you’re taking away from 
municipalities. You’re taking away the right of the rural 
municipality to say no. It is as clear and simple as that. The 
wording of your amendment takes away the right of the rural 
municipality to say no to having to take over the responsibilities 
of a dissolutioned village or resort village. 
 
In the past, municipalities have always had the right under 
legislation to say no, and they have because nobody takes on 
more added costs and responsibilities than they have already. 
Nobody takes that on. And you are very simply taking away the 
right to say no, and you know that. And you can stand there and 
holler and act pompous all day. But it is a fact of life that, in 
this legislation, you’re removing the right for people to say no. 
And my amendment would change that. 
 
And so if you’re saying that you are so right and that you’re not 
doing anything different and you’re not changing anything, then 
support my amendment and prove that what you say is right. A 
very simple thing  put in the right for everybody involved to 
be able to say no, and not just half of the people, not half of the 
people saying we want to do it and then just allowed to do, if 
you decide as a cabinet to do that. 
 
You are changing things in principle phenomenally here with 
such a small, little move. But it is in principle a very big 
decision and a change in the course of history. You are taking 
away the right of rural municipalities to say no. Madam 
Minister, I would suggest that you confer with your officials 
and with your House Leader and reconsider your position 
because this is a very important decision that you make today. 
 
It will affect your political career in the future. Every 
municipality in this province will know about this decision 
today very shortly. Don’t make a mistake. We give you a 
chance to get off the hook. Save face. Save your integrity. 
Support this amendment, Madam Minister. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:40 a.m. until 11:50 a.m. 
 
Sub-amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

Yeas  10 
 
Osika Aldridge McLane 
Draude McPherson Belanger 
Bjornerud Gantefoer Heppner 
Goohsen   
 

Nays  23 
 
Mitchell Wiens MacKinnon 
Shillington Atkinson Johnson 
Whitmore Goulet Lautermilch 
Upshall Kowalsky Pringle 
Trew Lorje Teichrob 
Nilson Stanger Murray 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Murrell  
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
and perhaps you would like to get . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. We’ll wait and get the officials 
back in before the debate continues. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
you of course know that we are disappointed in you for not 
supporting a reasonable amendment to what you claim is 
already available to people but is not in fact there. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I want you to know that we agreed with a 
lot of what you’re trying to do in this Bill. But the fact that 
you’re slipping in this one clause that gives you so much power 
and your government so much power to do the things that 
people in Saskatchewan do not want, we have to oppose the 
entire Bill now because of this one clause. We want it to be 
very clearly stated, when we vote against your Bill, we don’t 
vote against everything that you’ve been trying to do in your 
changes. But we cannot support a Bill that contains this kind of 
an attack on Saskatchewan people. 
 
After they have spent so many hours, so many weeks, so many 
months, so many thousands of dollars lobbying, you to get rid 
of this exact same principle in the Bill that you pulled  in the 
Bill that you yourself recognized was not going to be acceptable 
to Saskatchewan. After all of that effort, trying to sneak this 
same principle through the back door in this last minute 
amendment to your own Bill makes us have to vote against 
everything that you are doing in your changes. 
 
It’s not because we disagree with everything. But this principle 
outweighs all of the other things that you are doing. This is a 
key, important issue to all of Saskatchewan, and I want you to 
know that we are going to let the municipalities know. They 
won’t be in the dark for weeks and months. They are going to 
find out immediately that you have done through the back door 
what you could not accomplish through the front door because 
of their resistance. Their collective resistance will come against 
you again, and I suggest to you that you are at political peril 
here for yourself and your party. 
 
I am really disappointed in you as a minister. I had through of 
you as being a person of integrity. I now have to cancel that 

thought. Madam Minister, I leave you to live with your own 
conscience. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, I think we also would 
reiterate what the member of the third party has said here today, 
although it hurts. 
 
I think we have a couple of questions on it. We understand what 
you are trying to do with the whole intent of the Bill. I think the 
first problem we have with this Bill though is for the lack of 
regulations that are included in this Bill. And there’s so much 
being left to be decided after or to be brought forward after that 
I really find it hard how anyone can approve or disapprove of 
something when only a small part of it is involved here today. 
 
I would go on and say too that at any point, when an 
amendment is brought in that it in any way weakens the 
authority of RMs or is the possibility of weakening RMs and 
diminishing their powers, we just cannot support. So we also 
would not be able to support this Bill now in whole. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, just briefly, I just want 
to reiterate, following the rhetoric from the members opposite, 
that the powers that the government has after this amendment 
are exactly the same as has existed in the existing statute which 
was amended in 1984 by the previous administration. And 
nothing has changed except that the provisions could potentially 
apply at their request to municipalities of over 100 rather than 
being limited to those of under 100. 
 
There is no intent, and there is . . . you need to have the wildest 
imagination to even find any way that this amendment weakens 
the role of municipal government in this province. It absolutely 
does not. It is simply enabling legislation that will enable the 
government to accede to the wishes of municipalities in 
Saskatchewan who wish to reorganize themselves in some way 
if their numbers are over a hundred. 
 
The regulations will be worked out. They’re always pursuant to 
the legislation. The regulations are never before us at the time 
we pass a statute. The regulations are worked out in 
consultation, in concert, with those affected parties and will be 
discussed at the Municipal Round Table with input from 
SUMA and SARM, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:49 a.m. until 12:09 p.m. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  23 
 
Mitchell Wiens MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Shillington Atkinson 
Johnson Whitmore Lautermilch 
Upshall Kowalsky Pringle 
Trew Teichrob Nilson 
Serby Stanger Murray 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Murrell  
 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Nays  10 
 
Aldridge McLane Draude 
Belanger Bjornerud Julé 
Gantefoer D’Autremont Heppner 
Goohsen   
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I move that the Bill be 
reported as amended. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:12 p.m. until 12:18 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  22 
 
Mitchell Wiens Lingenfelter 
Shillington Atkinson Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Kowalsky 
Pringle Trew Lorje 
Teichrob Nilson Serby 
Stanger Murray Wall 
Kasperski Ward Sonntag 
Murrell   

 
Nays  11 

 
Aldridge McLane Draude 
Belanger Bjornerud Julé 
Krawetz Gantefoer D’Autremont 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 
Municipal Board Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, are you 
expecting the RMs which decide not to assess businesses to use 
their power and to raise mill rates on some other types of land 
use to make up for the lost revenue? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, if rural municipalities 
decide not to have a business tax, then the options that are open 
to them of course, are to use the variable mill rate or to have a 
uniform mill rate. There’s no relationship between the option to 
have a business tax and what other tax tools rural municipalities 
use. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, do 
you expect bidding wars between neighbouring RMs on the 
question as to whether they will have a business tax? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no. No more so than 
whether an urban municipality decides whether or not to have a 
business tax. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Madam Minister, what is in this Bill that will 

prevent a bidding war? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I would 
submit that there’s nothing in this Bill that would prevent a 
so-called bidding war any more than there is under the current 
statute the potential for that sort of behaviour, in that there’s 
already the ability to make exemptions and abatements to 
business, and that is widely practised. 
 
I think we will rely in the future, as we have in the past, upon 
. . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Could we keep the conversations 
across the floor between the minister and the critic that is 
asking the questions only, please. Could we come to order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I was just 
observing that we will rely on the wisdom, experience, and 
common sense of locally elected councils in the future under 
this statute in the same way that we have in the past. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I think we’ve gone over a lot of our stuff so we don’t 
have that many questions left for you. There’s just a few here 
that I’d like to touch on. The part that . . . regarding the powers 
of the council to deal with unsafe and unoccupied buildings. 
Should there not be any limits on the amount of money which a 
council may be ordered to be spent on repairs where the repairs 
are undertaken by the council after the failure of the landowner 
to do so? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the 
sort of eventuality that the member opposite refers to is exactly 
what we’re trying to address by the changes in another statute 
 The Tax Enforcement Act  which shortens up the period, 
which obviously then would reduce the liability or the potential 
for liability that a municipality may incur by reason of a 
deteriorated property. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but I think 
where I have some concerns is, do you not think that there 
should be a limit placed on how much that RM council could 
spend to upgrade these buildings? If there’s no limit on it and 
you had the wrong council in place or for some reason or other 
they felt that this was a good time to pay back someone, they 
could spend any amount of money? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re trying to 
create an environment where locally elected councils can have 
as much autonomy and exercise their judicious discretion as far 
as possible. And it sounds as if the member opposite is 
suggesting that there should be more regulations that limit the 
discretion and the ability of locally elected people to use their 
judgement. 
 
That’s not our wish, Mr. Chairman, because we have 
confidence in the ability of those people to manage their affairs 
at the local level in the best possible way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70  An Act to amend 
 The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 

 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that the Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 71. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 





 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2565 
 June 13, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition are from Estevan, mostly from 
Estevan, Mr. Speaker, and some other smaller communities in 
southern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And all the people that have signed the petition are from the 
city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Grenfell, Glentworth, Kipling, and other communities 
throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition today, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Weyburn, Radville, Raymore, Indian Head, and a 
number from Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition are all from the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today 
again to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today on behalf of 
concerned citizens throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many concerned 
citizens, upset citizens, from the communities of Loreburn, 
Riverhurst, Central Butte, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
a number of communities from across Saskatchewan, including 
communities such as Mossbank, Chaplin, Pense, Grand Coulee, 
Weyburn, a number also from Broadview, Fort Qu’Appelle, and 
many from the city of Regina as well. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Swift Current, they’re from Ernfold, from Frontier, 
from Regina, from West Bend, from Swift Current, and they’re 
all from throughout the land, Mr. Speaker, and I so present. 
 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues today to present petitions on behalf of the people in 
southern Saskatchewan in their efforts to save the Plains Health 
Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the people that have signed this petition, it appears, are 
almost all from Regina, White City. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order, the following petitions regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Gantefoer, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts, presents the committee’s first 
report of the twenty-third legislature, which is hereby tabled as 
sessional paper no. 200. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, it’s my pleasure to 
take this opportunity to table our first report. In doing so, I’d 
like to make a few general comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Firstly, I would wish to acknowledge and thank the members of 
the committee: firstly, the Vice-Chair of the committee, the 
member from Meadow Lake; other government members  the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the member from Saskatoon Eastview, 
the member from Lloydminster, and the member from Regina 
South; my colleague in the official opposition, the member 
from Thunder Creek; colleague from the third party, the 
member from Moosomin; and independent member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
As a new member of this Assembly and a new chairperson, the 
members have treated me with a great deal of patience and 
understanding through our deliberations. I believe the 
committee has worked very diligently to address the issues 
placed before us. We have held 11 meetings through the 
session, two of which were orientation meetings. I gratefully 
acknowledge all of those who participated with our education, 
and in particular the past Chair and past Vice-Chair of Public 
Accounts, the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
Given the large volume of work, the committee was given in its 
order of reference, a broadened mandate from the Legislative 
Assembly to include the unfinished business of the 
twenty-second legislature in addition to the Public Accounts 
and various reports of the Provincial Auditor tabled since the 
dissolution of the last legislature. These documents date back to 
the ‘92-93 fiscal year and encompass five reports of the  

Provincial Auditor and the Public Accounts for the 
corresponding years. And this has been a very large challenge 
for your committee. 
 
Given that large amount of work that faced us, your committee 
chose to not deal with issues that had been in previous reports 
and had been repeated or resolved in subsequent reports. So we 
adopted a schedule of provincial audit recommendations that 
we’re now working on. And we have done a great deal of work. 
 
This report reflects deliberations up to a meeting held this 
morning 
 
And in closing, all of this work could not have been 
accomplished without the gratitude of the committee being 
expressed to the Office of the Clerk for administrative support 
and procedural advice, to the Office of the Provincial Auditor, 
and to the Provincial Comptroller and his staff, to Hansard, and 
the officials of the Department of Health that appeared as 
witnesses. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
member from Meadow Lake: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee of Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be 
very brief in my remarks. It was with a great deal of pleasure 
that I second the motion by the member from Melfort-Tisdale. I 
want to reiterate some of the things that the Chair of our 
committee has already said. 
 
From the government side and from the government members, I 
want to thank first of all, and of course the officials and staff 
involved in compiling this report, and indeed those that worked 
with us through the weeks that we’ve spent putting all of this 
report together. The task when we began seemed quite 
formidable, but I believe under the good shepherding of our 
Chair that we’ve accomplished a substantive amount of work. 
 
To our Chair, I want to say how much I appreciated working 
with him, and compliment him especially, as a new member, 
and all the members, on the spirit of cooperation that was 
generally apparent throughout our meetings. 
 
I want to report to the legislature as well that the task at hand no 
longer appears insurmountable, and by the sitting of the next 
legislature, I would hope that we would be current with all of 
our reports. 
 
So again just in closing, I want to thank all of the members  
government and opposition, certainly  and all of the staff that 
were involved in helping us, and just really thank them for all 
they’ve done. Because as I said, when I started it appeared 
almost impossible to get this done. So thank you very much. 
 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to all colleagues in 
the Assembly, a group of students and parents and teachers 
from Theodore, Saskatchewan. They are from the Theodore 
School. They are a group of grade 5 and 6 students; 19 in total 
have made their trek to Regina today to take in a number of 
sights including the legislature. And I want to welcome them 
here this afternoon to the legislature. 
 
I also want to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, the teacher, Mrs. 
Valerie Jeske, teaching assistant, Arlene Fenske, and some 
chaperons, Barb Madsen, Carlyle Topliss, and Marty Roebuck, 
and of course the bus driver, Fred Dowholis, who makes sure 
they have a safe trip home, Fred. Welcome, and I’d ask all the 
members to join me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much again, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to 
the members of the Assembly, 13 students and their chaperon, 
Shelley Adamson, and the one of the teachers, Charles Stein, in 
the west gallery. 
 
They’ve travelled down all the way from Makwa School. And I 
believe, unless we sit well into the fall here, I believe they will 
be the one and only group visiting the legislature from the 
constituency of Meadow Lake this year. And so I really want to 
welcome them. I will be meeting you later on for drinks, I 
believe down in your office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over the years the Makwa School has been fairly regular 
visitors to the legislature and so I want to compliment the 
chaperons and the school for paying particular interest to the 
legislature and welcome them here. 
 
They wanted to have a nice picture on the legislature steps later 
on, but even if they do want a nice picture, I’m still going to 
join them. So we’ll get together later on. If everyone would join 
with me in welcoming the Makwa School to the legislature here 
today, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to the Assembly, the members of the Land 
Titles Advisory Council of the property registration branch of 
the Department of Justice. There are 14 people here who are 
representatives from the various land titles offices in 
Saskatchewan, and they are here to see how the legislature 
works and understand where the laws come from that they end 
up administering. 
 
Welcome to the legislature. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have some special guests in the Assembly I’d like to introduce 
today. And the reason I want to introduce them with a special 
note of congratulations and thank-you is that this group has 
come to us as a Legislative Assembly and asked us to introduce 
a Bill called the reorganization of labour relations between the 
health sector employers and employees. And this group 
represents the health care unions in Saskatchewan and the 
health care employers through SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations). 
 
We have with us here today Pat Gallagher representing SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union), if you’d 
please stand; we have Alice Robert representing health 
sciences; we have George Wall representing Service Employees 
International; we have Bev Crossman with the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses; Judy Junor, the president of the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses; and Rosalee Longmore  I’m sorry if I 
pronounced your name wrong; I hope that’s right  she’s the 
vice-president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; we have 
Andrew Huculak with the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees; and we have Brian Morgan representing SAHO, the 
Saskatchewan association of health care organizations. 
 
And with them today, out of the mediation and conciliation 
branch of the Department of Labour, we have Terry Stevens 
who is the executive director there who’s helped in pulling 
these people together. 
 
So I’d like the Assembly to welcome them and thank them for 
coming together to make a request to sort out some of the 
jurisdictional issues within health care in Saskatchewan. I’d ask 
all members to welcome them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
member opposite in welcoming the group here today, as well 
the union representatives, as well as Mr. Brian Morgan who 
worked for SAHO at my time of chairmanship there, and it was 
indeed my pleasure to have worked with him. So I’d like 
everyone to welcome him on our behalf as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the third party, I’d also like to welcome the guests here from the 
health care unions and from SAHO, and I hope they enjoy their 
visits here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
should like to introduce to you and through you to the members, 
a couple of special guests that are seated in your gallery. In 
particular I want to note the presence of Mr. Leender Oorschot 
from Krommenie in the Netherlands. He’s accompanied here 
today by Betty Lewis of my constituency of Regina Victoria. 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Mr. Oorschot is a retired personnel supervisor for a major 
pharmaceutical company in the Netherlands. He’s travelling 
throughout North America, and if I’m correct, this is his second 
visit to Saskatchewan. He takes a strong interest in Canadian 
politics and finds this is an interesting stop in his journeys 
throughout North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might be permitted to say a few words in my 
first tongue. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to please join me in 
welcoming our special guests  if they could rise  to greet 
them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to take a minute to also join with the Minister of Labour in 
welcoming Andrew Huculak, or however they want to say it  
good friends; you can say it 14 different ways if you want I 
guess. Andrew and his wife Bonnie live just across the river out 
of Last Mountain-Touchwood. They’re in Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, I guess. But we’ve been good friends for quite some 
time and I’m delighted to see him here, and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to take this opportunity to join with the member from 
Canora-Pelly in welcoming the students here from Theodore. I 
want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the finest 
schools in Saskatchewan, and I know this school very well and 
want to tell you that since 1968 the quality of students that have 
graduated from this school have increased significantly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to congratulate just the excellent work that this school 
has done for the people of Saskatchewan. Many, many of these 
students have gone on to just make major contributions to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I met these students on my way in from Regina this morning, 
Mr. Speaker, and they were stopping for some brief 
refreshments at Fort Qu’Appelle. And I indicated to them that 
likely the member from Canora-Pelly wouldn’t mind assisting 
in picking up some of the cost of that refreshment as well. So 
when they’re meeting with them earlier today, they might want 
to have that discussion with him. 
 
So I want to congratulate them for coming to the Assembly and 
to enjoy their tour and their day here at the legislature. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If all other members have completed 
introductions, the Speaker would like to introduce 28 grade 4 
students from Palliser Heights Elementary School in my 
constituency in Moose Jaw. These students today are here  

together with their teacher, Grace Walton, and are accompanied 
by chaperons Mrs. Hunt, Mrs. Schaaf, Mr. Heath, and Mr. 
Zarhariuk. 
 
After being in the gallery here until 2 o’clock they will be 
taking a tour of the building. And I look forward to meeting 
with them at about 2:30, with the help of the Deputy Speaker, 
to enjoy together with them a visit and refreshments and an 
opportunity for us to take a class photo. 
 
I’ll ask all hon. members of the Assembly to welcome the 
guests of the Speaker who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Computerized Axial Tomography Services 
for Prince Albert 

 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to share with this 
Assembly some exciting news for people served by the Prince 
Albert Health District. Yesterday it was announced that Prince 
Albert will become the first community outside Regina and 
Saskatoon to provide CT (computerized axial tomography) scan 
services. There has been almost a 30 per cent increase in the 
number of scans performed in the province from 1991-92 to 
1994-95. 
 
Having this state-of-the-art diagnostic imaging technology 
available in Prince Albert will eliminate hundreds of trips 
residents from the P.A. (Prince Albert) area make to Saskatoon 
to obtain this important service. It will reduce in-patient 
hospital days and will help Prince Albert-based physician 
specialists to provide a wider range of up-to-date treatment 
services. 
 
The decision to offer CT scan services in Prince Albert was 
made by Saskatchewan Health on the advice of its technology 
advisory committee. In its review of the Prince Albert proposal 
for a CT scan, the committee considered issues of access, 
quality of care, cost-effectiveness, and capacity utilization. 
 
CT scan services will be available in Prince Albert by the spring 
of 1997, and during the coming year the Prince Albert Health 
District will participate on a committee to address practical 
matters concerning diagnostic imaging for the entire province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Prince Albert 
Health District for the work they did on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Members’ Salary Structure 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
bring to the attention of some members of this House who may 
not have heard, that my colleagues and myself will be repaying 
money owing as a result of the new MLA (Member of the  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

Legislative Assembly) pay structure. 
 
As a member of the official opposition, I will now be looking to 
the government, and to the independent member as well, to 
demonstrate the same level of integrity and return that money to 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
I know these steps need to be taken to restore the public’s faith 
in politicians and the political system, and because it is the right 
thing to do, Mr. Speaker. I hope the government members and 
the independent member soon accept that reality too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Wheat Board Conference 
 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate the Canadian Wheat Board for sponsoring its first 
in a series of conferences in the prairie provinces dealing with 
adding value to prairie cereal grains. 
 
Moving Up To Market, held in Saskatoon from June 9 to 11, 
gave the industry an opportunity to work together in examining 
the challenges of adding value to these cereal grains. Large and 
small industry representatives attended the conference, 
including AgPro Grain; Darlaine Ventures from Radisson; 
United Grain Growers; Coteau Hills Rural Development 
Corporation; Weyburn Inland Terminal; and Lakeside Seeds 
from Wynyard. 
 
The conference showed us that there are common interests in 
value added with companies of any size, even those who have 
not yet started. 
 
Some of the key areas of the conference explored were market 
potential for North America and offshore, value added 
experiences highlighting the successes on the Prairies, and 
business plans and finances  getting started in value added 
with expertise offered from prominent business consultants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this conference was an excellent step for the 
Wheat Board to take in a continued and evolving support of 
producers it serves. I congratulate everyone who participated at 
such a busy time of the year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contract for Free Form Plastic Products Inc. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. Speaker, 
to extend my congratulations to a company in my constituency, 
Free Form Plastics of St. Brieux who recently landed a contract 
to manufacture 600 residential garbage containers for 
Saskatoon. In fact, plant manager for Free Form, George 
McQuarrie, says they will probably start shipping the containers 
to Saskatoon in the very near future. 
 
Free Form was awarded the contract after winning a 
competition with other Saskatchewan and Canadian plastic 
firms. This is the first time a Saskatchewan company has 
received Saskatoon’s container contract. 

Free Form will employ about 15 people on its production line to 
fulfil the contract which is worth over $160,000. I would like to 
congratulate the management of Free Form for putting together 
such a successful bid and for bringing more economic activity 
to St. Brieux. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Used-oil Management Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’m pleased to promote another successful community 
program that’s happening in my constituency. 
 
The agriculture development and diversification board, known 
as the ADD board, and the municipalities in the areas of 
Watrous, Young, Lanigan, Simpson, Nokomis, and Jansen, 
have been running a very successful used-oil management 
program. Waste farm oil is an environmental concern to many 
farmers. Yet until recently there have been very few alternatives 
for the disposal of waste oil. 
 
The program in my constituency has been going for three years 
now and it has been an overwhelming success. In the last two 
years over 10,000 barrels of oil and more than 20 barrels of 
used filter oil have been collected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact things are increasing so rapidly that this 
year they have already collected over 9,000 barrels of oil. Once 
the oil is collected, it is picked up by RRR Environmental 
services of Regina, which the announcement was just made 
recently with assistance from the government, and used for 
making diesel or heating fuel. Not only is additional use being 
made of waste oil but those 10,000 barrels of oil are prevented 
from harming any soil or water in our province. 
 
I am pleased that my constituency is setting such a fine example 
on how to provide a service to farmers and protect the 
environment. The people in my communities can take pride in 
what they have done. Please join me in commending all those 
people involved in the used-oil management program. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High School Athletes 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many 
youth who are dedicated to sports in my constituency. Today I 
rise to recognize the achievements of Shawna Leffler, a 
constituent from Rose Valley, and Daryl Finch from 
Kelvington. 
 
Shawna has taken the sport of badminton by storm, placing first 
at divisions, first as NESSAC (North-east Secondary Schools 
Athletic Conference) and first at regionals. Shawna is now 
guaranteed at least seventh place in the province. This grade 12 
student has competed in the last four years at the districts four 
times and she has visited the regionals at least three times. She 
also has been division champion for three years straight. 
 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Daryl Finch was recently awarded the Saskatchewan Volleyball 
Association’s Midget Male Athlete of the Year Award. This is a 
result of hard work and dedication to the game of volleyball 
throughout the past year. He has played with Kelvington High 
School and club volleyball with the Wakaw Warriors who won 
the provincials and went to Victoria for the western 
championships. Daryl will also be busy playing for the first 
Sask First team this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating these students for their dedication and excellence 
in sports. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Home for Disabled Opens 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure many 
people can remember the colourful cartoon chipmunks known 
as Chip and Dale. My statement today is not about cartoons, but 
about Chip and Dale Housing Incorporated, a non-profit 
organization established in 1980 to provide community homes 
for persons with multiple disabilities. 
 
Last Thursday I attended, along with my colleague the Minister 
of Social Services, the official opening of this organization’s 
new group home at 146 Nollet Avenue in Regina. The objective 
of Chip and Dale Housing is to provide residents of the home 
with the appropriate high quality care which addresses all 
aspects of development: intellectual, physical, social, and 
emotional  regardless of the degree of disability experienced 
by each person. 
 
The objective of the group home is to provide as normal and 
home-like an environment as possible and to provide a program 
and environment which enables each person to develop his or 
her full potential. The philosophy of Chip and Dale Housing is 
an appropriate one; it is the right of every individual to live in a 
normal home setting, and disabled persons must have 
residential options, other than living in an institution. 
 
I would like to congratulate Chip and Dale Housing, the board 
of directors, staff, and volunteers for their commitment to this 
very worthwhile cause. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Macklin-Eye Hill Municipal Airport Opens 
 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, communities in my constituency 
continue to show their optimism concerning economic activity 
and growth in the Battleford-Cut Knife region. As I mentioned 
previously in the Assembly, there are many thriving businesses 
in the area with people who are excited about new 
opportunities. 
 
The community of Macklin is no exception. Recently the 
Macklin-Eye Hill municipal airport had its grand opening. 
Upgrading of the 3,000-foot paved airstrip was completed last  

fall at a cost of just over a half a million dollars. 
 
Special ceremonies for the opening were held on June 2, 
beginning with a pancake breakfast sponsored by the Macklin 
Chamber of Commerce. UMA Engineering presented a framed 
photo which shows an aerial view of the new airstrip. This 
project is a welcome addition to the region and I would like to 
congratulate all the communities, organizations, and 
individuals, who helped bring it to completion, including the 
town of Macklin, RM (rural municipality) of Eye Hill, Macklin 
Chamber of Commerce, and the Macklin Flying Club. This is 
yet another sign of positive growth in the region. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education regaled in this House yesterday with the suggestion 
that we read a book entitled “Election Financing for Dummies.” 
Well perhaps the minister should pick up . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Perhaps the minister should pick up a couple of 
books on “Integrity for Dummies” and “Compliance of the Law 
for Dummies.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s attempt to trivialize this issue were 
a disgrace to this government and this Assembly. We are talking 
about a massive loss of public confidence in political financing 
at least as great as a catastrophic loss of confidence in the 
administration of justice in our province when it too was under 
the direction of the now minister in charge of Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
That loss of faith became a national scandal and was recognized 
by the now Minister of Justice. He appointed counsel from 
outside the province to inquire into and report upon the 
practices of the prosecution branch of that department. 
 
Will the Premier demonstrate the same courage and conscience 
and call for an independent inquiry into this issue to restore 
public confidence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, yesterday in this House, the 
minister responded to questions related to The Election Act by 
advising us that the NDP (New Democratic Party) has the best 
lawyers, the best auditors, and the best accountants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps they do. What they certainly have is the 
best teachers. The Conservative Party, whose act the NDP is 
following, could give lessons to anyone in how to launder  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

political donations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the NDP has excellent lawyers, 
auditors, and accountants; however, I must point out that the 
Mafia also has a very good . . . good lawyers and accountants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue before this Assembly is not how much 
professional talent a political party can bring together to 
circumvent The Election Act. The issue is whether this 
government will admit that serious violations of the Act have 
taken place, that millions of dollars of anonymous political 
contributions are in the hands of the New Democratic and 
Conservative parties. 
 
Will the minister now agree that only an independent inquiry 
can properly examine the state of affairs that exist and restore 
public confidence to political financing in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this seems to be a trivial 
matter to the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal 
opposition has provided a number of warnings in this House 
about the dangers of not disclosing political donations. We have 
pointed out that this opens the door for individuals or 
corporations to influence government decisions or receive 
government favours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberal Association recently 
received a letter from Extendicare, which notes that this firm 
has a practice of donating funds to political parties in provinces 
in which they have operations. The letter states that because the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party has questioned this NDP 
government’s dealings with Crown Life and because, and I 
quote, “Crown Life is a Regina-based company in which 
Extendicare has a major share holding, we will not provide 
support this year.” 
 
In essence, what Extendicare has said is, that if you don’t 
follow our direction, you won’t receive any political donations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a perfect example of the kind of financial 
blackmail we have been warning about. Will the minister 
explain if he believes that this kind of financial blackmail is 
appropriate? And I’ll pass a letter from Extendicare to the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I have stood in this House on 
June 6, June 7, June 10, June 11, and June 12. And all of my 
answers to all of the questions have been as follows: we have 
complied with the law. The law is perfectly clear and we’ve 
complied with it. We’ve been in compliance with the law since 
it was passed. 
 
I remind the members opposite that that law was passed in this 
House over the opposition of the Liberal Party at the time. We 
have complied with it. That is the end of it. 

Now we are prepared, as I have offered again and again, to 
make sure that the election law of this province is so clear that 
even you and your lawyers can understand it. You have said 
you don’t want that. Fine. We’re going to go ahead and do it 
anyway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  The law has been contravened. It’s in black and 
white. And, Mr. Minister, I took a bit of a lip-reading course 
since you proposed your comments to me yesterday  read my 
lips. Please read our lips: judicial inquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  The Saskatchewan Liberal Party is not in the 
practice of buying and selling favours. And if the New 
Democrats and Conservatives are fully prepared to clearly 
demonstrate that they are not, they should open their slush 
funds up to the public scrutiny. 
 
The minister can take a step in this direction by telling this 
House where Extendicare donations to the NDP are disclosed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I repeat again  please, 
Mr. Speaker, implore upon the member to listen to me  we 
are in compliance with the laws of this province. 
 
You are speaking to something else. You are speaking probably 
to a time down the road when the laws will be amended so it 
will say what you say it says. But the law doesn’t say, but the 
law doesn’t say what you say it says. The law is perfectly clear 
and we have complied with it. 
 
Now how many times, Mr. Speaker, am I going to have to stand 
in this House and give that answer to the member opposite? 
 
And if that’s not a good enough answer, then let’s work 
together to amend Bill 92, before this House, so that the law is 
perfectly clear so that even the members opposite, even the 
member from Wood River, can understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, we have a difference of opinion. 
And again I’ve been saying day after day, we believe we’re 
right, they believe they’re right; let’s get an independent 
opinion. What are they afraid of? Let’s call for an independent 
inquiry and clear this up. Let’s re-instil some confidence in the 
political system here in this province. 
 
The Premier has obviously heard the phrase: whoever pays the 
piper calls the tune. Until such time as there is full disclosure of 
the NDP and Conservative slush funds, one can only guess how 
many firms such as Extendicare are holding finances over the 
head of the current and previous government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents need and deserve to know 
that government decisions are not based . . . or influenced by  



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

political donations. Will the Premier make a commitment in this 
House today to order a judicial inquiry to examine the level of 
corruption that we may be dealing with and clear this matter up 
once and for all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday I cautioned the 
Leader of the Opposition that if he kept up on this line, one of 
these days he’s just spin out into outer space. I think today he’s 
done that. 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker, as I sit down, is the same one I gave 
when I first stood up  no. 
 

Minister of Labour’s Resignation 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions today are to the Premier or his designate. Mr. 
Premier, we’d like to ask you, do you think it’s appropriate for 
the Minister of Labour to retain . . . and remain in cabinet even 
though he has already another job? This is certainly an unusual 
situation, particularly when he won’t tell anyone what the new 
job is. 
 
Mr. Premier, doesn’t this create a potential conflict of interest 
 a minister remaining in the cabinet after already accepting 
another job? And in order to remove any threat of a conflict of 
interest, either real or perceived, we ask, Mr. Speaker: don’t you 
think, Mr. Premier, that the Labour minister should step down 
from cabinet immediately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’ll bring those concerns to the attention 
of the Premier, Mr. Speaker. I would say, although it is correct 
the hon. member points out that I have accepted another 
position, that position does not come into effect until July 3. 
 
I would further say that I can’t foresee any possible conflict of 
interest. If there was, I would take the normal course of events 
and absent myself from any discussions that would concern the 
particular topic being discussed. But in respect to the member, I 
will bring that to the Premier’s attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental for the Premier or his designate, and we do want 
to thank the member for his answer. I appreciate that kind of an 
approach to this problem. 
 
However, Mr. Premier, your government is clearly struggling 
with the issues of your union-preference tendering policy, and 
we would like to see this matter resolved before this legislative 
session ends. But your Labour minister has been a staunch 
defender of the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) in its present form. And this makes him a major 
stumbling block to any resolution to this issue. 
 
Yesterday the executive director of the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association said he looks forward to working with 
a new minister who might be more willing to work toward  

making changes to the CCTA. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have a lame-duck minister who is probably 
thinking more about his new job than his current one. Why 
don’t you take this opportunity to show that you are listening to 
the concerns of the non-union contractors and workers? Why 
don’t you immediately appoint a new minister who is 
committed to resolving the union-preference tendering policy 
problem before the end of this legislature ends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. All hon. members know that the 
Speaker can’t hear the answer even before it begins. I’ll ask all 
hon. members of the House to allow the . . . Order. Order, 
order. I’ll ask all members of the House to allow the minister to 
be heard in his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  As the member opposite knows, the 
Labour minister has done a very good job in this government 
from the first day of his appointment. But what the members 
opposite also know, is that this is a policy of the Crown 
Investments Corporation and a policy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, not just of the Department of Labour. 
 
And what the members also know is that the discussions that 
have been going on in the last number of weeks have been 
going on between the parties that have an effect on the 
agreement, not driven by government but driven by the parties 
themselves. And I wish the members would give credit to that 
fact and continue to support the work of those at the table who 
are looking for a better relationship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

McDowell Report 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. 
 
First of all I would like to congratulate the Liberals for 
following our example and agreeing to pay back their MLA pay 
hike. It only took them 71 days to come to this decision but, Mr. 
Speaker, I suppose it’s better late than never. 
 
Mr. Premier, this leaves one party standing alone at the trough, 
that being the NDP. It leaves one party leader standing alone at 
the trough and that’s you, Mr. Premier, the leader who promised 
that spending cuts would start at the top. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you follow the example set by our . . . that our 
party has set and that the Liberals have followed? Will you and 
your caucus members give up your $4,400 MLA pay increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would start 
out just by saying no, and to affirm that we would never want to 
make our mark by following your example on most things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The members know this is a pay cut, 
and I don’t know why you would pay back a pay cut. I mean 
there is just no logic to paying back a pay cut. You know that 
not only is it a reduction over the term but, Mr. Speaker, this is 
a reduction in every single year. The reduction exceeds . . . it 
turns out to be a net reduction considering all monies received, 
all monies paid. 
 
I can understand the Tories wanting to pay 4,000 each to get 
people to forget $15 billion in damage to this province. Maybe I 
can even understand the Liberals not feeling they’ve earned 
their pay for the people of Saskatchewan when they’ve done 
nothing to defend the province against the transfer cuts from the 
federal government. 
 
The member from Wood River should probably give back 
10,000, and the member from Thunder Creek should probably 
give back the whole works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Health Legislation 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I’m unable to hear even a 
single word that the hon. member from Rosthern has said in 
presenting his question to the House. Order! Order. And I ask 
all hon. members on both sides of the House . . . Order. Order! 
The Speaker is not seeking advice. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was about to the 
point to ask everyone in the House just to read my lips. 
 
My question is for the Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, in 
your letter to the outgoing Labour minister, you appear to have 
confirmed that your government is planning on bringing in 
another major health Bill this session. 
 
The health sector labour relations Act will result in sweeping 
changes to the health sector bargaining in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, is this Bill going to be introduced in this session, 
and if so, why would you leave such a major piece of 
legislation until so late in the legislative session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I thank the hon. member for his 
question. It is a very timely question indeed. Later this 
afternoon I’ll be talking with the House leaders of both parties. 
We want to have a copy of this Bill just as soon as possible. 
 
I tried to introduce, although briefly as it was, why the guests of 
mine were in the gallery this afternoon. And we wanted them to 
be here to show that there’s been a request from both the 
employer side and the employee side to come forward with 
legislation to help them sort out the jurisdictional issues within 
the health care districts throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we’ll be asking for later this afternoon is for 
unanimous consent by leave of the Assembly to have first 
reading of the Bill. And that way you will get a final copy of the  

Bill. And I’ll be talking to your House leaders later this 
afternoon. We recognize it’s late in the session that this is 
coming in, and the only way that we would do that is because 
all of the stakeholders immediately affected by the legislation 
have come forward in unanimous request to have this 
legislation come forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Prostitution 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
prostitution crackdown in Saskatoon this past week resulted in 
the arrests of 14 women, including two girls aged 14 and 17. 
These women are often the victims in the sex trade. They have 
been sexually and physically abused and often suffer from drug 
problems. Two of those arrested in Saskatoon last week are teen 
prostitutes. 
 
I find it to be extremely disturbing that more is not being done 
to target the johns. The system protects these men but often 
offers little help to the many children who are victimized 
through the prostitution trade. A few months ago, I asked the 
Justice minister to use his influence to pressure the courts to 
take a hard line with men arrested for soliciting young girls and 
boys. They should be charged with sexual assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Justice minister doing to encourage 
Saskatchewan Justice officials to target men who roam our 
streets to buy sex from children? These men are in fact 
pedophiles. Will the minister commit to treating them as 
pedophiles and let the world know what they are, and will he 
see to it that there is law enforcement that reflects zero 
tolerance for this criminal act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d like to thank the member for that 
question. The whole situation relating to child prostitution is 
very disturbing for all of us. The police have the rules set out in 
the Criminal Code and they can lay charges, and they do lay 
charges when they have the evidence. They also are very 
concerned about this, and I think it’s clear that they are using 
the tools that they do have to try to deal with a very difficult 
problem that includes many sectors of our society. 
 
As we know, in Saskatchewan, a number of the groups in both 
Saskatoon and Regina and other parts of the province have been 
working together on a sectoral basis, different people working 
together. And the question that the member is asking today 
relates to one piece of that whole puzzle. And I think 
practically, what she should be doing is assisting in working 
with all the people to come up with a solution for this difficult 
and disturbing problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am assisting in every 
way I know possible. That’s why I’m standing here today, in 
fact, presenting these questions. I think that at this point, the 
Minister of Justice has a lot more authority and ability to move  



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

ahead with this than I do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sick of hearing this government try and shrug 
off its responsibility to the people of this province and others. 
Many of the children selling their bodies on the streets are at the 
point of no return when they are arrested. They have been 
physically, emotionally, and psychologically beaten. Many are 
desperate for help to leave the streets, but the system is 
extremely inadequate. 
 
I am asking the minister to support proposals by groups in 
Regina and Saskatoon for the establishment of safe houses 
which would offer valuable, comprehensive treatment for child 
prostitutes rescued from the streets. I am asking once again, for 
the sake of our children who are crying out for help, will the 
minister immediately assist communities in setting up safe 
houses in Saskatoon and Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I appreciate the offer of assistance from 
the hon. member in this area. One of the most significant things 
that she could do would be to talk to the member in Ottawa who 
represents the same area that she does and work with the federal 
government, who has pulled out of this field and has left the 
province of Saskatchewan and primarily the department of 
services to finance most, if not . . . well not all the costs but 
probably 80 per cent of the costs of the services that are 
presently in Saskatoon. 
 
Those were started by federal programs, and I think that it 
would be of great assistance for that member to assist us in 
approaching the other members of her party to assist in solving 
this problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Round Table Meeting 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I get into 
my question for the minister of housing, I just want to make a 
point, a remark, to the member from Cannington in terms of the 
$4,000 payback that his caucus has agreed to pay back. 
Certainly myself, and I believe the Liberal caucus, will not be 
following the Tories on any financial path that they take. We’ve 
said this from day one, that we would do this, and we are doing 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  This question is to the minister of housing 
and Municipal Government, and it’s a letter from Joan 
Macdonald of Stony Rapids, and I quote from the letter: 
 

There was a northern round table meeting held in La 
Ronge, Saskatchewan, and there was absolutely no 
participation from the basin communities. And yet after we 
were promised a charter, which didn’t happen . . . and I’m 
wanting to see what type of minutes would come out of the 
meeting. And how can you call it a northern round table 
when we’re not welcome. We’re a hundred miles south of  

the North West Territory border and part of the Athabasca 
basin. 
 

Madam Minister, can you tell me why the far northern 
communities of Stony Rapids and others were totally excluded 
from the round table meeting you had in La Ronge? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I attended that meeting 
when the point was raised by actually a person from that area. 
And I think the reason why that they didn’t come was they 
looked at the travel costs in regards to the costs of flying from 
the far North into that area. And I think they had made that 
decision themselves. It was not that they were not invited. They 
were clearly invited to come to the meeting. And that was . . . I 
think they made that decision upon themselves. 
 
I know that the member had made a tremendous statement in 
regards to, let’s say another community in the far North, that 
they made a special trip to take the students down to Toronto, 
etc. and that type of thing. And the local communities make 
those types of decisions, Mr. Speaker. And I think that the next 
time around we’ll be looking at this question again when 
another round table is done in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I quote from 
the letter from Joan Macdonald. And that was one of the issues 
that she was going to bring up at this round table. They were 
promised to be flown down from their community down to La 
Ronge for this very important meeting, but that offer was taken 
back. 
 
However, Joan Macdonald writes in this letter, and I quote 
again: 
 

Why in 1996 are we still hauling water and pumping 
sewer? There are no subsidies on our groceries, freight, 
gas, construction materials, etc. There’s no recreation 
facilities for our people to utilize in their isolated 
communities. It costs $266 to fly one way for one person 
and get out of the community into the nearest city of Prince 
Albert. (And she further goes on) I believe I heard the 
government say that health and education was their number 
one priority, and we feel very neglected. 
 

Mr. Speaker, can you tell me today . . . and I’ll ask the Minister 
of Municipal Affairs, or Minister of Northern Affairs, why 
Fond-du-Lac or Stony Rapids haven’t got water and sewer to 
this day? Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, in regards to the person that 
was mentioned, Joan Macdonald, I did speak to her after this 
issue of the northern round table was done. And I did meet her 
at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
special meeting that was held. I think it was approximately a 
couple of weeks ago. So Joan Macdonald and also the mayor  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

were represented and they presented this issue with me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to the health issue, we must recognize 
that in regards to the health care developments, we’re looking at 
approximately an $11 million facility right in Stony Rapids. 
When we’re looking at the situation of capital costs in this 
province and we’re in a tough situation, etc., again not only 
have we built in regards to the facility in La Ronge, but also in 
Stony Rapids, right in Stony Rapids, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 
a plus in regard to the government. 
 
Of course the issue of sewer and water  and the fact that we 
have put in 20 million over 90 communities, etc., over the past 
four years  I did talk about this issue last time, Mr. Speaker. 
And of course we will be dealing with these issues in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Clearwater Forest Products Signs Partnership 
with Government 

 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today it 
was my pleasure to sign a partnership agreement on behalf of 
the province with Clearwater Forest Products. 
 
The objective of this agreement is to reduce trucking costs for 
the company by allowing them to use more efficient vehicles. In 
return, Clearwater Forest Resources has agreed to return 50 per 
cent of their savings to the Department of Highways for use in 
improving our northern road system. 
 
This partnership agreement will make the Clearwater mill more 
viable and helps to sustain long-term jobs. It also benefits the 
travelling public by providing new revenues for northern road 
upgrading. 
 
This 10-year agreement has grown out of a temporary 
agreement for the 1995-96 logging season. In the last 12 
months, at least $800,000 has been accumulated in savings. 
Half of that money will be used to finance improvements to 
Highway No. 55 in the Green Lake area. 
 
The partnership agreement also creates spin-off benefits for our 
provincial economy in that the trailers that are being used for 
this hauling program are constructed by Bee Line Welding in 
Prince Albert. This trailer configuration is a new product line 
for Bee Line and opens up possibilities of sales to other 
companies, both in Saskatchewan and outside of our province. 
 
This partnership agreement also utilizes the latest in truck 
technology, like central tire inflation, air-ride suspensions, and 
anti-lock brakes to provide these vehicles with excellent safety 
and handling characteristics. Central tire inflation will also 
allow truck drivers to minimize road damage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see partnerships like this as the way of the 
future. Working together with industry, we can benefit both 
economic development and the general public. I would like to 
thank Clearwater Forest Resources and the staff at my  

department for designing an agreement that promotes economic 
development and improves our highway system for our public. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to respond to 
the ministerial statement, and certainly on behalf of the Liberal 
caucus, I want to congratulate and commend the company that 
we’re speaking about, Clearwater Forest Products, in terms of 
taking the initiative to put this extra revenue into a fund for the 
benefits of the travelling public by providing new revenues for 
northern road upgrading. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we’re probably aware through time here, 
and certainly my time as MLA, we have been dragging up the 
issues of roads in northern Saskatchewan. There are a 
tremendous amount of roads that are in very poor condition, 
and I think we should as legislators really commend companies 
like the one we’re speaking about today on their initiative. And 
certainly the savings that they have of $800,000 and half of 
that, which is $400,000, can certainly be of some benefit to the 
northern people and certainly to the northern roads. 
 
And I would also say that it’s a sad day in the province’s history 
when you see companies that see the roads in a very poor 
condition saying, well something should be done about that. 
The government isn’t doing anything about it, so we will do the 
extra initiative and do the extra work. 
 
So in essence, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely support the Clearwater 
Forest Products Company for doing a tremendous job in 
recognizing the challenges of northern Saskatchewan 
communities and certainly the roads. And I also point out that 
not only does the minister need one company doing this, the 
minister may need 50 companies doing this to finally fix those 
roads in northern Saskatchewan  roads that they have 
neglected for many, many years. 
 
And I would suggest that they also set up a separate fund, Mr. 
Speaker, one fund for a washout fund, another fund for the ruts 
fund, another fund for the gravel fund. I think we need about 50 
funds, Mr. Speaker, to . . . and a helicopter fund. We need about 
50 funds, Mr. Speaker, to try and fix the problems of poor roads 
in northern Saskatchewan. And we do hope that the entire 
money they’re speaking about here gets utilized for northern 
roads right directly at the source. And we have a heck of a long 
ways to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I sincerely congratulate this company, and I urge the 
government to try, in the very least, match what they’re trying 
to do. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too would like 
to respond to the ministerial statement and the agreement that 
he has come to in northern Saskatchewan. 
 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

We want to go on record of course, first of all, saying that 
obviously we do support the initiatives of improved 
transportation, and we certainly do support any initiative 
designed at improving trucks and the quality of equipment that 
are used on roads for hauling. Any of those initiatives, 
obviously we support that. 
 
Unfortunately though from our perspective, this raises several 
new questions  new to the Assembly and to the people, but 
not new to our party because these issues were raised with us by 
the construction association people last year and the year 
before. 
 
There are serious concerns about the way that these kind of 
agreements go into effect and the precedents that might be 
established in so doing. Now the questions that come to mind 
of course, first of all, if you’re going to have a sweetheart deal 
for the trucking company in one area, is that deal now going to 
be extended to other companies and to other groups? Will this 
be a segregated situation? Or will all of the people in the 
province who are in this industry be allowed to use these kind 
of vehicles? 
 
Now obviously if this company can save money by using 
different vehicles, then those vehicles must be designed in such 
a way as to provide a larger payload for the same amount of 
travel, and that gives them more profit for each trip. Now if you 
do that, you have to be looking at overloading because the 
safety features that are mentioned are only that  safety 
features. They do not provide for more rubber on the highway, 
as I can see it, or those kinds of things. So it’s allowing for 
either longer loads or heavier loads or a combination of both. 
 
Now if that is well and good on this road, is it also then good 
for the rest of the contractors in the province to be able to go 
ahead and make those same savings? 
 
It also opens the door, Mr. Speaker, to some abuse, because it 
obviously now appears that we have a precedent set where a 
company is willing to pay the Department of Highways cash in 
order to be able to break the rules or bend the rules. Now does 
that mean the Department of Highways and the government 
now can impose rules on industry, and then in return we will 
allow you to bend or break the rules if you pay cash? Mr. 
Speaker, these are serious questions. 
 
The next question is, if you’re building the road, does that mean 
that the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement kicks into 
place? We were told by the contractors that on Highway 55 and 
those highways, if there was reconstruction, the government 
was only going to allow one group to bid on the construction. 
There also opens another can of worms that this government 
has to deal with. The construction association did not agree 
with that, and we have very serious reservations about this 
policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, earlier today I gave a 
notice of motion for reading of a . . . first reading of a Bill, the 
Bill that I mentioned in introductions and also in question  

period, the reorganization of labour relations between the health 
sector employers and employees. 
 
And after some consultation, I’d like to ask today, by leave of 
the Assembly, that An Act respecting the Reorganization of 
Labour Relations between Health Sector Employers and 
Employees be now introduced and read a first time, so that the 
Bill can be distributed to the members of the opposition  the 
official version  so they can have a look at it. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of 
Labour Relations between Health Sector 

Employers and Employees 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I would move, Mr. Speaker, that by 
leave of the Assembly, that An Act respecting the 
Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector 
Employers and Employees be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Municipal Board Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, I’ve 
just about wound all my questions up from other sessions and 
then this morning. One more I have is  and I’m thinking 
about section 9(e) in the Bill  I guess what I’m asking is, 
what other matters does the minister have in mind when she 
wants to give the powers to pass regulations respecting any 
other matters that the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers 
necessary or desirable to carry out the intent of subsection 8. 
 
Can you give us an explanation of what things that is added in 
there for? It seems to give a broad piece of control just by that 
last clause. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, could I ask the 
member opposite to clarify the section to which he refers. 
Because we’re trying to check his reference and it seems to be 
completely out of context. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  9(e), Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
it’s our mistake; you’re not going to find it. We’re on the wrong 
part of it here. 
 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

One other comment I’d like to make before I wrap up, Madam 
Minister, is that we find it very hard to support these pieces of 
legislation when we are leaving so much to do with regulations. 
A lot of the intent of this whole Bill is going to be brought in 
when the regulations are brought forward, and the explanations 
that we have got this morning to do with the regulation part of 
it, are absolutely next to nil. 
 
So in many cases here we’re not really getting what the intent of 
the Bill will be and we’ll find it very hard to support. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the intent of the 
Bill is to provide the framework and then the mechanics of that 
intent expressed in the Bill are carried out in regulations. And 
regulations are never before legislators at the time they approve 
the Bill because the mechanics are worked out later, after the 
legislation itself is in place. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I realize 
what you’re saying, but I would really wonder how you would 
expect the parties involved such as SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), and in the case of the 
urban Act, SUMA, and ourselves, and for that matter the third 
party, to actually discuss and approve or disapprove of any part 
of this when really the intent is not here because the regulations 
are not involved. 
 
So it makes it very hard for us. And I can see why SARM and 
SUMA are very hesitant to really endorse any or all parts of 
this, because they really don’t know what is coming down the 
road. And it’s hard to properly discuss. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I need to correct the 
reflection that the member opposite has made in that SUMA 
and SARM as municipal . . . or organizations representing 
municipalities have any reservations about these amendments 
that are proposed to the legislation, because we have been in 
close contact and consultation with them through the entire 
process and they do understand the intent, and they have no 
hesitation in supporting the changes that we’re bringing 
forward for the most part, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
your last comment makes me wonder  and your comment was 
that SARM and SUMA are all happy and they think everything 
you’re doing is hunky-dory here. Then it makes me wonder why 
did they phone me up here just a day or so back and ask if I 
could come out to a public meeting of several municipalities to 
explain to them what the legislation is going to do? 
 
Now if they understand it so well and they’re so trustworthy of 
what you’re doing in your regulations, how come they’re asking 
me to come out and explain what’s going to happen to them? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
opposite should explain exactly who it is that’s making the  

request to him. If it’s a group of municipalities in his 
constituency, fair enough. I don’t think it’s accurate for him to 
reflect that the membership of SUMA or SARM is asking him 
to go and provide explanations. Because we are in the process 
now of attending the 12 regional meetings of SUMA and 
SARM that are regularly scheduled for this time of year. 
 
We’ve already attended two of the SUMA regional meetings. 
The SARM regionals have yet to commence. But I will be in 
personal attendance at every single one of those 12 meetings 
that will be held throughout the province. And we are perfectly 
prepared to provide any explanations or answer any questions 
that are put to us, and we have been doing that. And we’ve had 
a very positive response, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, I beg to differ with you. You haven’t had a very good 
response from SARM or SUMA. You haven’t had a very good 
response from anybody this year. 
 
If they were so responsive to everything that you say and if they 
were so happy with everything you’ve done, how come they 
lobbied so hard to force you to take your most important piece 
of legislation off of the order paper? The proof is in the testing 
of the pudding and the pudding’s already been tasted. And I 
think possibly your whole argument has been defeated by the 
actions of the people that you talk about. 
 
Madam Minister, later on as we go through this Bill, and even 
though once again  as I said earlier — there are some things 
that are good about the Bill, but there are some things that need 
to be changed. And we will warn you that  and I think you’ve 
had a copy already  we will be introducing an amendment to 
this Bill probably in about clause 24. So having noted that, I 
suggest to you that you have your officials examine it because I 
really believe that we can help you to save part of the day at 
least by doing the right thing so that you can in fact go to the 
municipalities and claim to be open, honest, and accountable, as 
you like to say your government is. 
 
So if you’re open, honest, and accountable, then put into 
writing the things that you are claiming will never happen, the 
things that you are claiming people have nothing to worry 
about. You should have no problem in simply putting in clearly 
in English, in simple, non-disputable words, exactly what your 
intent is going to be. If you are so trustworthy, why would you 
want to leave things in a grey area where they can be 
misinterpreted or misunderstood. Simply clear up the whole 
matter by putting in there exactly what needs to be done. 
 
And that’s what we’re going to help you to do when we 
introduce our amendment in clause 24. In the meantime, 
Madam Minister, I have a list of questions that municipalities 
have been sending in for us, and I want to ask them of you 
today so that you can go on record, so that we can send 
Hansard back to these people to show them that you have had 
the opportunity to answer, and then they can judge for 
themselves what your answers are. 
 
My first question, Madam Minister, could you provide me with 
a brief explanation of exactly how this Bill will affect the oil  



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

companies and where their property taxes will go. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I just simply can’t 
allow the member opposite to ramble on with this wild rhetoric, 
with widespread misrepresentations of what the intent, the 
purpose, the understanding of the amendments to this Act 
entail. 
 
There has been broad consultation on the intent and on each 
and every proposed amendment. His last comment as to how 
the oil industry will be affected has absolutely nothing to do 
with the changes in this Bill, has to do with tax policy and with 
the operations of the independent Assessment Management 
Agency, SAMA, and is not relative in any sense to the 
amendments that are before us. 
 
The amendments that are before us are to facilitate the work of 
the independent agency and to allow some flexibility for 
municipalities to deal with the changes that will be happening. 
But in terms of the tax policy itself, these provisions have 
nothing to do with that. 
 
What we are doing is being enabling. We are respecting the 
autonomy of local government in this province, unlike the 
members opposite, I guess. And I would differ with the member 
and say that we do have strong support for the changes that are 
being proposed. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, you’re entitled to live 
in your own little dream world, but you do not have very much 
support. In fact I would say it would be probably less than 4 per 
cent in the province, as I can judge it from the kind of calls that 
we’ve been getting. 
 
And the only thing that is wild about this whole process, in 
terms of rhetoric, is the snow job that you’re trying to feed the 
people of this province when you say that this Bill is rather 
inconsequential, and it really doesn’t matter, and that you’ve 
got support. 
 
But I’m going to go on, because the reality is that I’ve been 
asked to ask these questions and they want to hear your 
answers, they don’t want to hear my answers. I ask the 
questions right now. 
 
What sort of dollar figure does your department have to show 
regarding how much revenue is lost from oil companies to 
municipal governments when you finish with this process? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I couldn’t identify a 
question there that is begging to be answered. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Your answer is 
duly noted. We also want to know  from the rural 
municipalities that are worried that revenues will go from oil 
companies straight to the provincial government after you finish 
with the reassessment program and the amendments that you’re 
bringing into the Acts  so where is the revenue going to be 
made up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman falling from . . .  

flowing from these amendments, there is assessment policy 
which SAMA is responsible for. There is tax policy which has 
been developed with extensive consultations. Municipalities, 
local governments, will have a great deal of flexibility in 
dealing with the changes that are proposed to bring the 
assessment up to date, which is sorely needed after 30 years. 
 
The system needs to be modernized. Municipalities recognize 
that  85 per cent of municipalities, members of SAMA, voted 
at the SAMA annual meeting in 1995, September, which I 
attended, to go ahead with these changes. And what we are 
doing is facilitating, Mr. Chairman, the wishes of local 
government in this province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  If I heard you right, Madam Minister, you 
said there was a vote at a SAMA meeting. I don’t think 
municipalities, urban or municipal, really would want to be tied 
to anything that was ever done in terms of a vote at a SAMA 
meeting. It is not representative and it does not truly reflect the 
feelings and the wishes of the people of this province. 
 
Madam Minister, you talk about the availability of flexibility, 
and that leads me to the next question. Could you  and I’m 
presuming that when you’re talking about flexibility that you’re 
talking about variable mill rate provisions  so could you give 
me a brief explanation of the variable mill rate provision in Bill 
71. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I wish to 
clarify that the meeting to which I refer, where 85 per cent of 
the member municipalities present voted in favour of 
proceeding with reassessment along the lines that we are now 
facilitating through these amendments, was not the SAMA 
board. It was the annual general meeting of the total 
membership of SAMA, being all municipalities, rural and 
urban, in this province. So this was an open membership 
meeting at which every municipality in this province, urban and 
rural, had the opportunity to be represented. And I think that 
there was, if not 100 per cent, very close to it at that meeting. 
 
Then on the explanation that the member asks for on the 
variable mill rate. Well there will be several tax tools. One will 
be . . . well first of all, the province will set the property tax 
classes and the percentages of value that will be deemed to be 
used, if other than 100 per cent, for the various classes. That is 
the role of the province. 
 
Then on top of that, municipalities will be given the opportunity 
to apply a variable mill rate to those various property classes. 
They will also have the option of having a uniform mill rate, but 
they have that; they use that now. But the variable mill rate is 
added. The facility to impose a minimum tax is added. And the 
facility to phase in changes over a three-year period is also a 
new feature of the system. 
 
So there will be flexibility and avenues for municipalities, for 
local governments, to use their discretion to suit the tax regime 
in their area to those unique features. Of course in some 
municipalities the oil and gas industry is not a factor, the same 
as in some municipalities tourism or resorts or the forest 
industry is not a factor. 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

Saskatchewan is very diverse and that’s why there a wide range 
of tax tools to use so that local governments will be able to use 
their discretion to create a package of tools that will suit their 
particular circumstances and the circumstances of their 
ratepayers, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
just to step backwards a little bit. I suggest that you are 
misrepresenting the question that was asked at that SAMA 
meeting. When you asked people from rural municipalities and 
urban municipalities, do you agree that we should update the 
assessment process, obviously people will say yes. 
 
When you then say that that meant that they agreed to changes 
of the formulas, I say you have misrepresented the question that 
was asked and the vote that was taken. And people from the 
country and from the cities will judge you on your answer. You 
have misrepresented what they had agreed to. 
 
Madam Minister, the people that have been calling to tell me 
that, in fact they believe that you have misrepresented the 
process right from the beginning and all through want us to ask 
you some more questions. Prior to this Act, did your 
government commit to allowing rural municipalities the right to 
use a variable rate structure? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I must apologize. I just 
didn’t catch the wording that the member used. He asked the 
question: what did municipalities do, and I’m sorry, I simply 
didn’t hear. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I’ll repeat the 
question because I think probably the minister didn’t hear. Prior 
to this Act, did your government commit to allowing rural 
municipalities the right to use a variable rate structure? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 
question the member opposite asks is yes. Because as the tax 
policy discussion has evolved, first of all, cities, urban 
municipalities, identified that they wanted to have a variable 
mill rate. At first, rural municipalities said that they felt more 
comfortable  and I’m going back quite a number of months 
now, if not years, in the consultation and development of the 
system  that rural municipalities that first expressed a view, 
that they would prefer to stick with a uniform mill rate. 
 
Then as the consultations evolved and there was more 
discussion about how the system might work, rural 
municipalities then decided that if urban municipalities were to 
have access to the use of a variable mill rate, then they would 
want to have the same facility. 
 
(1500) 
 
So we are responding, in these amendments, to the wishes of 
local governments in this province. This is . . . the role of the 
provincial government now, beyond the establishment of 
property classes and the percentages of value, our role now is 
simply to provide a framework for SAMA, the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency, independent of government 
and municipalities who own the system, to do their work.  

That’s our role and that’s all we’re doing. 
 
And also I have to correct the member opposite on his 
observations about the annual meeting and what the wishes of 
municipalities were and what it was that they voted on, because 
that meeting was held on September 29, 1995 to my 
recollection, at the Hotel Saskatchewan and I was present 
through the whole meeting. I heard all of the presentations from 
the Chair and from other speakers. 
 
I heard, in the breaks and at lunch time, conversations among 
the members who were there and I was present for the vote. I 
know exactly what happened there and I am satisfied that what 
is happening here today and the tax policy that has evolved, 
evolved from the wishes of a majority, a vast majority  85 per 
cent or more  of the municipalities in this province. 
 
Now mind you there may be . . . if there’s 85 per cent in favour, 
that means there were some who were not. And maybe those are 
the ones that you’re hearing from. But it is the government’s 
job to represent the majority view after having full and free 
consultations, and that, Mr. Chairman, is being expressed in the 
actions that we’re taking here today in introducing and asking 
support for these amendments. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, you also told us that you had support for your service 
district Act. You also ran a few people in from different areas 
of the province, both urban and rural, to support you and say 
that yes, we are in support of what the minister is doing. And 
obviously again you can play with numbers and play with 
figures and I’ll suggest to you that yes, probably 15 per cent of 
the population out there supported the service district Act. The 
85 per cent that did not support it, you didn’t bother bringing in 
at that time. 
 
But they clearly showed you what they thought of your Bill 
with their united effort to lobby against it, and their 
determination resulted of course, in your having to pull this Bill 
off the order sheet. I think that’s great. I think that your courage 
to do that should be commended. 
 
But it also proves to us that we can’t trust your word when you 
say that you have the majority of people supporting your views. 
You have proven clearly that you didn’t on the service district 
Act and we believe that you clearly don’t in the changes that 
you’re making to the assessment process in our province. 
 
I believe that people asked for some things to be changed. They 
never, ever dreamt that they were going to have the baby thrown 
out with the bath water. And I use that metaphor because it’s 
the only one that comes to mind. You’ve overkilled the 
situation; you’re putting in far, far more than anybody ever 
anticipated or asked for. 
 
Madam Minister, I do have to get on with these questions 
because these people will want to read the answers that you 
give. In spite of your claim, we need to know, how will these 
variable rates work? And who will set the rate scale? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first of all before I  



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

answer the question, I’m really getting weary of the members 
opposite whistling through the cemetery and digging up issues 
that are dead. And I think that The Service Districts Act, we 
never said that we had large majority support for it. We said at 
first that it was being treated in a somewhat different manner 
than a normal Bill in that it was removed from the legislative 
review cycle for further consultation. 
 
Certainly I became aware during that time that there was wide 
misinterpretation of what was intended. And we responded to 
that. We ended up with a much better situation because 
cooperation  at least we think  that cooperation beats 
legislation any day. And we think that the memorandum of 
understanding that was reached between SUMA and SARM 
and the provincial government to sit down and work 
collectively on all of the issues that are before us was a much 
better solution. 
 
And so we did the right thing. And we can be counted on to do 
the right thing because we do honestly consult with people and 
when . . . We don’t just talk to them  we listen to them. When 
they speak, we hear. And if what they want reflects good policy, 
then we act. And that’s what we did. So I just wanted to make 
that point. 
 
And I also wanted to assure the member opposite that we have 
an understanding with what is called the local government 
federation. SUMA representing urban municipalities, SARM 
representing rural municipalities, and the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) representing school boards has 
formed this loose affiliation that they call the local government 
federation. They produced a joint paper some months ago that 
reflects their joint wishes. And I can ensure the member 
opposite that the terms of these amendments are reflected in 
that paper. 
 
Now how could we possibly be more responsive than by acting 
in accordance with a paper produced by those three 
organizations  all elected people at the local level in this 
province? That is what we are responding to. And we are 
confident that that is what they want and that they are going to 
have the common sense to be able to use those tools. 
 
And the question the member asked, is how would the variable 
mill rate be used and at what variations will there be and what 
flexibility will there be? Who will make the decisions? 
 
Local councils will make the decisions, and we have confidence 
that they will make the right decisions. And that expresses, Mr. 
Chairman, the confidence that we have in those people elected 
at the local level to determine their own destiny and to serve the 
people that elected them in the best possible way. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I would suggest to you that it is not only unfair but foolhardy 
for you to listen to anybody when you are taking advice on how 
to interpret the views and the wishes of the local people in local 
governments, either urban or rural. It would be desperately 
wrong of you to take opinions from anybody except the annual 
general meetings of these organizations you call SUMA and 
SARM. That’s the only place where you have a truly  

representative, democratic vote on the issues. 
 
And I suggest to you that if you put these amendments to a vote 
one by one at a SARM or SUMA convention, some of them 
would pass and some of them would not pass. Because you 
have put together a package including some things that people 
have asked for, and then slipped in a whole bunch of other 
things that you want to have done. Because as you say, you 
consult, you listen, and then you do as you please. You’ve 
become a true New Democrat in the government of today. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to repeat the question because I didn’t 
get an answer that is reflective of what your department is 
attempting to do. The municipalities want to know who will set 
the rate scales in this variable rate process. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, with exception, I did 
answer the question. I said that municipal councils would be 
responsible for using their discretion in how they use the tax 
tools that are at their disposal. They have the wisdom and the 
experience to do that, and we have the confidence that they can 
do that appropriately. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Then, Madam Minister, what safeguards are 
there for racial discrimination, personalities being discriminated 
against, and other forms of discrimination? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the province will 
set property tax classes and percentages of value. Municipalities 
will apply either uniform or variable, depending on their 
preference, mill rates to those classes. They won’t be able to  
I don’t even like to use the word discriminate  they won’t be 
able to use discrimination any more than they do now. 
 
It could be said now, under the current system, that for instance 
on appeals, that it’s possible that boards of revision could use 
discrimination in allowing or not allowing appeals, that kind of 
thing. 
 
I think that most, if not all, local elected councils are above that 
sort of thing. And so I’m not sure exactly what kind of a 
situation the member opposite might be referring to, but again 
we have confidence in local councils to manage their affairs. 
And they have, if they manage improperly, to face the same test 
as we do  except more often  at the ballot box, being that 
rural municipal elections, being held on a staggered basis, have 
some of their members up for re-election each and every year, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, excuse me, I think you’d make a good used car 
salesman, because everything that you say, you say you think, 
you don’t say I know, or I’m going to make it clear; it’s always 
you think or we have faith in. Well this old trust-me syndrome 
probably is what’s gotten our world into a lot of trouble in a lot 
of areas in a lot of times. 
 
So we don’t trust you. We want you to definitively spell out 
how your process is going to work. Because we know very well 
that the record of your government is not to be kind to rural 
Saskatchewan or to urban centres in many areas. 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

But, Madam Minister, I do have to get on with these questions. 
I’m concerned about what will happen to producers’ share of 
local taxes. Are you going to place a cap on the rate in which 
individuals can have their taxes increased in a single year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 
question is no, because there are no such caps now. There never 
have been. Municipalities set their priorities, set their budget, 
and base their mill rate on that. And there are no caps now. And 
there are, of course, wide variations in the mill rates  school 
mill rates or municipal mill rates  throughout the province. 
 
But I want to read, for the benefit of the member opposite, from 
page 24 of Bill No. 71, about the variable mill rate. It says this 
 it’s new section 330.3: 
 

The following section is added after section 330.2: 
 
Mill rate factors 

330.3(1) A council may, by bylaw, set mill rate factors 
(that’s another word, definition, for variable mill rates) 
that are to be multiplied by the rate established pursuant 
to section 258 and clause 330(1)(a), or subsections 15(2) 
and (3), section 259 and clause 330(1)(a), for the 
purpose of establishing the levy for a taxable 
assessment. 
 
(2) A mill rate factor may be made applicable to a class 
of assessment of land, improvements or both established 
by regulations made pursuant to this section. 
 
(3) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 
regulations: 
 
(a) setting classes of assessment of land, improvements 
or both for the purposes of this section; 
(b) respecting limits on mill rate factors that may be set 
by a council; (or) 
(c) prescribing classes of assessment of land, 
improvements or both for which a mill rate factor may 
not be set. 
 
(4) No council shall fail to comply with any regulations 
made pursuant to subsection (3). 

 
And so I think that sets out — I know that sets out — very 
clearly, for someone who wishes to read it, what the powers of 
local councils are with respect to this matter, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
most of the time it’s good to have power in the hands of local 
people. But if those powers include the ability to treat different 
taxpayers in different ways, then there is a potential for abuse in 
the system. 
 
If your land falls into different classes because first . . . And you 
can correct me if I’m wrong. Perhaps I have a hog operation on 
my land. I may be classified as an intensive hog operation. That 
would be a class. If I have another quarter section that I grow 
wheat on, it’ll go into probably cereal production class, and 
that’ll be a class, a different class. If I  

happen to have a feedlot on another quarter of land that feeds 
out beef cattle, that’ll probably be another class, a different kind 
of intensive livestock, other than hogs. 
 
Then tell me . . . And of course if I’m in oil industry, I’ll be in a 
different class. And I guess if I have a small business in the 
country selling antiques, I’ll probably have a different class. 
And I suppose maybe then, because you also include 
improvements in the definitions of the things that may be 
classified, that also can include my farmhouse. If I build a new 
farmhouse, that’ll go into a special class. 
 
Now if I decide to put a new set of granaries on my farm for 
grain, maybe that’ll become a new kind of class. Maybe if I 
decide to store my machinery on one quarter in the winter 
months rather than others, that’ll become a class because that is 
my machinery storing quarter. So I’ve got a whole bunch of 
different classes. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now tell me, Madam Minister, suppose the council is elected of 
six hog producers in the area and they all have decided that they 
don’t particularly like beef producers and they decide to 
increase the mill rate on all beef production improvements and 
classes. What is to stop them from doing that, other than the 
electoral process where you would hope those councillors might 
get, I suppose, defeated in the future? 
 
But aren’t you leaving an awful lot of time in between for 
people to be discriminated against and to be hurt while this 
class system goes into effect, where you have no caps, no 
limits, and no regulations that guarantees that the people will 
use the system fairly and equitably across the board? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important 
to refer back again to the sections of the Act that I read which 
says the Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations. 
And I have said that we will be, as a province, using our 
responsibility to establish classes of land, classes of property, 
and percentages of value. And it also says that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council may make regulations respecting limits on 
mill rate factors that may be set up by a council. 
 
I want to refer to some of the discussions that have happened 
during the consultations, and to assure the member that the 
number of property classes  while it hasn’t been completely 
fine-tuned yet and has not been announced  that is proposed 
to be set by the government for these purposes is very, very 
broad. 
 
For instance, there would be five  one would be agriculture; 
one would be residential; one would be seasonal property; one 
would be commercial and industrial; and one would be resource 
production industry. There wouldn’t be 10 classes of 
agricultural land such as the member is talking about, and using 
his very fertile imagination, that there would be land on hog 
farms, dairy farms, chicken farms, asparagus farms, land with 
only granaries on it. I mean this is in your wildest dreams. 
 
At the current time we only have arable land. Classes are arable  



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

land, where the assessment is based upon the productivity 
indexes that I’m sure the member is familiar with, and the other 
is range land, or unimproved land. 
 
There’s not a large variation from the current system in terms of 
classes that we plan to establish. So the member can be assured 
that there will be no such range of classes which will make it so 
complicated and difficult for local councils to cope. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for the 
compliment. I want you to know that I have always been happy 
that everything about me is very fertile. And I don’t give in 
easily to nightmares or bad dreams so I’m not really too worried 
about those things either. 
 
But I am concerned the reality . . . that you continue to tell us 
that we should take comfort in the fact that you say things may 
be done. And that's supposed to mean, of course, that they may 
not be done. But it also doesn’t alleviate the 50 per cent 
probability that they may in fact be done. And of course I think 
I can get better odds than that at the casino down here. 
 
The reality is, Madam Minister, that once you put these things 
into effect, under law, they are in fact going to probably happen 
some day. No question in my mind whatsoever. If you don’t do 
it, the next minister will. You’re opening the door to abuse and 
to all kinds of problems and we’re going to have a nightmare 
figuring this mess all out. And in time, certain individual 
groups are going to find themselves forced out of agriculture 
perhaps, or forced out of certain kind of businesses. 
 
We’ve seen examples of discrimination being applied to what 
seemed to be normal, ordinary laws in the past. You know that 
as well as I do. It will continue in the future. It’s a human 
problem. We’ll never solve those kind of problems 100 per 
cent. It’s just one of those things we have to live with. But we 
don’t have to open the door to make it just a hundred per cent 
more probability. We can limit those probabilities to the kinds 
of things where maybe you have the 1 per cent chance of error 
instead of a 99 per cent chance of error. And that’s what you’re 
doing here. You’re opening up a 99 per cent chance of error. 
 
But I want to go back, Madam Minister, to some of the 
statements you just made with regards to the classifications. 
And just to get a little more clarification, let’s just deal with a 
couple of things that most people really understand, and that 
would be like farm land versus pasture land. 
 
The concerns that people have been expressing to me is that 
they would like to know about ranchers and farmers and the 
way classification is going to work for them. Could you provide 
me with a brief explanation of how pasture land and grain land 
would differ in classification and how the classification process 
would affect the taxation, as compared to the way it’s taxed 
now? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it is proposed that 
there would be one class for agricultural land and then the 
differential could be made by using a variable mill rate; for 
instance, a lower mill rate for non-arable range land than there 
is for productive cultivated land, in much the same way, Mr.  

Chairman, as the assessment system works now, where the 
assessment is based on the productivity for the production of 
wheat, being the staple crop. And we had this discussion the 
other day, about specialty crops and so forth. But there isn’t a 
radical change. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, the members opposite, instead of making 
people worry . . . of course there’s some apprehension. The 
changes are long overdue; we haven’t changed the system for 
30 years. 
 
And instead of digging up fears, imagining the worst potential 
problems there are, the members opposite should be positive 
and get on board and reassure people that they will be able to 
cope with this, that it will be a fairer system at the end of the 
day. Because that is the objective of the whole exercise, and 
being negative and dreaming up potential problems that never 
will happen and scaring people, is not responsible, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, How soon 
compliments turn to the other side. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m hoping that we won’t be too irresponsible 
by asking you questions, but the truth of the matter is that when 
you suggest that we should climb on board whatever it is you’re 
floating, I’m afraid we just can’t do that because we don’t agree 
with what you’re doing. 
 
So I guess we’ll have to take this, as you call it, irresponsible 
approach and try to find out for the people out in 
Saskatchewan’s rural and urban communities exactly how your 
new policies are going to affect their lives. Or whether in fact it 
might be time for some of these people to say, as thousands and 
I guess maybe you could even stretch that to hundreds of 
thousands have done in the past, and simply pack their bags and 
leave the province. 
 
Is this whole process going to end up so complicated, so 
discriminatory, that some classes of people, some races of 
people, will have to leave our province? That is a very real 
question that people are asking, and the answers you’re giving 
are comforting no one. There has been absolutely no comfort in 
any answer you have given me that makes me think that if I was 
a Hutterite in Saskatchewan, that I’d have very much of a 
chance of surviving without paying a penalty for the fact that I 
wear a black hat. Now I hate to get right down to the bare bones 
of it, but that’s what it sounds like. 
 
We also have the problems, Madam Minister, that we talked to 
you yesterday about, or the day before or whatever it was, about 
the example of the beef producers who have to compete for 
grassland. Now they found themselves, in many parts of 
Saskatchewan, competing against the monies that were brought 
in through native land claims. And I don’t know why native 
people want to buy grassland and not farm land, and I guess in 
some cases they buy farm land, but in our area they have 
concentrated on buying just grassland. So we have to deal with 
what I know about. 
 
And you can talk about the rest and that’s fair, but the reality is  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

in our area, grassland is calculated to be at a certain value in 
proportion to how many cattle can be run on that land, and how 
many calves. And the ranchers in the area have figured out a 
rather unique formula that I just don’t have written down here, 
but they do have a rather unique formula of deciding that so 
many cows on a quarter section relates to how much you can 
afford to pay for that property. They don’t go by the assessment 
base so much on that as grain and cereal farmers do. 
 
I’m not sure why that has evolved, but it’s something that has 
happened out in rural Saskatchewan in the south-west. And I 
think it’s rather a general rule for beef producers throughout the 
province. And probably it comes also into play in Alberta and 
other places. 
 
Now the thing is though, that because the native people had 
these large sums of money and were anxious to buy land, they 
were prepared to pay far more than market value, and that’s fair 
ball. The people that were selling probably are pretty happy to 
get the extra price. Unfortunately though for all the ranchers 
who existed who are not buying or selling their ranches, now 
are going to have their taxes determined on those 
super-escalated prices of somewhat of a one-time unique 
situation, not a fair market value over time, not a fair market 
value in anybody’s wildest imagination, as you like to use the 
term. The truth of the matter is that this is a glitch in the 
process. 
 
Native people won’t be paying four times the price for land 
probably for ever because their land claim monies, once they’re 
settled, will be spent. They’ll be gone. And when that happens, 
then things will settle down. But now, in 1994, you say is your 
trigger year, that’s the year when land prices in many parts of 
Saskatchewan peaked as a result of these land claim monies 
being available. 
 
Now not every band settled at the same time. Some didn’t. But 
others were fortunate enough to have that money available, so 
they did spend it. But now the rest of the community is going to 
be  and the natives themselves  are going to be taxed 
higher because of that choice that they made. I’m not going to 
say it’s good choice or bad choice. They made a decision; that’s 
the free market system. I agree with it. 
 
The truth of the matter is though, that their taxes should not 
have been based on that glitch situation that happened as a 
result of people wanting to do the right thing to settle up 
grievances on past native claims and those kinds of things and 
those kinds of contracts. 
 
But, Madam Minister, the price of cattle has fallen by 50 cents a 
pound. And now their taxes are going to reflect that higher 
value because you’ve gone to this market value process, which I 
honestly think, if you went and took a vote out in the country 
today, you would find more than your 85 per cent would oppose 
that again because I have heard nobody say that they think that 
that’s a fair way to have their property taxed. 
 
Now the reality is that there are always a few people willing to 
sell their soul for cash, and so there will probably be somebody 
that you can drag in here to prove me wrong if I say 100 per  

cent, so I’ll never go that far. But reality is that the vast majority 
of people are against you. 
 
What we need to know, Madam Minister, how can you correct 
this situation of the prices having fallen so much when a glitch 
situation has caused the tax base now to go up so much? You 
talked about this the other day, and you said there’s a three-year 
rotation. But when we got finished with the numbers  and I 
looked it over afterwards  and what you really said is it was a 
six-year process. You can have all kinds of people in the 
agricultural industry gone broke in six years. I mean you just 
can’t have a system that takes six years to correct itself and call 
that fair  not in today’s escalated dollar values where taxes 
are very, very high. I expect maybe in the 1930s, when land was 
valued very low and if you made some kind of changes in those 
days, people either couldn’t pay and left, or else the margins 
were small. 
 
But these days when we say we’re going to increase the mill 
rate by 1 or 2 mills, that reflects on land values that are a 
situation of inflation-induced numbers. And while the value 
may not be all that much different, the numbers that we use are 
bigger. And 2 per cent of 1,000 is a lot more than 2 per cent of 
100 and you know that, and you know what I’m talking about. 
So immediately we’re caught up in this fantastic kind of a 
multiplication problem where people are going to have to pay 
vasts amount of money more. And if that happens to be a 
situation where there is a one-time problem with the land prices 
having been driven up, there has to be some mechanism in here 
for fair play and reality to come into allowing people to get 
back to a more realistic tax base. 
 
And I don’t think you’ve built that in. And none of your 
arguments I’ve heard so far have given anybody any comfort 
whatsoever. And we’ve had some people look at this, and 
they’re just standing there shaking their heads. So why not take 
a consideration, go back to the drawing board on this thing, and 
try to find out if there is some way that you can allow for these 
glitch situations to be taken out of the formula. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first of all SAMA 
decides the assessment policy and practice. The province leaves 
assessment methods to SAMA; it’s been given this 
responsibility by law. If the council has difficulty when they 
have the assessment information from SAMA, it can use a 
variable mill rate to make the adjustments. And the province is 
looking at reduction in range land assessments, achieved by 
setting percentages of value. 
 
And I just want to say to the member opposite, that he’s just 
stood up and contradicted himself in the most incredible way. 
He said that he believes in the free market, but at the same time 
he objects to using market value as a benchmark for an 
assessment system. Now if that’s not contradictory, I don’t 
know what is. 
 
And I only have to say one other thing, that the statements that 
he made with respect to the changes in the new system 
providing a potential for discrimination against Hutterites or 
any other group is absolute balderdash. 
 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

(1530) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
we want to go on record as saying that we support some of the 
changes again that you make, but the bad and the evil of what 
you are perpetrating on the people of Saskatchewan again 
outweighs the good. And we just simply can’t go along with 
supporting what you’re doing unless you straighten out some of 
the problems. And I think the door is open to straighten that 
out. 
 
We are of course at this time going to allow the other party 
members to go on with some of the discussions with you. But I 
have suggested to you and I will remind you that when we get 
to clause 24, whenever that happens, we will be introducing our 
amendment. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 24 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
move House amendment for Bill No. 71 of 1996, An Act to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act, moved 
by myself. 
 

Clause 24 of the printed Bill: 
 
Amend clause 24 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 
after the words “are repealed” where they occur therein the 
following words: 

 
“and the following is substituted therefor: 
 

“289.1 Where the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
orders that a rural municipality be dissolved, such 
order shall be effective only if the residents of the 
municipality agree to such dissolution.”.” 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair:  The amendment to clause 24 of Bill 71 of The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, as moved by the hon. 
member from Cypress Hills, is out of order because it is 
irrelevant to the sections of the Bill that it seeks to amend. And 
to any other  Order  to any other provisions in the Bill. 
These sections relate to assessments and are reapplied as part of 
clause 23. And further, the amendment is beyond the scope of 
the Bill as agreed to at second reading. 
 
The amendment deals with the dissolution of rural 
municipalities, but this topic is not covered in any part of Bill 
71, thus the amendment being out of order. 
 
Clause 24 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 25 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Clause 37 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to make a 
House amendment to clause 37 of the printed Bill. I’ll read the 
amendment. Proposed House amendment for Bill No. 71 of 
1996, An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and 
to make a consequential amendment to The Municipal Board 
Act. I move: 
 

Clause 37 of the printed Bill 
 
Amend subsection 330.3(1) of The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989, as being enacted by Clause 37 of the printed Bill, by 
adding “or sections 8 and 9 of The Municipal Tax Sharing 
(Potash) Act,” after “section 259 and clause 330(1)(a),”. 

 
This amendment, Mr. Chairman, will remedy a drafting 
oversight. It will provide a reference to The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Act so that mill rate factors may be applied to 
the mill rate set under that Act for potash mines. Without this 
reference, this tax tool would not be available for RMs to use in 
these situations, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, I only want to make a very brief comment about the 
amendment. Madam Minister, you referred to the fact that you 
needed to introduce this amendment because of a very drastic 
oversight. Quite frankly, I’m not surprised that you have drastic 
oversights in your department and in the way that you are 
presenting Bills. You’ve already had one of the biggest Bills 
ever presented to this legislature, The Service Districts Act, that 
was so drastically flawed that you’ve had to pull it from the 
paper after public protest grew so strongly against it that you 
had no choice but to remove it altogether. 
 
The drastic oversight of course, is certainly an appropriate term 
for you to use. This entire Bill, I think, is a drastic oversight of 
the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan and I think the people 
of Saskatchewan will revisit this question at election time. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 37 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 38 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 50 
 
The division bells rang from 3:41 p.m. until 3:47 p.m. 
 
Clause 50 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  25 
 
MacKinnon Shillington Anguish 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Crofford Renaud Calvert 
Pringle Koenker Bradley 
Scott Teichrob Cline 
Serby Stanger Hamilton 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

 
Murray Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Nays  12 
 
Aldridge McLane Draude 
McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 
Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 
D’Autremont Heppner Goohsen 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act and to made a consequential 

amendment to another Act 
 
The Chair:  I’ll invite the minister to again introduce her 
officials as we begin. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, on my right is John 
Edwards, director of municipal policy and legislative services. 
Behind Mr. Edwards is Perry Erhardt, legislation officer. And 
behind me directly is Sharon Markesteyn, senior policy analyst 
in the Department of Municipal Government. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And just a couple of 
questions for you, Madam Minister. The only two sections that 
we are really looking at . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. Members, this is perhaps not the best 
way to start the Bill. I had difficulty hearing the hon. member 
for Athabasca in his putting of his question. I simply ask all 
members to allow this proceeding to take place properly. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a few questions, 
Madam Minister, about the Bill. First of all in clause 16(a) and 
16(b) this clause gives the minister the authority to define 
property classes and set percentages of value that are applied to 
property assessment in these classes. I guess from the northern 
perspective, the whole intent here, when we talk about the 
assessment and the intent of the Bill, is that we want to make 
sure that any moves and any regulations, any processes, would 
always result basically in the same level of revenues from the 
same different groups. And that of course is, I believe, the 
intent of the government. And I hope that this process certainly 
is followed. 
 
I guess the few questions I have in reference with this, in that 
regard, why does the government insist on having this type of 
controlling power over municipalities when it comes to clauses 
16(a) and (b)? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the provisions would 
be exactly the same as for southern municipalities, in that the 
province would set property classes and percentages of value 
after the Assessment Management Agency has done its work, 
and those percentages and classes would apply and be used in 
the assessment for northern municipalities. 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. It has been stated that one of the 
purposes of this new system of classification of properties and 
the assignment of differing percentage of value is to ease the 
impact of new assessments in order to protect some classes of 
taxpayers. 
 
What classes of taxpayers in the North do you see being 
protected by this new system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there are 
different objectives in setting percentages of . . . in establishing 
property classes or setting percentages of value at other than 
100 per cent of assessment. 
 
And there might be a number of objectives. It might be 
economic development, it might be social objectives. But the 
variable mill rates that will be . . . municipalities will have the 
capability of using, will also be used for those very same 
purposes. 
 
But the objective is not so much protection, although that’s 
given as one of the possible or potential objectives, but is to 
make the system more fair and more equitable, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay, another bonus of this system is to 
supposedly stimulate economic activity. Can you give me an 
example of where this will be achieved in the North as a result 
of the implementation of your system of classification and 
differing percentage values? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t be 
specific about this because the discretion will be used beyond 
the percentages of value and property classes by local councils. 
But they might, for instance, want to be careful, if there’s a 
developing industry in their municipality or in their region, to 
be careful not to apply an overly high percentage on the 
variable mill rate in order to discourage such development. 
That’s basically the parameters that are meant to be followed by 
these tax policy tools, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much, Madam Minister. And 
I only have one more question for you. Certainly you’re aware 
of some of my questions in previous opportunities that I’ve had 
to discuss northern issues with you. 
 
I guess the last bit of discussion I have in terms of northern 
Saskatchewan is that you’re probably aware of the fact that 
northern municipal governments certainly occupy a small 
section of land. There’s no such thing as RMs in northern 
Saskatchewan; most of it is Crown land, if not treaty land. So 
the whole role of the mining industry, and the forestry industry, 
and all the other industries out there that would have to be 
looked at, it would certainly be between the provincial 
government and certainly the different companies involved. 
 
And I would suggest, Madam Minister, that you also involve 
the northern municipalities in some of these discussion and 
choices because they have a lot more to gain when you talk 
about assessment and taxation and industry in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

I guess the final question I have is, what was your thinking in 
. . . why did you put in the provision of the examination for 
discovery which wasn’t there before? What was the intent and 
reasoning behind that clause? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the reason for 
including the provision for an examination for discovery is . . . 
first I need to point out that that is . . . the examination for 
discovery process is entirely at the option of the appellant. So 
there will be no appellant who will be forced into a situation of 
an examination for discovery or the engagement of a solicitor if 
they don’t want to. It’s the appellant’s option. 
 
And it was introduced in order to make . . . to have a better 
balanced system, to make sure that appellants have the ability to 
have the disclosure of all the information that they might need, 
which in some simple appeals, they’re very seldom, or I would 
predict, never at all will this be used. It would be in more 
complex cases where an appellant is not quite satisfied that they 
have the range of information that they require from the 
assessor. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I also want to 
thank your officials for coming here this afternoon, on this 
particular Bill. And just to say that we will be watching and we 
will certainly be waiting and expecting, probably by the end of 
this month, rules and regulations, and certainly more 
information on how this Bill will impact on northern 
communities. Thank you once again. 
 
(1600) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would simply like to, 
before I excuse the officials from my department, thank them 
for their diligence here today, this morning and this afternoon, 
in assisting us with these Bills. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would like to thank the minister and her officials for coming in 
today and answering our numerous questions. And I’m sure that 
everyone found the debate enlightening. I’d like again to thank 
them. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  As well, thanks to the minister and her 
officials for spending the time here and going through this 
process. 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the 
Management of Forest Resources 

 
The Chair:  It’s pointless to invite the minister to introduce 
his officials at this particular moment. We’ll do that as they 
gather. But I understand there’s agreement to start the 
proceedings on clause 1. 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess in reference 
to some of the situation with the forestry Bill, I just want to 
make an opening remark from a number of sources of 
information on the forestry Act. 
 
First of all, I think the thing that’s basically lacking in this 
particular Bill is the fact that consultation with the public in 
northern Saskatchewan was one area that the Bill certainly did 
not address. And I have several notes from several people that 
spoke about a meeting in Buffalo Narrows with different SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
officials in which Metis people as well as local government 
representatives were in attendance. 
 
And this was an 11th hour meeting. It was not held until after 
the first reading of the Bill. And people certainly did not have 
the time nor the resources to analyse the Bill properly from the 
community perspective. They certainly recommended, many of 
the northern people did, that the government delay the passage 
of this Bill until the northern people had more time for the 
analysis. It also recommended that the government allocate 
resources so that northern communities could hire legal counsel 
to analyse the impacts of this Bill. 
 
Other members spoke about consultation. They stressed that 
more consultation needed to be done and they also affirmed that 
the government should go no further with this Bill until they 
have consulted with Northerners. 
 
An official from the department was at this meeting in May and 
a motion was passed at the meeting by northern mayors and 
Metis Nation representatives and local residents that this Bill 
should not go further until consultation with people of the 
North takes place. 
 
The entire north-west part of the province feels this way, as they 
certainly want to make sure that their forest use is also 
respected, and any legislation that affects northern people. 
 
Mr. Minister, we initiated a consultation with a number of 
people, and we spoke about the problems of consultation. You 
and I realize that we can consult until we’re blue in the face, 
and many times we’ll not get adequate overviews of what 
people want in general. So as a result legislation of this source 
where it completely disregards the need to consult with northern 
people when it comes to forestry and the resources associated 
with forestry and access to forestry, then how can I as their 
representatives support the Bill in general? 
 
I think there has been some efforts to meet the economical and 
certainly the large industries perspectives when it comes to 
these particular aspects of this Bill. There is no question that 
they’ve had proper consultation. And I strongly believe that the 
jobs and the opportunity and the investment associated with the 
forest industry in northern Saskatchewan in general will 
certainly continue to be a high priority with your government 
and with yourself and with the rest of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I go back to the earlier statement . . . is  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

we need to have as much feedback from the northern 
communities. And the consultation they feel, and myself being 
their voice, was non-existent. We need to sit down with the 
mayors of some of these northern communities. We need to sit 
down with some of the small operators of some of these 
northern communities that operate in forestry. We need to sit 
down with some of the environmentalists that live in northern 
Saskatchewan. We need to sit down with various other people 
in northern Saskatchewan that have a vested interest in forestry. 
And this is the whole process . . . is we have to consult more. 
 
Some of the feedback we got on the consultation process, and 
this was some effort on SERM’s part to include town hall 
meetings. But again I go back to the earlier point; there’s a 
significant difference between consultation and agreement. The 
findings are recorded which reflect the opinions and the views 
of many northern residents regarding the consultation process. 
This section is without prejudice or bias. 
 
Point one, there exists a degree of suspension which is based on 
critiquing the selection process for the provincial legislation 
advisory committee. Obviously if we don’t have representation 
and a good cross-section of representation from northern 
communities, then obviously we’re excluding them from the 
consultation process. And we don’t hand-pick the people who 
we want on these committees and basically tell them this is the 
direction we want to go, and we want to make sure that you go 
that direction when it comes to making a final choice. 
 
The northern residents and elected representatives believe that 
the members selected for the advisory committee are in a 
position of conflict of interests. This is based on the individuals 
recorded as members and the fact that members on the advisory 
committee belong to executives of self-interest groups 
associated with the environment and forest products. Certainly 
we need to record and hear their aspects of the story because 
I’m always promoting and supporting development of northern 
Saskatchewan. But if they have an interest gain and they have 
influence gain, then obviously they cannot, from a completely 
neutral point of view, look at the best interests of the forest for 
future generations and for the rest of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
The development of the forest industries on the advisory 
committee is seen as a conflict of compromises by many 
northern local authorities including aboriginal communities, 
and many times, some of the aboriginal businesses involved 
with forestry. There exists a de-facto attitude of SERM 
officials: three representatives on the advisory committee in the 
expertise in the field of enforcement coordination, forestry 
branch, and sustainable land management branch who are 
perceived as the engineers of the proposed Forest Resources 
Management Act. 
 
The provincial legislation advisory committee is seen by the 
major stakeholders as a smoke screen in the actual drafting of 
the proposed legislation. And the delegated authority extended 
by SERM to the forest industry to develop environmental 
impact assessments and environmental impact statements for 
their respective forest resource management areas is interpreted 
as selling out to the industries, including the development of 
regulations to be developed at a later date. 

The consultation process by SERM under the new proposed 
Act, is being fast-tracked with very little consultation 
implemented with the major stakeholders in northern 
Saskatchewan. When I speak about the major stakeholders, Mr. 
Minister, I’m speaking about the people directly affected in the 
community, the people that have for many years have gone into 
the forest and have accessed berries, have accessed mushrooms, 
have accessed medicinal herbs, you know, have accessed 
basically anything in the forest for their own use. These are the 
people I’m really concerned about, Mr. Minister. 
 
Certainly as I’ve stated to you many times in this House, I 
continue to support the industry, and I continue to support 
sustainable development of forestry products. However, Mr. 
Minister, there is a number of areas that we need to talk about 
with this Bill. And the biggest point I want to make at this point 
in time is what have the communities got to fight back when 
they see an injustice being done, when they see certain 
legislation being passed without their consultation, without 
their blessing, without their input? 
 
(1615) 
 
And for time and time again, northern Saskatchewan people 
have been stressing, stressing to many governments, that we 
need to have more input on the land surrounding our 
communities, the land that we have inherently enjoyed, and the 
land that we basically grew up on. 
 
And when governments introduce legislation of this nature 
regarding The Forest Resources Management Act, they consult 
with the large industry. And what happens in reference to that is 
you also have members of SERM involved. And then you have 
the government involved, and you have large industry involved 
in the consultations. And I can agree with them that there is a 
large amount of consultation and discussion that must happen 
to get the two sides to negotiate some kind of settlement in 
reference to this Act. 
 
However the one group that we’re forgetting about, Mr. 
Minister, is the people themselves: the people in these 
communities, the small operators, and the small loggers that 
create 8, 9, 10 jobs; the co-management committees that want 
to make sure that there’s sustainable forestry development; and 
the elders and the people that are concerned about the 
environment. They should be the top priority in any 
negotiations when it comes to forests and the management of 
those forests. 
 
Mr. Minister, I submit to you that your department has not done 
the proper consultation with the people of the north-west when 
it comes to this particular Act. 
 
When it comes to this particular Bill, the people of the North 
are simply and for many years stating we need to have a stake in 
the forest and the industry that it offers. We need to be able to 
access the forest products that we’ve accessed for many years. 
We need to be able to find some revenues to help many of our 
local people to get involved in forestry. We need to have some 
way, shape, or form to gain a better level of benefit from all the 
activity happening around our northern forests. 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

So that’s the primary function that I have this afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, is to talk about these things and to stress to you that 
there’s a lot of frustration out there. And we need to re-examine 
our role as government if we cannot go back and consult with 
people affected and impacted by Bills of this nature, and yet we 
try and push them through. We need to re-emphasize the need 
to discuss any changes to anybody’s life when it comes to Acts 
of any nature. 
 
So with that, I’d like to hear what you have to say in regards to 
some of these comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
opening statement. At this time I would like to introduce my 
deputy minister, Stuart Kramer, and forester Rod Thompson 
who are with us here today. 
 
First of all, I’d like to thank the hon. member for explaining or 
at least bringing forth the concerns and the interests of northern 
people in our forest resource. We’re very pleased that they are 
very interested and concerned about the forest industry and also 
the other values in the forest. And we do look forward to 
continuing to work with these people. 
 
However I have to disagree with the hon. member when it 
comes to a lack of consultation. The consultation for this Act 
began in 1992. At that time we held 29 community meetings 
throughout the province including Beauval, La Ronge, and 
Meadow Lake. Hundreds of people attended, and we also sent 
out thousands of householders as well. 
 
Later on in 1994-95 we had a forest legislation advisory 
committee that held nine meetings, mostly in the North. And on 
this advisory committee were representatives from the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council, Prince Albert Grand Council, the Metis Nation 
of Saskatchewan had two representatives on this committee, 
Council of Saskatchewan Forest Industries, Saskatchewan 
independent forest industries which are the smaller operators 
which the hon. member referred to, so we had their 
involvement. 
 
We also had the Farm Woodlot Association, tourism industry 
association, Saskatchewan environmental association, parks and 
recreation association, Saskatchewan Trappers Association, and 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 
 
So that brought us up to 1994. And again a mail-out to 700 
people  bands and communities again in the North, asking for 
their response from the report prepared by the advisory 
committee. 
 
That brings us up to 1995. A year ago we brought a Bill 
forward and issued it as a White Paper, and another year has 
elapsed. And during this time, 12 meetings were held in 
northern communities including Creighton, Cumberland House, 
Denare Beach, Pelican Narrows, Sturgeon Landing, Canoe 
Lake, Beauval, La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, La 
Ronge, Pinehouse, and Meadow Lake. Again these were public 
meetings where people had the opportunity to participate. 
 

There was also meetings with aboriginal groups  11 of them 
in total  11 opportunities here. Again the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations), Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 
P.A. Grand Council, Agency Chiefs Tribal Council, 
Cumberland House band, Waterhen band, and the Metis 
Nations was also met with several times. 
 
Following that, meetings with the forestry industry included 15 
meetings or so which included representatives of all sector of 
the timber operation, 17 businesses, and special product 
industries as well. 
 
And over 1,000 copies of the White Paper were circulated since 
March 1995. We’ve also involved a number of government 
departments and agencies in the consultation. So this 
consultative process has been going on since 1992  dozens 
and dozens of meetings, thousands and thousands of people 
involved. So we do believe that we have listened to the people. 
And this is evident in the fact that we have brought in 50 
amendments to the White Paper at the request of many of the 
people in the North. So we do believe that we have responded 
to their concerns. 
 
A prime example is the aboriginal people were concerned about 
their right to go out and pick berries because the legislation 
indicated that commercial operators had to have a licence, and 
this in fact was to prevent people, outsiders, from coming in to 
traditional grounds where berries and other herbs were collected 
by the native people, and so the native people can go out and 
pick berries and herbs for their own use. But commercial 
operators cannot go into a particular area without a licence, and 
this is to protect the local residents from outsiders coming in 
and utilizing the resource. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, we do believe that we have consulted very 
thoroughly on this Bill and are quite excited about it because 
the old forestry Act dates back 30 years, so we look forward to 
this opportunity to move on to the next generation of forest 
management. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well that certainly is a very impressive list of 
public consultation and meetings; however if you were to . . . 
And I would invite any officials to pick up the phone and call 
any five communities in the north-west and ask them, are you 
aware of the forest management Act that is being presented in 
the House? And basically they will probably say no. 
 
I think the real problem here is many, many times in northern 
Saskatchewan when you have these northern municipal 
governments, the people that basically run these northern 
communities they have many, many concerns, Mr. Minister. 
They have housing concerns. They have social concerns. They 
even got to look after the infrastructure of the community. They 
got 50 million different concerns. And by no way, shape, or 
form are they able to really set up a good system in which they 
can feel that they’ve participated fairly in a consultation system. 
In fact you can probably consult with them for the next five, ten 
years and they still will not know what’s going on. 
 
The reason why is not because of their disregard for the 
government and not because they don’t understand or don’t  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

want to take the time to understand Acts of this nature. It’s 
simply because they haven’t got the adequate resources to really 
study the impacts of this Bill. And had we taken the opportunity 
and had we taken the time to even have done Dene radio 
messages, if we had done Cree radio messages, if we had met 
with these communities with each mayor and council on the 
individual basis over a period of one or two days . . . because 
this Act will have some profound effects on the future of 
forests. 
 
And I support the efforts that you are personally making to try 
and ensure that these forests are maintained and managed 
properly. I think that’s in everybody’s best interests. 
 
However the people of the North strongly feel that they have 
not been consulted, and they have not participated enough in 
this process. And this is the reason why they have some very 
serious questions about this Bill. 
 
And I go back to my earlier statement, and I can certainly share 
that with you, if you’d like. But the message I got from two 
people we spoke to this afternoon, as late as this afternoon, just 
to test the waters to see if they’ve been consulted with this Bill 
. . . And I personally also hired a consultant to go around 
talking to people about this Bill. And much of this time was 
explaining what the Bill was all about because people weren’t 
aware. And again many people . . . and these two individuals 
also asked that they allocate resources so that the northern 
communities could hire legal counsel to analyse the impacts of 
this Bill. That’s right from the horse’s mouth. 
 
And this is our point . . . is that we haven’t got, Mr. Minister, a 
chest full of lawyers, a chest full of consultants that we just 
simply ask to come out of the chest to start analysing and 
debating these Bills. We haven’t got the revenues for it. We 
haven’t got the time for it, and we certainly haven’t got the 
skills for all this. 
 
So what’s happening in essence is the smaller communities and 
the people that live in these communities just feel overwhelmed 
by all that the government is doing when it comes to forestry. 
And then they get frustrated when they don’t know what’s 
going on, and yet consultation was offered to you guys. 
 
So as a result, really the northern people don’t have a clue how 
to respond to this thing because they haven’t been consulted. 
They don’t have an idea how their own little industry will be 
affected by some of these things. 
 
And certainly if you could guarantee to me today that you 
would insist that no northern resident that have lived in 
northern Saskatchewan will be expected to buy permits to pick 
berries or to gather firewood. And even if there are local people 
that pick berries, say 5 or 10 pounds of berries a day for their 
own personal sale, to give to their families or to sell it to 
somebody, that helps them subsidize. These are some of the 
things that they’re concerned about. 
 
And I’m trying my very best as a member of this Assembly to 
try and work with your department and work with the officials 
of other industries to try and come up with a compromise to  

make sure that the northern people’s voice are being heard 
when it comes to legislation of this nature. 
 
So can you basically advise me as to the logic behind having 
people get permits for gathering other than for personal use. If I 
was an older person in Ile-a-la-Crosse and I went out and I 
picked berries every day, 5 or 10 pounds, and I use that extra 
money to buy my grandchild a pair of shoes, or go to a bingo, or 
whatever, would these people have to buy permits for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again I thank the 
hon. member for his informed comments. 
 
I guess we all agree that the forest and all of the resources in 
northern Saskatchewan are very important, and the new forest 
Act looks at things more than trees. The old Act of 1965 was 
basically divvying up the timber for harvesting. And the new 
Act does consider things such as mushrooms and berries. And 
the specific answer to your last question is no, you do not need 
a permit to go and pick a pail of berries if you live in the area 
and sell it to a tourist for $2. 
 
However if a commercial operator from Calgary or Regina went 
into the North to a blueberry area and picked gallons and 
gallons, they would require a licence because they could 
severely impact on the traditional users of the land. So there’s 
no intent to have the local people obtain licences to go out and 
pick a few berries for their elders or sell a few pails here and 
there. That is not the objective of the legislation at all. 
 
(1630) 
 
Again I’m pleased at the . . . and I’m certainly not surprised, but 
the northern people are concerned about the forest and the other 
resources in the North. And to the hon. member, we will be 
developing regulations during the course of the coming year so 
this Act will not take effect for another year yet, and we would 
welcome your particular comments and input on the regulations 
as we finalize and fine-tune the legislation. And any other 
group of individuals or community or whatever, we look for 
their input. 
 
We have gone to the communities; we’ve held meetings and 
undoubtedly everybody doesn’t show up, so there’s still, I’m 
sure, people who feel they have not been consulted, but we’ve 
done this and been doing this for four years. We’ve gone to the 
communities and we’ve used mail-outs and so on and so forth, 
so we have made a genuine effort to consult with people. 
 
But again the offer is there. We would appreciate everybody’s 
input on the regulations, and I certainly will be communicating 
with the hon. member to get his input on this and anybody 
else’s that we are able to obtain. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well certainly I can see the value in over the 
next process of a year, talking about the rules and regulations 
that that’s going to be part of this Act and won’t be coming into 
effect for one more year. Is that a fair assessment to make? 
Okay. 
 
So in saying that, then can you guarantee me that you would  



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

make every effort, and if I were to give you names of different 
individuals at the different community levels, that you will 
absolutely guarantee to me today that you will consult with 
these people  sorry, I shouldn’t use the word consult  but 
you will seek agreement with these people to try and not only 
educate them on what the Act’s all about, to try and get their 
input and their issues on this Bill as well. I think that’s a key 
thing in what I’m trying to say today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, we would certainly welcome a list of 
contact people, whether it’s individuals, communities, or 
groups. We would certainly appreciate that and we will 
certainly communicate with them in one form or another and try 
to certainly answer their questions that they raise. So we would 
welcome that opportunity. We are here to work with the people. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  One of the biggest problems that they have in 
northern Saskatchewan is that many communities are really 
debating on the value of the forestry industry. Not because 
they’re against it; really because they’re trying to see how they 
can participate and benefit from it more. And certainly as 
government, you know, it is our responsibility to ensure that the 
management of the forestry industry is watched. We have to 
make sure that these things are done in a sustainable, well 
thought out plan. I don’t think anybody can argue with you on 
that. 
 
I think the key thing here as well is that what the northern 
people are trying to get at is how could we derive benefit from 
all the industry happening out here when your particular 
forestry Act does not address a way and means in which you 
can take a portion of those revenues, a slice of the pie if you 
will, to try and have a local economy developed, a local 
economy that could help small foresters, small loggers, small 
saw mill operators  people that can create 6 or 7 jobs, or 7 or 
8, 9, 10, 15 jobs in each of the communities. 
 
These are the people we need to also try and help. The forests 
are huge in northern Saskatchewan. There’s a tremendous 
amount of forest. Now what they’re saying is, how can this Bill 
help me or help the northern people setting up business 
opportunities, employment possibilities? 
 
This is where one of the biggest problems comes in as well, and 
this is some of the consultation that we’ve done on our own and 
these are some of the weaknesses of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again we 
thoroughly believe that we are working with northern 
communities and people. We have a number of co-management 
agreements. Just this spring I had the pleasure of going to Green 
Lake to sign an agreement with the local community there as we 
obtained a wood supply for the Green Lake saw mill. We view 
that as an example of working with the local community, which 
in turn provides jobs and opportunities for the local residents. 
 
The Meadow Lake Tribal Council is a good example of 
aboriginal people being involved in the forest industry. They’re 
very involved in saw mill logging operations in the Meadow 
Lake area. 

We view that the forest industry does create jobs for northern 
people. It also helps to upgrade roads, and there’s probably 
always room for improvement to local communities, again tied 
to the forest industry. And there’s going to be new 
opportunities. The province has got out of the production of 
seedlings for reforestation, and already we’ve heard interest 
expressed by northern communities and aboriginal people that 
they would like to get involved in perhaps seedling production. 
And this we will certainly help to facilitate in conjunction with 
the holders of the forest management areas and the timber 
companies. 
 
So we see lots of opportunities, and certainly we are committed 
to working with the northern communities as we manage our 
forests on a sustainable basis. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Some of the parts of the Act 
spoke about water. Now you can talk about not looking at the 
forest management Act in strictly, you know, for the trees. 
When you spoke about water, what are some of the concerns 
and some of the points of discussion that you had during your 
consultations that you spoke about earlier in reference to the 
water issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly water is a very important resource 
in the North, along with the forests. And although the Act, this 
is The Forest Resources Management Act, it doesn’t 
specifically deal with water, but certainly the forest 
management agreements and other forest practices also help to 
protect our waterways. For example you cannot fill in a stream 
where there is fish spawning or fish living. You cannot cut trees 
right up to the water’s edge. And there certainly is some 
question whether this margin of trees along some of the lakes 
and rivers should be extended. And that certainly will be a point 
up for discussion with future advisory committees. 
 
So we certainly want to protect our valuable water resource and 
in turn our fisheries resource and keep our lakes and rivers in 
the North as clean as we possibly can. And we are working with 
northern communities and also industry of all kinds to achieve 
this goal. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  The other part of the Act . . . and of course 
we will certainly share some of the findings that we had and 
certainly some of the final report that we have on this Act and 
will be sending you a copy of that for your own information. So 
there you can see firsthand what are some of the constituents’ 
concerns when it comes to this forestry Act. 
 
I guess the situation that we have when you talk about your 
negotiations and roles with the different forestry companies . . . 
and of course I’m going on record as supporting the 
development of the forest industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
I’m just simply saying that the northern communities and the 
people that live in the North that are impacted and affected by 
this forestry Bill should have been consulted at a greater extent 
and they should receive greater benefits from such activity in 
their area. And so far they haven’t seen that. 
 
And I guess the other fact of the matter is that we have 
co-management boards set up in many of these northern  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

communities. Industry and the communities got together and set 
up co-management boards, and you’re probably aware of that. 
 
And we, I think, have been taking the co-management boards 
too lightly. I think there’s got to be more emphasis on either 
giving these guys greater authority or in some way, shape, or 
form, legitimizing their role in the whole industry. If the 
government hasn’t got the means to ensure that these forests are 
properly maintained, the government doesn’t have the intent to 
adequately support many of these northern communities in 
putting infrastructure in to make sure that they can watch 
what’s happening in the resources industry of forestry, then 
perhaps they could start looking at the role of the local 
co-management committees. How can they play a larger role? 
 
You have various members in your own caucus, the member 
from Meadow Lake, the members from Prince Albert, you also 
have the member from Cumberland House, that see the forest in 
different respects. And I think the majority of them also agree 
that forests should be maintained. But agreeing to maintain the 
forestry and really ensuring that the forests are properly 
maintained is another issue. 
 
And I quote the member from Saskatoon Sutherland said in the 
Leader-Post, and this was his quote: 
 

Having industry judge its own environmental performance 
is like walking on a knife. 

 
Could you respond to that comment please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well thank you very much for your 
comments again. Certainly co- management is something that 
we’ve engineered here in Saskatchewan. Other jurisdictions are 
following our footsteps. And in Saskatchewan we do believe in 
cooperation, and again northern communities and people have a 
lot to contribute to the management of our forest resources. And 
we are very pleased that industry has been so receptive to 
involvement from local communities and aboriginal people, and 
we want to pursue this. 
 
So we are committed to managing our forests in the most 
sustainable way we can. We want to communicate as best we 
can and we certainly welcome public involvement at every 
opportunity. And I can see public involvement becoming more 
and more of a priority because people want to be involved, and 
we certainly welcome this. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the point you’re trying to 
raise when you’re talking about the role of the co-management 
board and the involvement of the people and the need to have 
more benefits flow to the northern communities, as I’m sure 
you’re aware of, some of the economic and social conditions of 
northern Saskatchewan communities . . . and if you want to 
spend five hours tomorrow talking about that I can do that 
again. 
 
But the thing is, what we need to do is we need to really begin 
to have the attitude is we all know what needs to be done, but 
leave the how to the imagination of the Saskatchewan people. 
That is where the crux of the problem is, Mr. Minister. You  

have some very good people in these northern communities. 
They have business aspirations and they also have 
environmental concerns. 
 
If the government cannot do it, or does not wish to do it as in 
the high standards as the forests should be watched, then 
perhaps you should let the people do it. These are people that 
have offered time and time again. And some of the comments 
and ideas I wish to bounce off you to see how you feel about 
them, the northern people do have a solution to the problems 
that have arisen out of the tabling of this forestry Bill. 
 
In fact there are a number of solutions. One solution is use the 
proceeds of some of the rates that you talk about, and the 
potential savings and the potential earnings, to legislate and 
finance co-management boards. These co-management boards 
were set up by industry and communities, so naturally they 
should be recognized by the industry. Therefore industry would 
be able to cooperate with a local co-management boards that 
they have established to monitor activity in a specified region. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Sutherland’s point is very well 
taken. We cannot have the fox guarding the chicken coop. 
 
The second and preferred solution is to again use these new 
profits to provide the excluded northern communities with even 
ownership of some of the forest industry happening in that 
region. Perhaps they should own part of the mill. And of course 
ownership of some of these mills will benefit the entire area. 
Would not a truly socialist government consider these two 
options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again the member’s comments are very 
well put and we are working in this direction in the way of . . . 
Again the Meadow Lake Tribal Council is very involved in the 
forest industry. We were very pleased to have the community of 
Green Lake have the operating saw mill again with a good 
supply of timber. 
 
We wish to continue this. We see more co-management 
agreements. They will change as times change to better reflect 
the needs and requirements of the local people and the interest 
in sustaining our forests. 
 
(1645) 
 
With respect to the funding, funding is an issue in every area of 
the province and we certainly want to provide as much funding 
as possible. And as the member mentioned, some of the social 
conditions in the North leave a lot to be desired and that’s 
certainly a concern of everybody in the province as well. 
 
But I guess the bottom line is we’re here to work with the 
northern people. We want their involvement, and that is our 
commitment as we all work towards a sustainable forestry 
resource. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Is there terms of what the cost increase might 
be for the stumpage fees? At one time we thought that the 
stumpage fees that the government would collect from northern 
communities would actually double from 3.5 million down to 7  



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

million. Is there some different figures at this point in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  This is certainly an issue which is being 
discussed at this time. The province is meeting with forest 
industries, both collectively and individually, to discuss the 
funding which includes stumpage fees, reforestation, insect and 
disease control, fire control. And because these talks are sort of 
not finalized yet, both the industry and government has decided 
not to publicly discuss them. We wish to do our business at the 
boardroom table so to speak. And when we collectively come 
out with an agreement, the best agreement for everybody 
concerned, certainly we will be letting that information out. But 
because discussions are ongoing, we cannot comment on it at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Could you offer to me today, Mr. Minister, 
that some of the discussions that you are proposing to have with 
the forestry industry, is that you would also leave the door open 
for an opportunity to have some northern mayors as well as 
some northern business people that are involved with the 
forestry industry involved in these type of discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The discussions with the forest industry at 
this time are simply cost-sharing on the subject of fire, insect 
and disease. And because it’s business transaction between the 
province and the forest industry, we aren’t expecting 
communities to pick up any costs. 
 
We will deal directly with industry as we try to arrive at an 
acceptable fee scheduling of these . . . or cost-sharing of these 
subjects. But again the particulars about the management of the 
forests, harvesting, and so on and so forth, will be dealt with in 
the regulations. And again there’s a year of time and 
opportunity, and as I indicated, we welcome input from yourself 
and anyone else who has an interest or concern. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. One of the other particular areas 
of the Act that I was a bit concerned about and certainly had 
questions on . . . and we’ll turn the chair over to the member 
from Cannington for a few minutes. But certainly I want to go 
down and get as much information as I can for my constituents 
from yourself and to say, these are the questions that we ask; 
this is what the situation is; what do you guys feel should be 
done? And therefore, some of the questions that we’re going to 
be asking you over the next period of the next few hours, we’re 
certainly going to take back and we’re going to use that as best 
we can. 
 
But the one part again I’m having a lot of great difficulty in is 
the two issues of making sure that proper benefits flow to the 
northern communities from such an Act and from such an 
activity of forestry, but also to make sure that the northern 
people also have some input, that they have some way, shape 
and form . . . if they see an injustice being done in any area, 
with any regard, that they have an opportunity and they have a 
process in place in which they can deal with these conflicts. 
And certainly that’s the other part of the equation here, is 
responsibility and true participation are things that they want to 
see happen. 
 
And the key thing here is, when you look at the provisions in  

this Act, it certainly empowers officials from your department 
of SERM to do . . . has more powers to search and to seize 
vehicles and to charge people. Now that’s also another area of 
great concern to northern people. You talk about giving certain 
organizations greater power. In essence, you’ve taken that 
power from the communities. So there’s got to be a balance. 
 
And certainly I think the point I made earlier, we all know what 
needs to be done. But sometimes you’ve got to trust people and 
sometimes you’ve got to leave the how to them. And in this 
instance, it doesn’t appear that we’re doing that by giving the 
SERM officers more powers to control people. We need to 
make sure they understand that these things aren’t there for 
their control, but really that they’re there to challenge people. 
And this kind of has a negative effect on people. 
 
Can you respond to some of these statements that I’m making, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well again I’d thank the hon. member for 
his comments. And we did brief the hon. member on the Bill 
here a couple of months ago, and we will certainly be glad to 
meet with him and go through the material again at any time. 
We look forward to the cooperation of the member and others 
in the northern communities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
member from Athabasca was discussing with you an issue that I 
wanted to bring forward and that is the use of the forest 
products by the people living in the area or by in fact by people 
visiting the area. Because under section 17 of the Act, clause 
17, it talks about subsistence gathering but it goes on to say, 
“but does not include gathering of trees.” 
 
Well I know of a number of people, when they happen to be in 
the northern forest area or if they live in the northern forest 
area, pick up a Christmas tree. Now under this Act it would 
appear to me that that would be breaking the Act. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, we need some clarification on that 
because I believe that the people of Saskatchewan, on Crown 
land, should be allowed to harvest a Christmas tree for their 
own use when they are visiting the North. 
 
Now perhaps I’m not reading the Bill properly, but it certainly 
seems to say that, because it says it does not include the 
gathering of trees. Well a Christmas tree would fall into that 
area, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I wonder if you could clarify for us please, whether or not an 
individual be it someone living in a northern community, 
someone visiting the North from the southern part of 
Saskatchewan, has the right, has the option, the opportunity, to 
harvest for themselves one Christmas tree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes you do. I guess as a landowner we 
would prefer that you drop in to the local SERM office and the 
staff there would certainly direct you to an area where there 
may be trees and perhaps steer you away from an area which 
may be more fragile, but you do not need a licence to cut a 
Christmas tree. 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, that’s 
certainly good to know. How does that square though with 
what’s written in the Act where it says it does include the 
gathering of trees. Is there an error here that needs to be 
clarified? Is there a change needed? Or does it some place else 
in the Act say that you can harvest that Christmas tree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The wording is there to provide the 
opportunity, if perhaps hundreds of people came up to a 
particular area, we would still have the authority to say no, you 
cannot cut a Christmas tree here, but by and large it hasn’t been 
a problem. 
 
However, if you wanted to cut 50 trees and take them back 
home and sell them, then you would require a licence. But for 
basically cutting one Christmas tree and taking it home, or 
maybe even two, one for your mother, there’s no licence 
required. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. If 
anyone calls me as having been charged, I’ll quote Hansard on 
you, on this, in the courts. 
 
Mr. Minister, the member from Athabasca also talked to you 
about co-management areas. I know that there was a great deal 
of controversy last year about the co-management proposals in 
the Montreal Lake area with the federal government. A certain 
number of the stakeholders felt that they had been left out of the 
discussions and the proposals for that co-management area. 
 
Under this agreement, are all stakeholders going to be 
consulted? Now the people who live in the North absolutely 
must be a part of the process. But they are not the only ones 
who inhabit the area, who deal with the circumstances there. I 
believe that there are a number of people who have cottages or 
hunting cabins or fishing camps as the case may be. Will they a 
part of the process for the co-management consultations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, co-management certainly does extend 
beyond a small area, and our practice is, on advisory boards, 
co-management boards, that we do involve as many 
stakeholders as we possibly can. On a broader scale, we bring in 
the provincial environmental groups. SARM is often involved 
and certainly local municipalities; cottage owners’ associations 
are often consulted and involved in the processes. So we do 
want to bring in as many people as possible and make the 
correct decisions because in this day and age people want to be 
involved. And if they are left out, we soon hear about it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are the 
co-management boards though officially a part of this process 
in the sense of being an advisory body on forestry management? 
Or are they a body that you would simply consult in dealing 
with this as the Act is being . . . establishment, but it’s not an 
ongoing relationship where the federal government, the 
provincial government, and the local communities are part of 
the board to deal with issues that happen within the area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We do have a number of levels of 
consultative processes. We have and will continue to have a 
Provincial Forestry Advisory Committee from the broad  

provincial scale. On the east side of the province, for an 
example, we have an advisory group to the east side FMA 
(Forest Management Agreement) which is being developed and 
that includes the more local input. And then the actual 
co-management areas are smaller, and again, involves the local 
people. So we do have a lot of local input, but there’s always 
room for more. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What kind of 
input would the co-management boards have in things like the 
amount of harvesting to take place within the areas that they 
would be administering? What kind of input do they have on 
things like the distances from a road that would not be 
harvested or the distances from a stream that would not be 
harvested or a body of water? 
 
What kind of actual impact do the co-management boards have 
on the decision-making process within the forest management 
area? Is it simply an advisory role that they play or do they 
actually have some form of regulatory control that they can 
exercise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly the details laid out by the member 
opposite are something that the local people are being involved 
with. Again east side FMA, which is being developed, the 
advisory board there will be making recommendations, and I 
guess the final say does rest with the minister. 
 
I can tell you, from when I’ve met with these people, they’re 
very concerned and very knowledgeable and very sincere about 
the jobs they’re doing. And it certainly . . . I can see that we will 
be approving a lot of the things, if not all of the 
recommendations, by the advisory group and co-management 
boards in other areas. So again we do look for good input and 
meaningful input from these people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report considerable 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 71 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act and to make a consequential 

amendment to another Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 72 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 20. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................2566 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................2566 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2566 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2566 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2566 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2547 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2552 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2558 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................2555, 2567 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Computerized Axial Tomography Services for Prince Albert 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
 Members’ Salary Structure 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
 Canadian Wheat Board Conference 
  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................2569 
 Contract for Free Form Plastic Products Inc. 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2569 
 Used-oil Management Program 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2569 
 High School Athletes 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2569 
 Community Home for Disabled Opens 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................2570 
 Macklin-Eye Hill Municipal Airport Opens 
  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2570 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Political Donations 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2570 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................2570 
 Minister of Labour’s Resignation 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2572 
  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2572 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................2572 
 McDowell Report 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2572 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2572 



 

 New Health Legislation 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2573 
  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2573 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2573 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2573 
 Northern Round Table Meeting 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2574 
  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................2574 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Clearwater Forest Products Sign Partnership with Government 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................2575 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2575 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2575 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector Employers and 

Employees 
  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2576 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 70  An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................2547 
  Bjornerud ........................................................................................................................................2547, 2549, 2553, 2559, 2561 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2548 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2551 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2553 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................2554 
  Goohsen .........................................................................................................................................................................2554, 2560 
 Recorded divisions ............................................................................................................................................................2561, 2562 
 Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2562 
  Teichrob .........................................................................................................................................................................2562, 2576 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................2562, 2576 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2577 
  Recorded division ....................................................................................................................................................................2584 
 Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to made a consequential amendment to another Act 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................2585 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2585 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2586 
 Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the Management of Forest Resources 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2586 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................2588 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2592 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 70  An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................2563 
 Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................2593 
 Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to made a consequential amendment to another Act 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................2593 
 
 
 


