


















































April 24, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1115 
 April 24, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens with respect to the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the names are primarily from the citizens of the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the signatures are mainly from Regina, some from 
Saskatoon, and some from Allan, Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina and Regina South. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions from Saskatchewan residents regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 
 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the city 
of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
petitions of names of people from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People that signed this petition are from Regina and from 
Gainsborough. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of names from people in Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by concerned citizens of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
for the undersigned people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition are from 
Gainsborough, they’re from Carnduff, they’re from Estevan, 
Kelvington, and from the city of Regina. I’d like to present this 
to the legislature. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
day no. 37, the 37th day I’ve stood with my colleagues and the 
people of Saskatchewan in trying to save the Plains Health 
Centre. And the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I see a number of the people that have signed this 
petition are from the Hodgeville area, but mainly from Regina, 
in fact many from Regina Victoria and Regina Elphinstone, 
Regina Northeast and Regina Dewdney, and of course, as 
always, Regina Albert South constituencies. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today that were given to me on Friday at 
Vibank: 



1116  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally pass the Bill to 
protect the rights of firearms owners, otherwise known by the 
short title as The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Vibank, Regina, Glenavon, 
Windthorst, Davin, Montmartre, Francis, again from the 
south-east corner of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre ; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
challenge the implementation of the federal firearms 
legislation. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture regarding the extension of 
the minister’s current trade mission to the Pacific Rim: (1) 
state the reasons for the extension and the business 
undertaken during that period; (2) state the total additional 
cost of the trade mission incurred as a result of the 
extension. 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Agriculture regarding rural 
service centres, ag service centres: (1) how many enquiries 
in total did rural service centres receive in 1995; (2) how 
many enquiries did each rural service centre receive 
individually in 1995; (3) how many enquiries were 
received in 1995 by centres that the government proposes 
to close; (4) what is the furthest distance a producer in 
rural Saskatchewan will have to travel in order to reach the 
nearest rural service centre once the closures take place; 
and (5) is there a formula and/or distance cap that has been 
developed by the department regarding the amount of 
travel producers must undertake to reach these centres? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great privilege for me today to introduce to you and to members 
of this Assembly, 48 young boys and girls who are in grades 5 
to 7 from St. Matthew School in Saskatoon. And accompanying  

them today is Elizabeth Kreiser, Michelle Sanche, and Carmen 
Bassingthwaite. 
 
I met with these young people, I think one or two months ago, 
to talk about how government works and how the political 
system works in the province of Saskatchewan. And they were 
so interested and asked such astute questions, I’m sure we’ll 
have a wonderful time when we get together a little later today. 
 
I would very much appreciate it if everyone would join with me 
in giving them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for 
the Public Service Commission, it is my real pleasure to be 
welcoming to the Assembly today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
14 public servants, men and women who work in the 
departments of Finance, Agriculture, Justice, and Social 
Services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are here on a public service tour to both tour the facilities 
and the rooms in this building, but also to explore with others 
who work in this building, the processes of government within 
this building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are men and women who serve the people of 
Saskatchewan on the front lines, Mr. Speaker. And to them we 
owe our gratitude and our support, and I welcome these very 
valuable members of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 19 grade 
8 from the Carnduff School. They’re seated in your gallery. 
Their teachers include Art Keating and Brian Nicholls, along 
with Mr. and Mrs. Logue as chaperons. 
 
I would ask everyone to welcome them here today, and I look 
forward to meeting with them after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and through you to members of the Assembly, some guests 
seated in your gallery. They have joined us here today to watch 
question period and of course the second reading of the 
engineering and geoscientists Act. 
 
I will ask them to stand and I would ask that we hold our 
applause until they’re all introduced. Joining us today from the 
Association of Professional Engineers of Saskatchewan are 
Margaret Miller, president; Dennis Paddock, executive director; 
Bob Barschel, director of professional practice; Ray Pentland, 
past president. 
 
Joining us today as well, are members of the geoscience 
professional registration committee: Fran Haidel, Phil Reeves, 
and Gary Delaney. And also with us today are representatives of 
the Saskatchewan association of technicians and  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

technologists: Jamie Briltz, executive director; Jim Brent, past 
president; and Dan Crites, past president. 
 
Please join with me in welcoming our friends here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
legislature, someone seated in your gallery today. Mr. Quinn 
Bokitch is a grade 12 student from Thom Collegiate who is here 
today to research a project for his history class. 
 
He’s here to learn more about the responsibilities of MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and to answer that 
age-old question of why anyone would actually choose to go 
into politics. And in order to give him a little more insight into 
that, he’s going to be watching the House today and I’ll ask him 
a few questions after about his opinions on the proceedings. 
 
So if you want good marks from Quinn, you better be on your 
best behaviour today. Do you want to . . . we recognize Quinn. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish 
to introduce to you and members of the Assembly today seated 
in the west gallery, Mr. Ken Schneider. He is a business 
consultant from the city of Yorkton and a constituent of mine, 
and he’s here to observe the proceedings in the House this 
afternoon. 
 
And I wish to ask all members of the House to join with me in 
welcoming Mr. Schneider, if he would please stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce somebody 
very special to the House today  somebody that wasn’t here 
21 years ago today. It’s one of our pages, Leanna Eaton. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Happy Birthday. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to join with the hon. member from Souris 
Cannington to welcome the students, parents, and teachers from 
Carnduff. 
 
Carnduff is my home town. You won’t know that because I left 
a number of years ago, but it’s my home town and my parents 
still live there. And I’ve always been very proud to have come 
from Carnduff and like to visit when I go back there. And I 
came here in grade 8 like you did, and someday hopefully one 
of you will be sitting in this chair. 
 
Anyway all the best to you. Have an enjoyable day in Regina 
and have a safe trip home, and say hi to everybody back there. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Secretaries Week 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
Secretaries Week and today is officially designated Secretaries 
Day. I know that because this morning there was a reminder on 
my desk that I was making this statement, along with my 
schedule, briefing books and phone messages. It helps to start 
the day organized, and I have help, as we all do. 
 
Those of us who are lucky enough to have support staff know 
that if we look good, if we appear to be performing our duties 
with a flair of intelligence and efficiency, then that success is at 
least due to our secretaries giving us the right information and 
pointing us in the proper direction. 
 
As the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood said last year, 
when things go well, they stand aside and allow us to take the 
credit that is actually half theirs. And when things go badly, 
they do not say, I told you so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our secretaries and constituency assistants work 
year round with us in what is truly a partnership. If we do not 
acknowledge their value to our work often enough, it is not 
because we do not recognize it. So as chair of our caucus, 
speaking on behalf of all of our members, let me say that we do 
know. We do appreciate, and we do value our co-workers, our 
secretaries. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I too rise on behalf of the official 
opposition to recognize today’s designation as Secretaries Day. 
We all know that secretaries are often the most important 
people in any organization. They try to keep us running on 
schedule and our correspondence up to date. 
 
The Liberal caucus is fortunate to have two excellent 
secretaries, and my colleagues and I would like to express our 
gratitude to them for their continued hard work and patience, 
and extend the best wishes to all secretaries across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also rise today on 
behalf of our PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus to 
acknowledge the hardworking secretaries of our province. I 
don’t know about others in this Assembly, but our office 
secretaries, Joanne and Mavis, are a whole lot like Radar 
O’Reilly from MASH; they bring us our work before we’re even 
ready to look for it. 
 
I want to thank them both for their dedication and for the many 
evenings and weekends they’ve given up to catch up on work 
that needed to be done. Thanks as well to all other secretaries 
who efficiently carry out their duties behind the scenes and 
often don’t receive the recognition they deserve. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to take the opportunity 
to acknowledge the highest paid secretary in the province, the  



1118  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Provincial Secretary. In fact the Provincial Secretary is one of 
the few secretaries who got a big raise this year  $4,000 to be 
exact. As I mentioned earlier, all good secretaries are able to 
carry out a wide variety of different jobs. Our Provincial 
Secretary is no exception. In addition to his demanding duties 
of looking after the provincial seal, he finds time to sell a few 
perogies as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt SADD Chapter 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to commend the Humboldt SADD (Students Against 
Drinking and Driving) chapter and its president, Jeremy Elder. 
The Humboldt chapter was awarded the Nicole Nakoneshny 
Memorial Award given to the most active SADD chapter. 
Nationally Humboldt was presented with the National 
Cooperation Award for their work with other agencies in 
schools, communities, and provinces. 
 
President Jeremy Elder received three major awards: the Royal 
Bank Youth Leadership Provincial and National Award and the 
Sarah Dunleavy Memorial Scholarship presented to an 
individual who has shown outstanding dedication to the goals 
of SADD. Mr. Elder is a two-time provincial winner of the 
Provincial Royal Bank Leadership Award and the only 
Saskatchewan delegate to win a national award. 
Congratulations to Jeremy Elder and the Humboldt SADD 
chapter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Spouses of Members 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to speak about a group that often goes without public 
recognition but without whom this legislature simply could not 
function. I am speaking about the spouses of the members of 
this Assembly. 
 
Our wives and husbands are people who play a huge role in 
enabling us to do our jobs as legislators. These are 
hard-working partners who keep the home fires burning; they 
are the ones who take phone calls from constituents at all hours 
of the day or night  our personal secretaries. They fill the role 
of single parent all too often. They shovel snow and mow the 
lawn in our absence  this year more snow than mowing, I 
think. Without the support of our spouses, Mr. Speaker, our job 
as legislators would be impossible. 
 
Today has special significance for me, Mr. Speaker, because it 
is my 25th wedding anniversary, and it is because of the 
understanding of my wife, Sylvia, that I am able to do my work 
as an MLA in this government. 
 
I am sure that all members of this House will join with me 
today in saluting the untold work of our spouses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Waterhen Lake Housing Initiative 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish to 
also commend the first nations of the Waterhen Lake area for 
attempting to solve some of their housing problems while at the 
same time stimulating economic activity in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Waterhen Lake First Nation recently purchased a saw mill 
and plans to use it to launch a log cabin business. It hopes to 
build log cabins to help ease the desperate housing shortage 
facing that community. About 100 families currently are on the 
waiting-list, and many of those families on the waiting-list 
consist of young people who also have young children. 
 
We, as the Liberal opposition, hope that this government will 
also look at ways to encourage northern communities to build 
their own houses. If communities such as Waterhen Lake 
choose to build log cabins, every effort must be made to ensure 
that they have access to high quality materials and equipment. 
 
The severe housing shortage of about 600 units in northern 
Saskatchewan demands that we find alternative ways to provide 
proper housing. The current overcrowding is causing health 
problems and family breakdown. A shortage of housing is also 
an economic disincentive and other challenges for people living 
in northern Saskatchewan. This crisis in housing demands a 
unique and creative solution. 
 
I’d like to commend the Waterhen Lake First Nations on their 
efforts to create jobs while at the same time relieving some of 
the tremendous pressure on current housing needs. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North-west Trade Fair 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend marks 
the sixth annual North-west Trade Fair to be held in Meadow 
Lake. The trade fair is sponsored by the Meadow Lake Winter 
Festival, and there will be something for everyone: more than 
90 indoor and outdoor exhibits ranging from household and 
commercial items to forestry and agriculture. 
 
And many of the exhibitors are from the Meadow Lake area. 
But there also, Mr. Speaker, will be some from across the 
prairie provinces, and one in fact even from Ontario. There will 
be forestry equipment on display. Mistik Management will have 
an exhibit again this year, as will the Millar Western pulp mill. 
 
Agriculture is also very important, as you will know, to the 
Meadow Lake economy. The North of 40 Cattle Breeders will 
have a show and competition which includes the futurity heifer 
competition, an open class showmanship competition. And this 
year there will be an outdoor tent which will be the focus for 
many more activities. There will be a locally organized petting 
zoo that will probably be a big hit for the kids this year. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, something for everybody. It’s shaping up 
to be a great weekend and a great annual event in Meadow 
Lake. Everyone is welcome. Thank you very much. 



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskferco Expansion 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today and congratulate Saskferco fertilizer plant on the 
announcement of their $37 million expansion. 
 
Saskferco was a great idea from the start, although the Premier 
and his colleagues didn’t seem to think so at the time. Instead 
they had nothing but contempt for the Saskferco plant when it 
was first announced. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the member who is now the Economic 
Development minister called Saskferco a sweetheart deal. And 
the Premier said much, much more. He said, and I quote: 
“We’ve got a white elephant on our hands.” He also said, “The 
fertilizer plant should be stopped.” That was on February 20, 
1991. 
 
He later said that the NDP (New Democratic Party) were, 
“opposed to the Saskferco fertilizer plant.” Well it’s good to see 
that the members opposite have completed their about-face on 
this particular issue, and now if we could accomplish the same 
thing in a number of other areas, perhaps Saskatchewan’s 
economy would indeed have a chance. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women in Agriculture 
 
Ms. Murrell:  On Secretaries Day it is worth pointing out 
that not all secretaries are women, which gives me the 
opportunity to say that, likewise, not all farmers are men. We no 
longer talk about the farmer and the farmer’s wife any more 
than we refer to actors and actresses. People act and people 
farm. 
 
In recognition of this fact, I’m happy to commend the 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food Library for establishing a 
research collection on the achievements of Saskatchewan farm 
women  a collection that will become a valuable tool for the 
scholar and for the interested general reader. 
 
The collection began as the result of the 1991 census of 
agriculture, which, with extended reporting, allowed for 
specific recognition that there are, quote “farms owned and 
operated by females.” 
 
This recognition has led to the library’s attempt to collect in one 
spot records that have till now been scattered or sparse. Head 
librarian Helene Stewart and her staff are attempting to build 
their collection and ask for contributions from the public  
journals, books, conference proceedings, whatever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because we are not yet 100 years old as a 
province, we tend to be a bit casual in the preservation of our 
historical record. I am happy to see this collection of the 
achievements of Saskatchewan farm women. It is a good start  

on a neglected chapter of our historical book. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I questioned the 
Acting Minister of Agriculture in this House yesterday about 
the fact that his government is backing farmers into a corner by 
demanding payment of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) wind-up. By breaking its promise, the government is 
encouraging farmers to pursue legal action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an ad in today’s paper, in the Regina Leader-Post, 
invites farmers to join a possible court challenge against the 
government. Will the Acting Minister of Agriculture stand in 
this House and demonstrate some courage by doing what this 
government should have done in the first place  return the 
$188 million that was taken from the GRIP surplus and return it 
to the producers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite for 
the question. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite keeps referring 
this to a bill, when actually it is a request to the farmers to 
return the overpayment in 1993. Some of the reason the farmers 
are not sending this request to government, Mr. Speaker, is 
because of the member opposite creating confusion. 
 
He speaks of the $188 million that was the province’s share of 
when the GRIP ended. I want to inform the member that the 
great percentage of that was put back into agricultural 
programs, unlike his counterparts in Ottawa who took most of it 
back into their general revenue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because this 
government broke its promise and is now demanding the 
payment on GRIP wind-up statements, farmers feel they must 
examine legal recourse as an alternative to hold the government 
to its word. 
 
While this government demonstrates no regard for the farmers 
of this province, the mayor of Calgary recently stated, and I 
quote, “Agriculture is growing more than food. It’s growing 
Calgary.” The mayor of Calgary realizes the importance of 
farmers and the farm economy, yet this government shows utter 
contempt for the farmers of this province by breaking promises 
time after time after time. 
 
Will the acting minister demonstrate his commitment to 
agriculture in Saskatchewan and make good on this 
government’s promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1120  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well the Minister of Agriculture of 
course is away on a trade mission right now and it’s probably a 
good thing. I’m sure he would be quite tired of the same 
questions coming day after day after day. 
 
But I want to tell the member opposite that there were 39,000 
producers that received their share of the GRIP overpayment. 
Does the member opposite want us to request that those 39,000 
farmers send back their cheques so that we can, in turn, give 
some money to the people that already received an overpayment 
in 1993? I think that’s what he’s suggesting. 
 
And I want  he talks about Alberta  I want to tell the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan we spend 
more than $400 per capita in agricultural programs, unlike 
Alberta who spent under $200 per capita for their agricultural 
programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance Office Closures 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
recently came into possession of the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union newsletter for the month of April. I would 
like to send a copy over to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. 
 
This newsletter indicates that when a number of Crop Insurance 
offices were recently closed, 46 in-scope or union positions 
were eliminated, resulting in 43 people losing their jobs. This 
publication also indicates that eighteen and a half out-of-scope 
or management positions were eliminated, but only one person 
lost a job in the process. 
 
Can the minister explain why 43 front-line service people lost 
their jobs and only one management person? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, this government listened to 
the people of Saskatchewan in an extensive consultation 
process before this budget. What they said is, because of the 
federal reductions to the province in health and in social 
programs and in education, that we should look internally to 
back-fill those programs so that we will not lose them. We 
looked throughout every department to see what internal 
efficiencies we could. Certainly in Crop Insurance there was 
some adjustments made, saving the people of Saskatchewan 
some $5 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I remember the members opposite campaigning in the last 
election about internal efficiencies. Now the only reason they 
don’t remember, Mr. Speaker, is because I think that was one of 
the sections of their red book that they whited out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
people in rural Saskatchewan are awful tired of seeing 
front-line people losing their jobs and all of your management 
people being protected in Regina. 

Mr. Speaker, the union alleges, in this newsletter, that the 
reason eighteen and half out-of-scope positions were eliminated 
and only person lost a job is because a number of positions 
were created, and I quote: “to make the government and 
management look good by cutting these phantom management 
jobs.” 
 
Will the minister explain how many other phantom 
management positions this government is pretending to cut in 
other departments while front-line people are losing their jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to tell the member opposite that 
the Crop Insurance offices were closed in Wilkie, Wolseley, 
Kyle, Wynyard, Carnduff, Outlook, Melfort, and Canora. Now I 
know the member is concerned about Melfort, but not 
concerned about the financial well-being of the province. 
 
The total job loss, Mr. Speaker, were 33 positions in Melville 
 29 full-time, 4 part-time; 27 customer service office 
positions; 154 marketing agents, Mr. Speaker. And why? 
Because farmers said that they could do it on their own and that 
that $5 million in savings would be better put to programs. 
 
The members opposite seem to forget that internal efficiency is 
necessary because of the federal cuts in their last budget. And 
we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, to give the people of 
this province adequate service within what we can afford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High-risk Offender Identification 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government claims to have the best interests of Saskatchewan 
children at heart. But time and time again, the Minister of 
Justice stands up in this House to give more excuses for not 
immediately making legislative changes to prevent 
Saskatchewan from becoming a haven for pedophiles. 
 
In a media interview yesterday, the minister stated that police 
are targeting child prostitution, and more specifically the johns, 
by making sure the names and faces of individuals are 
circulated publicly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if police are circulating the names and faces of 
convicted customers of child prostitutes, why won’t this 
government immediately start doing the same for convicted 
pedophiles who are seeking refuge in Saskatchewan 
communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 
of the Opposition for that question. We are working very 
carefully with the city police in Saskatoon, the city police in 
Regina, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), Justice 
officials, Social Services officials, to prepare a Saskatchewan 
way of dealing with the problem that the member opposite has 
raised. 
 
And we are going to do that in a way which protects the  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

children in our community, but it also deals with the issues of 
privacy and concern of some of these offenders. We’re going to 
do it in a fair, straightforward way, in the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, it seems that in fact the 
government is actually defending its double standard for child 
protection. I have already proposed Bill 56  An Act to Protect 
the Public from Convicted Pedophiles. It’s time to quit stalling. 
We will never know how many children are being put at risk 
while this government puts off dealing with the threat of 
released convicted pedophiles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Justice take immediate action 
on this issue by supporting our proposed legislation to protect 
the public from convicted pedophiles? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 
of the Opposition for his second question. We have been 
working carefully with the communities and the people that are 
involved in this. And I have a quote from Chief Owen Maguire 
in Saskatoon who we’ve been working with, and he says that 
. . . this is on April 11: 
 

I think we’re on a good track here. I would sooner have . . . 
(protocol) that we’re going to be able to live with rather 
than have to do patchwork. Saskatchewan has an 
opportunity here (to do it in a positive way). 

 
He confirms that our three-month time line is right in line and 
that we need to do this in an organized, concerned fashion. 
 
I met with Mr. Allan Rock last week. We’re looking at some of 
the things that are being done on a federal basis. We need to do 
this in a coordinated fashion with other provinces. This will be 
a subject for discussion at the ministers of Justice meeting in 
May in about two or three weeks time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nuclear Industry Development 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, your 
foot-dragging on nuclear development has cost our province a 
tremendous economic opportunity and possibly hundreds of 
jobs. 
 
On April 30, AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) is 
scheduled to announce a major restructuring, and speculation is 
that it will result in a major downsizing and possibly even 
closure of the Saskatoon AECL office, an office which employs 
110 people in high-paying, high-tech jobs. 
 
While your NDP government has resisted nuclear development, 
Manitoba has taken a proactive approach. As a result, AECL is 
going to continue funding the Whiteshell electron accelerator 
project in that province while Saskatchewan gets the short end  

of the stick once again. 
 
Mr. Premier, why have you squandered this opportunity? Why 
must Saskatchewan residents sit back and watch economic 
opportunities in high-paying, high-tech jobs leaving our 
province once again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Conservative Party of course is today, for a change, in the mode 
of defending virtually everything that the former Devine 
administration conducted and did in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s a refreshing change because, as we know, the Leader of 
the Third Party has been heretofore, since becoming the Leader 
of the Third Party, rejecting and denying everything that the 
Devine administration has embarked upon. 
 
This is another one of these hangover issues which the member 
alludes to and tries to concoct a case which is not based in 
conformance to the facts. The situation is that the province of 
Saskatchewan is in active negotiations with the appropriate 
AECL people to determine whether or not and how we can 
continue to have a significant presence of the research and the 
development respecting AECL’s activities in the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The key issue here is whether or not the federal Liberal 
government is going to continue the funding of AECL. They 
have to make a major decision in this regard, and we are 
working very hard to work the best possible deal for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. The assumptions behind the 
question are premature if not erroneous at this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you say 
that there are active negotiations going on. Well that may be the 
case. In 1994 you gave a Saskatchewan . . . pardon me, a 
Saskatoon consulting company, Garven &Associates, $95,000 
to conduct a feasibility study on building an electron accelerator 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we’re still waiting for the results of that study. Meanwhile 
Manitoba has beaten us to the punch. And if the accelerator is 
built anywhere, it will almost certainly wind up in Manitoba. In 
fact Manitoba will probably wind up using the $95,000 study 
you paid for to help them with their project. 
 
Mr. Premier, this type of facility can be used to process and 
preserve food products and sterilize medical supplies. That’s 
exactly the kind of value added processing that we need to 
promote here in Saskatchewan, instead of seeing it slip away to 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Premier, whatever became of the Garven study? Why have 
you taken so long to look at the opportunity and the high-tech 
jobs that go along with it that now appear to be gone for ever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite, of course, and I are onside to this extent. We believe  



1122  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

very much in diversification and value added development as 
the economy. It’s too bad that that’s not what he and his party 
believed in when they were in office for nine years. And the 
consequence, we find ourselves with a total debt of about 14 to 
$15 billion as they spent money like drunken sailors. 
 
We think that economic development is not megaprojects. We 
think economic development in Saskatchewan involves the 
private sector, the public sector, the cooperative sector, and it 
means value added as the hon. member has indicated, whether 
it’s in the nuclear research and development industry or in other 
areas. 
 
But what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, because we can’t 
afford to do it, we’re not going to open up the pocketbooks and 
get the province back further into the sink-hole of debt that the 
Conservatives have gotten this province into. We want reasoned 
studies, which will take time, in order to do research and 
development, value added and diversification; and when they 
land in the province of Saskatchewan they’re going to be here 
to stay and to provide good paying jobs for a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Occupational Health and Safety Changes 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 
Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, three 
years ago you introduced changes to The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act and several months ago a consultant you hired 
told you that your proposed regulations would cost business 
communities in Saskatchewan eighteen and a half million 
dollars to implement. 
 
At the time you said it was too soon to say how much changes 
to The Occupational Health and Safety Act regulations would 
cost businesses, but you were sure that the KPMG report was 
wrong. Well, Mr. Minister, you said the same thing about the 
business community’s concerns over The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, and you were once again proven to be 
wrong there. 
 
So now I suspect you’re waiting until we’re out of the session 
and people are on their summer holidays so that you can 
conveniently release your occupational health and safety 
regulations, because you will know of course that these 
regulations will be costly and you will want to avoid the 
scrutiny of this Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you’ve had three years to prepare these 
regulations . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member has been 
fairly lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My direct question 
to the minister is this. Mr. Minister, you’ve had three years to 
prepare these regulations. When are you going to release them, 
and would you commit today to releasing them while the 
legislature is still in session? 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I appreciate the question. It is an 
important issue, one of occupational health and safety. The 
regulations were almost ready to take forward when the report 
came out from KPMG, that they felt there could be as high as 
an $18 million price tag attached to the implementation of the 
regulations. 
 
We wanted to look at ways in which we could implement the 
occupational health and safety regulations without 
compromising their value for safer work places, and at the same 
time not having that much cost to the employers who would 
have to suffer that cost. 
 
We think we’ve been successful in a number of areas that 
we’ve looked, in terms of in particular having the training of 
occupational health and safety committees, a number of 
proactive initiatives, some regulatory measures I think 
employers will be happy with. 
 
And while I cannot commit to making sure that the regulations 
are brought forward during the term of the session, I’m 
certainly going to be doing my best to bring them in in the very 
near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
supplemental question for the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, 
everybody wants the workplace to be safe. Everybody wants 
that place to be safe  the employers and the employees alike. 
The problem is, Mr. Minister, your own report states that your 
changes will place a significant burden on small businesses, and 
that they won’t necessarily improve the workplace safety, and 
you’ve admitted the cost yourself in your statement. 
 
On one hand the Minister of Economic Development is 
promising cuts in regulations for businesses, and on the other 
hand you are adding red tape to running a business in 
Saskatchewan. It’s not consistent. What’s worse, Mr. Minister, 
is that your proposed regulations won’t even improve the safety 
of workers. 
 
Mr. Minister, after three years it’s hard to believe that you 
haven’t been able to address the concerns outlined in your 
report and the concerns of the business community. Now, have 
you done so, Mr. Minister? Have you been able to address these 
concerns? And when can we and the business community 
examine those regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the regulations themselves have 
not changed in any substantive degree. It’s the implementation 
of the regulations that we’ve been looking at, to try and keep 
the costs reasonable. 
 
I want to stress to the member opposite and to the Assembly 
that the occupational health and safety regulations had fairly 
broad consensus on almost every issue from the labour 
community as well as the business community. It’s the cost that 
concerned us. It was a report done by KPMG. I also point out it 
was an interim report. 
 



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

And we took the interim report, looked at the concerns that 
were raised. I’ve had the officials in the department doing some 
consulting, both with business and labour. We’ve looked at 
some very innovative ways of implementing the 
recommendations that I think will be of benefit to the employer 
and also to the employees in having safer workplaces. 
 
And we are giving due diligence, and in the very near future the 
regulations will be in place. And I think that there will be 
general acceptance by the business community and having safer 
workplaces for the working men and women of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treatment of Welfare Recipients 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it has 
become very apparent, since 1991, that this government speaks 
a great deal about compassion, but its actions don’t reflect those 
words. 
 
And today we have another example involving Debbie Morris 
of Saskatoon, a cancer victim who is preparing to undergo 
surgery on Monday. As if she doesn’t have enough to worry 
about, Ms. Morris was recently cut off of welfare because she 
was attempting to make extra money to provide for her four 
children. As a result, this family has had to survive solely on 
family allowance. In addition, Ms. Morris has just received 
notice that her phone, power, gas, and water are going to be 
disconnected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Debbie Morris has enough to worry about. She 
does not need the added burden created because this NDP 
government lacks in compassion. What is the Minister of Social 
Services prepared to do to ensure that people like Ms. Morris 
are shown the compassion and the treatment with dignity that 
they so deserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Humboldt raises, in the House today, a very significant concern 
on behalf of an individual. Following question period, she and 
other members can rest assured that I and the Department of 
Social Services will be following up on the information that she 
has laid before the House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I ask that member again in public, as I have 
asked her in private on a number of occasions, if she is aware of 
individuals in our province who are in need, to please contact 
the department, contact my office. Do not just simply do it in a 
question period to endeavour to convince people of your own 
compassion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, there are numerous problems. I don’t 
think we should have to be contacting the minister constantly; 
he should be doing something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problems that Debbie Morris has had with 
government agencies is only one example of the lack of 
compassion that she and others like her experience on a daily  

basis. A great deal of the problem rests with the fact that this 
government is so money driven that it forgets that with every 
decision lives are affected. 
 
Will the minister explain how many people like Debbie Morris 
have to speak out before this NDP government rethinks its 
policies of economics over the well-being and compassion of 
our sick and elderly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I’m doing my level best to 
remain calm in light of that kind of question from that political 
party. I repeat again that individual concerns, I appreciate being 
brought to my attention, as does the Department of Social 
Services. What is not appreciated I know, by individuals or by 
the community, is grandstanding or this kind of politics, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now when that member from Humboldt, who in this House on 
occasion has attacked valuable civil servants and not 
apologized, when yesterday we had that caucus attacking civil 
servants, when today she implies that people are not doing their 
work, Mr. Speaker, it is shameful. And what is doubly 
shameful, what is doubly shameful, is the silence, Mr. Speaker, 
of that Liberal caucus in light of a federal Liberal government 
slashing social programs from coast to coast, border to border 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
impact of the SaskTel strike on management employees and the 
general public has been well documented by the media in this 
House. Reports that both sides in the dispute are heading back 
to the bargaining table is a positive sign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has come to my attention that many young 
people are awaiting to begin summer employment with the 
Crown corporation. Mr. Speaker, as members know, many 
students have or will soon wind up their schooling for the year 
and need summer’s work. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskTel in this House tell us how 
many young people are awaiting work with the Crown 
company, and whether their summer employment will be 
affected by this strike should it continue on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true that 
the contracts for summer employment that are normally entered 
into at approximately this time of year with the students who 
have summer jobs at SaskTel contain a clause which says that 
in the event of a labour disruption, that summer students will 
not be hired for the duration of that period. 
 
So it is true that an unfortunate effect of the current labour 
situation is that summer students will not be taking their place 
in those jobs until the impasse has been successfully resolved. 
 



1124  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, before we proceed to 
ministerial statements, I would ask for leave of the members to 
introduce some guests. 
 
The Speaker:  I will recognize the hon. member just before 
orders of the day and I expect to be there very shortly. I will 
acknowledge the hon. member before orders of the day. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Announcement of Saskferco Expansion 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring some good economic news to the attention of all members 
of the Assembly. This morning the Premier and I had the 
pleasure of taking part in the announcement of a $37 million 
expansion of Saskferco’s urea operation. 
 
This expansion is good news in more ways than one. It will 
create about 100 construction jobs and provide spin-off benefits 
to firms that supply services to the plant. It will also provide a 
greater return to Saskatchewan taxpayers on their investment in 
Saskferco. 
 
Last year, the plant paid a dividend of $7.2 million to the 
province. With the expansion we expect profits and subsequent 
dividends to be even higher. Mr. Speaker, Saskferco has proven 
to be a safe investment for the province. The plant was initially 
funded by an equity commitment of $69.9 million by Cargill, 
$68.4 million by the province, and $1.4 million by Citibank. As 
well, the government currently guarantees debt of $214.6 
million U.S. (United States). 
 
In its first three years of operation, Saskferco has paid $16.4 
million U.S. and $38 million Canadian against debt guaranteed 
by the province. I am pleased that the new expansion will be 
financed from Saskferco’s cash flow and that the partners are 
not required to make any further investment. 
 
In closing, I want to emphasize that this expansion is a win-win 
situation for the government, the company, the shareholders, 
and most importantly, for the people of this province. With 140 
people on its permanent payroll and another 40 employed on a 
contract basis, Saskferco continues to make an important 
contribution to jobs, agriculture, and economic growth in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to begin 
by thanking the minister for having the statement in a timely 
fashion. We appreciate that and hope that all other ministers 
will take note. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever there is economic news of this sort in 
the province of course our caucus is always supportive, and it’s 
just good for the province. It’s good for everyone involved and  

we commend Cargill . . . or Saferco for in fact these 
expansions. 
 
One thing that I might add for the minister is that in fact some 
of the profits that he’s referring to that the Saskatchewan 
government enjoys, should be perhaps redirected to those that 
are directly related to this industry, and that being the farmers of 
this province. 
 
When we have profits related to the fertilizer industry why 
wouldn’t the government directly send this money back in some 
form or fashion to the farmers of this province who are 
purchasing this fertilizer, Mr. Speaker? And I hope this is 
something they’ll consider in the very near future. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While we are pleased to 
see the Premier and his colleagues now in support of this 
project, when it was under construction the Premier and his 
colleagues ran around this province like Chicken Little saying 
that the sky was going to fall in. And the project now has been 
shown to be successful. It was a good investment. It returned 
jobs, economic diversification and development here in the 
province. It was, in the minister’s own words, a good, safe 
investment. And it’s nice to see that they finally recognize that. 
 
And I’ve just to remind you of a few of the comments . . . just 
remind you of a few of the comments that you and your 
colleagues made at the time: “We’ve got a white elephant on 
our hands”; that was the Premier. “The $340 million Cargill 
fertilizer plant should be stopped”; that was another comment 
of the Premier at the time. And another quote: “Romanow is 
opposed to Saferco fertilizer plant.” A quote again: 
“Romanow’s NDP says the Saferco plant under construction is 
not an issue.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s finally come home to roost on the NDP, the 
good socialists that they are, that there are times when there is 
an opportunity to make investments, and that was indeed one of 
the great investments that this province enjoys. 
 
We have to, Mr. Speaker, it goes I guess without . . . certainly 
without saying that the management and staff of Cargill and 
Saferco deserve a great deal of credit in terms of the project and 
the project’s successful nature, that it is out there. And we fully 
believe that it was a good project for the people of 
Saskatchewan and has resulted in tremendous opportunities for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  I have a ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker:  Before we proceed to . . . Order, order. Before 
we proceed to . . . Order. Before we proceed to ministerial 
statements, I have previously denied the hon. member for 
Regina Victoria leave to introduce guests on some 
understandings regarding orderly operation of the House, and I 
wasn’t anticipating the ministerial statement. 
 
I would like to, with the permission of the members, to return  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

back to the hon. member for Victoria’s request for leave. Would 
that be granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to thank the members of the House for their 
kindness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members, a group of 30 students. They’re all adults. They are 
enrolled at the University of Regina in the English as a second 
language program. They’re accompanied here today by their 
instructors, Ruth Heinrichs, Ron Evans, and Rob McDonnell. 
 
Now many, if not all, of these students will have come here 
from other countries to learn English, and in addition to 
whatever other impression we may leave them with, let us leave 
them a warm and profound impression of welcome and 
friendship. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I note that 
we have a very important guest with us who happens to be 
sitting behind the bar on the government side of the House, Mr. 
Ken Kluz, who is a former member of this Assembly. 
 
Unfortunately, it appears it ran up against a roadblock in the 
nomination and I believe the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood is now the member from that area. But 
we certainly want to recognize the efforts he has given to us in 
the past and welcome him back to this Assembly. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Sale of Cameco Shares 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
to advise the Assembly of a matter of considerable positive 
public interest. 
 
Members of the Assembly will know that when this government 
announced its intention to sell nine and a half million of its 
shares in Cameco Corporation, it also announced that a further 
1 million shares would be available through options for sale for 
another period of 30 days. I’m pleased to announce today that at 
the closing of the option period, an additional 620,500 shares 
were sold under the option. 
 
Despite the current market price, which is slightly below the  

original sale price, these additional shares were sold at the 
original closing price of 75.50 per share. The total amount of 
shares of Cameco sold by CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) this year is now 10,120,500. The Crown 
holding company retains 5,423,123 shares in the uranium 
producing and refining corporation headquartered in Saskatoon. 
This represents 10.3 per cent of outstanding shares in Cameco. 
 
This sale was a tremendous success because of the work of the 
officials of the Crown Investments Corporation and the 
syndicate it put together to market this issue. Cameco has been 
listed on the New York Stock Exchange since March. It is now 
only the second Saskatchewan company to be listed on the New 
York Stock Exchange  both of which have roots as 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations. 
 
In marketing this issue, Cameco and CIC’s brokerage syndicate 
travelled all across North America and to London, Paris, and 
Geneva, contributing to the great success of the sale. In the 
process of introducing investors to Cameco, they also 
acquainted them with Saskatchewan and the kinds of 
opportunities available in our province. The professional 
marketing job done by Cameco and by our syndicate is 
something worthy of praise from every member of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIC officials and board members put a great deal 
of time and effort into putting together the right syndicate for 
this sale, and I would say the results speak very clearly for the 
success of those efforts. I want to make it clear that, as with the 
funds received from the original sale, the money for the sale of 
the options shares will be applied directly to debt repayment. 
 
The sale of these options will result in gross proceeds of $46.85 
million to CIC. The total gross proceeds from the sale of 
Cameco shares is now placed at $764.1 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, estimated total net proceeds, after costs, $730 million. 
Of these proceeds, half will be retained by CIC to pay down its 
debt and half will be paid to the General Revenue Fund in the 
form of a special dividend  all, as I’ve already said, to pay 
down debt. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that CIC’s prudent management of 
the public’s investment in Cameco has resulted in this 
significant return on that investment and, might I add, a return 
much higher than that which we would have received had we 
relied on the advice of the members opposite who sit amongst 
us in this Assembly today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1430) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to at 
this time thank the minister for sending a copy of the ministerial 
statement over in a timely fashion, as I wish that other ministers 
would also do. 
 
Of course today’s sale, once again at quite a high price, I guess, 
in comparison to what it was a year ago or two years ago looks 
great for Saskatchewan. But there are some concerns, Mr.  



1126  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Speaker, that being that we still hold significant amount of 
shares, if in fact the sale of shares isn’t putting downward 
pressure on the value of shares. I think there’s an opportunity 
for the government to perhaps move further along in this 
direction and get out of some of the industry and businesses 
that they’re in today. You know, whether or not they should 
ever have been into is still a question which needs to be 
answered. 
 
A few of the concerns that we would have with in fact, you 
know . . . not rain on his day here, but a few of the concerns we 
would have still comes in the form of how this division of the 
monies coming in . . . where half goes to CIC to pay down debt 
and half goes to the General Revenue Fund. Whenever you 
have monies going to the General Revenue Fund . . . and this is 
the only way that we can have of an assurance that in fact it’s 
going towards debt. It opens it up to some gamesmanship. 
 
So at this time, I would ask that the minister, perhaps within 
cabinet, promote the Bill put forward by the Liberal Finance 
critic and support this Bill which in fact would tie . . . I don’t 
want to say tie the hands, but it gives ease to directing the sale 
of assets over and above $100,000 in value directly to the debt. 
And we don’t have to worry about whether or not there’s 
semantics or some games being played there, so that when in 
fact you have positive announcements such as this, the public, 
the opposition, know full well that it’s going to go directly to 
where we are being told, and we don’t have to have accountants 
pore over this to ensure us and to the public that in fact that is 
the case. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are certainly 
pleased to see the further sale of Cameco shares. As you know, 
it was originally intended to be sold down over time, and so we 
are pleased to see that the government is indeed doing that. We 
have been recommending it, and I’m glad to see that they have 
accepted that recommendation. The benefit to the province will 
be significant, Mr. Speaker. We would very much want to see 
all monies raised going towards debt retirement. 
 
We hope that this means that the government will sort of take 
the blinders off to other opportunities in this area  perhaps 
the further share and eventual completion of sales of Cameco 
altogether. There’s others as well. The Wascana Energy, there’s 
approximately $65 million worth of shares that the government 
currently holds in Wascana Energy that I think is an 
opportunity. Perhaps Saferco as well is a great opportunity, 
given the strong fertilizer market that’s out there today, that 
that’s a possibility. 
 
And another possibility perhaps, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 
is SaskTel. I can’t help but recall the dinner that we attended 
here not long ago where they had the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Hewlett Packard talking about SaskTel and the good 
job that SaskTel does, yes, and the value that there is. But his 
concern was that at some point, given new technology coming 
into place at SaskTel, while it may be worth literally millions, 
hundreds of millions, perhaps even billions, might not be worth 
anything in the not-too-distant future. 
 
So we hope through the Crown process, the process of  

reviewing Crown corporations, that privatization will be looked 
at in a very favourable light because there are other 
opportunities, there are other ways of raising money here in the 
province to pay down debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61  An Act respecting the Practices of 
Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak on second reading of The Engineering and Geoscience 
Professions Act. This Bill is a rewrite of the existing 
professional engineering legislation in the province. 
 
The current engineering law is out of date. The law reflects the 
world of professional engineering as it existed many decades 
ago. The Association of Professional Engineers of 
Saskatchewan began the process of developing a new Act about 
eight years ago. 
 
In developing this Act it was decided to add recognition and 
regulation of professional geoscientists in the new engineering 
law. Geoscientists carry on work of a similar nature to 
engineering. We have worked closely with both groups, 
engineers and geoscientists, in developing this new law. Hon. 
members are no doubt aware we have received a fair amount of 
comment from other organizations on this proposed legislation. 
 
A number of groups have expressed the concern that the 
legislation may result in the new Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan taking steps to 
restrict the ability of groups such as physicists, computer 
scientists, information processors, architects, and technologists 
and technicians, from carrying out their normal duties. 
 
These groups made their concerns known to me shortly after I 
became minister. As a result of these concerns, it was decided 
not to bring in any changes to what we call the scope of practice 
for engineers. We are bringing in a Bill which essentially is a 
necessary housekeeping Bill. This Bill updates the current law 
in a number of routine areas which are not controversial. I will 
indicate these now, and can deal with them further in 
committee. 
 
The Bill provides for greater public accountability by 
authorizing the government to appoint two members to the 
council of the new professional association. The Bill updates 
public accountability in cases of professional misconduct or 
professional incompetence and updates fine levels for these 
cases. 
 
This Bill is the first step in a two-step process. Because of the 
concerns of the groups I have already mentioned, I have  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

decided to start consultation with these groups as soon as 
possible. I will be inviting groups interested in a new scope of 
practice for engineers and geoscientists to join with my officials 
in discussing a new scope of practice. I firmly believe we need 
a new scope of practice. 
 
A new scope of practice clause must reflect the public interest 
and the reality of today’s world of work. Hopefully it will be 
achieved by a consensus of all interested parties. Members may 
know I have received an indication from groups such as 
physicists, computer scientists, and architects that they can 
accept this first step, provided we move quickly to resolve their 
concerns over any new scope of practice. It is incumbent upon 
us to do this as soon as possible. I assure the House we will 
work diligently to achieve a consensus on the new scope of 
practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about people employed 
as technicians and technologists. I understand and appreciate 
the strong representations from their organization in the past 
few weeks. I acknowledge their desire to be specifically 
identified as a group who are excluded from the Act’s 
provisions. The draft Bill does exclude them as a group who are 
practising his or her profession, trade, or calling. This exclusion 
continues the provision in the current law. 
 
As I said, this draft Bill provides for us to appoint two members 
to the council of the new association. I intend to recommend we 
appoint a technician or technologist to the council. I will be 
asking the Saskatchewan Applied Technologists and 
Technicians to suggest names for my consideration. 
 
I wish to discuss the intent of the new law. The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Act does not restrict people from doing 
their jobs. The Bill only regulates the practice of professional 
engineering and professional geoscience by members of the 
new association. The only prohibition is against others holding 
themselves out as professional engineers or professional 
geoscientists. Only members of the new association may put 
themselves forward as professional engineers or professional 
geoscientists. The Bill does not prevent people from doing their 
jobs in any way. The specific exclusion clause clarifies this 
intent. 
 
The new Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act will 
update an important law for engineers and geoscientists in this 
province. Our plan to develop a consensus on a new scope of 
practice for stage 2 demonstrates our commitment to reaching a 
mutually satisfactory solution for engineers and geoscientists, 
technologists and technicians, and other groups. 
 
By working on this project in a cooperative spirit we can 
develop a better law for us all. I will be pleased to answer any 
questions members may have in committee. I move second 
reading of The Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to take a few moments to discuss The 
Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act that is before us 
today. 
 

I firstly would like to note that in my reading of the Act I see 
that it’s a very important thing that there’s been no provision 
made anywhere in this Act for including welders under the 
definition of the professional engineers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an Act regulating the engineering and 
geoscientific profession is long overdue. The current legislation 
that governs these professions is outdated and the Association 
of Professional Engineers of Saskatchewan has been working 
towards this new Act for many years. 
 
As the fields of engineering and geoscience progress and 
modernize on a global scale, legislation that regulates these 
professions needs to be modified and changed as well. Through 
talks and consultations with the Association of Professional 
Engineers of Saskatchewan, it has been made clear that this 
association is pleased to see that Bill 77, An Act respecting the 
Practices of Professional Engineering and Professional 
Geoscience has been introduced in the House during this 
legislative session. 
 
A lot of time and hard work has gone into the formulation of 
this Bill on the part of many organizations that will be regulated 
by this pending piece of legislation. Upon the passage of this 
Bill into law, the Association of Professional Engineers of 
Saskatchewan will be known as the Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see this government take notice of 
the importance that technical professions have for the economic 
well-being and growth of this province. 
 
This Bill not only recognizes the importance of these types of 
jobs and careers, but it hopefully opens this government’s eyes 
to the need to work to keep and to recruit as many technological 
jobs in Saskatchewan as possible. 
 
(1445) 
 
The future of this province depends not only on the continuing 
prosperity of the agricultural sectors of rural Saskatchewan, but 
it also depends on the fostering of growth in the oil and gas, 
mining, and forestry industries in this province. We would all 
like to see continued growth in these sectors of our economy as 
they do foster job creation and economic growth in the areas of 
the province that need it most, that is northern and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan has one of the finest 
engineering programs in western Canada; giving public support 
to engineering and geoscientific professions will hopefully help 
foster a growing interest in this field of studies in our 
province’s universities. 
 
Currently, a large number of engineers that graduate from our 
universities’ engineering and geoscience programs leave the 
province to find employment elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, we must 
work together to bolster the engineering and geoscience fields 
in our province in order to keep our young people here. By 
doing so, we will not only continue to increase our tax base, but 
industries that depend on engineers and geoscientists for much  



1128  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

of the work that needs to be done will be able to find qualified, 
quality people living and working here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The main purpose of this new legislation, as I understand it, Mr. 
Speaker, is to include geoscientists into the recognition and 
regulations that govern engineers in this province. Due to the 
similarity of work that is done by many types of engineers and 
geoscientists, it only makes sense that they be ruled by the same 
piece of legislation. 
 
This bill does not simply include the geoscience title, it reflects 
consensus among the engineering and geoscience communities 
with regards to disciplinary provisions and penalties that may 
arise out of disciplinary action. The stakeholders that we have 
consulted see no problem with stiffer penalties in cases of 
professional or criminal misconduct. 
 
The council under this new legislation will consist of elected 
and appointed councillors from both fields and shall govern the 
affairs of the Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan. The council must consist of at 
least ten councillors. Of the councillors that are elected, not less 
than two are to be professional geoscientists and not less than 
four are to be professional engineers. 
 
I do question, why there is a difference in the required numbers 
of elected professionals from each field sitting on the council. 
This concern will be raised in more detail in the Committee of 
the Whole This council has the power to establish committees 
that it deems to be necessary. 
 
A registrar that records the names and addresses of every 
member, licensee, and holder of a certificate of authorization is 
to be recorded and presented to the Minister of Justice on or 
before February 1 of each year. 
 
The association of professional engineers and geoscientists is 
also required to file an annual report to the minister, as 
required. 
 
This Bill not only repeals The Engineering Professions Act, but 
also makes consequential amendments to a number of pieces of 
current Saskatchewan legislation. Eleven other pieces of 
legislation will be amended following the passage of this Bill 
into law. The amendments of these Acts all deal with the 
definition of a professional engineer. 
 
The definition of a professional engineer will now be regulated 
under The Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act, and no 
longer by The Engineering Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see this Bill as a non-controversial one. The 
changes to the regulation of professional engineers and 
geoscientists through this Bill are long overdue. The authority 
of the council and committees are clearly outlined in this Bill, 
as are the responsibilities of the association as a whole. 
 
I do have some questions regarding some of the sections of the 
Bill, but I have no major concerns with the actual content or 
intent of this Bill. We have received positive feedback from a 
number of stakeholders in regard to this Bill and I feel quite  

comfortable that this is a good piece of legislation that will have 
nothing but good effects for all professions. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 55  An Act to amend  
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees’ pension plan provides 
pension benefits to municipal employees, school board 
employees, and designated police officers and fire-fighters. 
Over 700 employers and over 7,400 employees participate in 
the plan. 
 
A nine-member commission oversees the plan’s operations. The 
commission represents major employers and interest groups 
participating in the plan, such as the association of school 
business officials, the rural municipal administrators’ 
association, and urban employees. 
 
The primary impetus for this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to change the 
plan to comply with the Income Tax Act of Canada. 
Participating employers of the municipal employees’ pension 
plan currently match employee contributions to the plan on a 
monthly basis. 
 
In a defined benefit pension plan, Revenue Canada does not 
allow employers to match employee contributions based on 
salary. It is therefore necessary to amend the plan to provide 
that employers will contribute amounts as determined by the 
commission. This amount, to be determined by the Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Commission, will be based upon an 
actuarial valuation. The commission is dedicated to ensuring 
that the pension plan is funded at all times. 
 
The municipal employees’ pension plan currently refunds any 
member contributions exceeding the amount allowed in a given 
calendar year under the Income Tax Act of Canada, plus 
interest. Revenue Canada, however, prohibits the payment of 
interest on this refund amount and it is prudent to amend the 
plan to reflect this. 
 
The pension paid to a member prior to age 65 is reduced at age 
65. It is necessary to amend the plan to make it clear that 
members who take early retirement with a reduced pension will 
also have their allowance reduced at age 65. This amendment 
facilitates consistency of pension payments within the plan and 
complies with the Income Tax Act of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan currently allows members who retire with 
a terminal illness to receive the payment of their pension in the 
form of a term certain annuity. To comply with the income tax 
regulations of Canada it is necessary to amend this provision  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

such that members who are terminally ill at the time of their 
retirement will receive the commuted value of their pension. 
The same benefit will be provided to active members of the 
plan who terminate membership in the plan due to a terminal 
illness. 
 
The pension plan currently provides a pension to those 
members who meet certain medical criteria. The disability 
allowance is payable to a member who is less than age 60 and 
has at least 15 years of continuous service. The member must 
be in receipt of a disability benefit under the Canada Pension 
Plan. 
 
For compliance purposes, the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission recommends that the member must also be 
disabled within the meaning of the Income Tax Act of Canada 
to receive the disability allowance. 
 
Adding this criteria to The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act 
ensures that the plan complies with the federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon termination of employment, the municipal 
employees’ pension plan allows members two years to seek 
re-employment with a participating employer of the pension 
plan without affecting the member’s service for the purpose of 
qualifying for a pension. 
 
It is desirable to amend the plan such that non-vested members 
will receive a refund of their contributions, plus interest, 
immediately upon the expiration of this two-year period instead 
of after six months. This change will benefit the member by 
providing continued membership in the plan and will foster 
consistency in the pension plan’s operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where a member dies prior to the commencement 
of a pension and leaves no beneficiary, it is the desire of the 
pension plan to pay to the member’s estate the commuted value 
of the pension as at the member’s death, plus any other relevant 
amounts standing to the member’s credit at the date of death. 
This method of payment reflects the value of the pension earned 
as at the date of death and is more representative of the amount 
that should be payable on the member’s behalf. The current 
practice pays the amount standing to the member’s credit and 
the contribution account multiplied by two. 
 
It is also desirable to amend the legislation to remove those 
provisions that no longer apply to members in the plan. This 
facilitates the commission’s desire for concise, complete, and 
accurate legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This proposed 
legislation will significantly restructure The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act. I understand that many of the changes 
are needed to make sure that the municipal employees’ Act will 
comply with the revamped federal Income Tax Act. 
 
One of the first amendments proposed in this Bill will allow 
people employed by one municipality who leave and become  

employed by a different municipality to continue coverage 
under the municipal pension plan. The suggested changes in 
section 14 will give non-permanent members two years to find 
other employment with another employer in the plan instead of 
a just six-month period as in the current Act. 
 
Another section in this legislation will change the formula 
municipalities use to determine how much they contribute to 
employees’ pension plan. The amendments outlined in section 
17 will move away from a strict dollar-for-dollar plan to a more 
sophisticated formula that is decided by an actuary. 
 
While I am pleased to see that changes are being made to bring 
this Act into line with the federal Income Tax Act, a few of the 
amendments cause me some concern. There would be major 
changes to the financial contributions of the municipal 
employees’ pension plan, and I would like a better idea of what 
kind of financial impact this will have on municipalities. 
 
If a municipality is joining the plan, it will have to pay a lump 
sum. I have some concerns about how that amount of money 
will be calculated. Another problem I have with Bill 55 is the 
section dealing with the over-contributions employees make to 
the municipal pension plan. Under Bill 55, those people would 
not collect interest on the over-payment. If the employees will 
not get that interest, I’m wondering where the interest will end 
up. 
 
The amendments contained in section 21 will see the commuted 
value of the employee’s pension to be paid out if that employee 
dies, but I do not see any mechanism in place to ensure that this 
commuted value is fair. 
 
I am pleased to see that this legislation will make changes in 
section 24 to adopt a federal definition of disability. I believe 
this is generous and fair. 
 
Finally I do have concerns about the changes outlined for 
section 37. Municipalities would now have two years to pay out 
pension refunds, instead of one. I feel that a two-year wait may 
be too long for employees who are no longer working for 
municipalities. 
 
Because all the amendments proposed in Bill 55 will have a 
significant financial impact on municipalities and their 
employees, I would like more time to consult with these 
stakeholders. And therefore I move this debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1500) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 63  An Act 
respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund be now 
read a second time. 



1130  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we are 
discussing a new Act aimed at consolidating the provisions for 
underwriting annuities for pension plans under one Act. Upon 
passage of this Act, the fund, which currently has a budget of 
approximately $13 million, will be invested by the board. This 
fund will provide annuities for members of the public 
employees superannuation plan. 
 
Section 6(1) deals with the board’s ability to establish specialty 
funds. I am having a difficult time understanding the need for 
this unless it is to enable the board to make riskier investments. 
As set forth, there do not seem to be legislated guidelines to 
regulate such uncertain ventures. 
 
The Act also states that The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 
doesn’t apply to this board. This would seem to have some 
far-reaching implications. That Act goes on to set out division 
of funds upon a marriage breakdown and establishment of 
appeal process if there is an objection to the division. 
 
Upon examination of this Act, Mr. Speaker, I find the goals set 
forth unclear, and I do not see any real benefit. As a member of 
the official opposition it is my responsibility, along with my 
colleagues, to scrutinize this Bill, to provide reasonable 
criticism, and make suggested changes. It is my duty to 
challenge parts of this Bill that I find do not satisfy the Act’s 
mandate. The stakeholders and interest groups that have had the 
opportunity to review the Act have also expressed some 
concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At this point I conclude my remarks and will discuss my 
concerns when we meet in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 64  An Act 
respecting Pensions for Public Employees be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this point we 
are discussing another Act dealing with the public employees’ 
pension. This Bill appears to be just a revamping of the old 
supervisory board of the public employees’ government 
contributory superannuation plan which exists under the 
previous legislation. 
 
This board’s job is to invest money from the fund in securities 
that have been authorized by The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 
As I read the Bill there is no opportunity for a court challenge 
of the actions of the board. In addition to investing the money 
from the pension fund, the board will also administer the public 
employees’ pension plan. This pool of money the board looks 
after called the public employees’ pension fund is an 
accumulation of employees’ and employers’ contributions, 
money from the old fund, revenues earned from the investments 
of the fund, and certain other monies that are transferred into 
the fund, as set out in sections 15 and 16. 

Mr. Speaker, as a member again of the official opposition, it is 
my job to challenge the members opposite to do their very best 
for the citizens of this province. It is my responsibility to 
challenge and give responsible criticisms. It is my job to 
scrutinize every piece of legislation and try and arrive at a 
suitable conclusion with the other members. To assist us in this, 
we have approached various interest groups to help us appraise 
the Act. I will bring their concerns before this body in the 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 65  An Act 
to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for 
the opportunity to discuss amending this Bill and its possible 
consequences. As I read the amendment, it outlines provisions 
allowing for the splitting of pension assets upon marriage 
breakdown as set forth in The Matrimonial Property Act. There 
is clarification as to how the pension assets are dealt with when 
a marriage breaks down after retirement. 
 
Under the Act it reads, today’s pension assets can only be split 
when the benefits become available. This amendment allows 
for the benefits to be divided, based upon the commuted value 
of the benefits accrued from the date of marriage and ending on 
the date of an order or agreement pertaining to the marriage 
breakdown. The amount of the division of the commuted value 
entitled to by the spouse will be transferred to a prescribed 
RRSP (registered retirement savings plan) subject to The 
Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 
 
It is our job as members of the opposition caucus to scrutinize 
each and every change, to honestly evaluate the amendments, 
and suggest legitimate, concrete changes. To achieve this, our 
caucus again is in contact with stakeholders and people that will 
be directly affected by these changes. They have expressed 
some concern, however, and we will address these concerns 
when we discuss the Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 73An Act to 
amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983  be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am glad to have a few 
minutes today to discuss the proposed amendments to The 
Planning and Development Act, 1983. I have a few concerns  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

with this Bill and I would also like to raise a few issues before 
this Bill passes into Committee of the Whole. 
 
The mandate of this Bill as I see it is to ensure that the province 
of Saskatchewan is able to maintain an environment for 
meaningful and effective land use which will continue to be of 
benefit to the people of this province. 
 
As we have stated before, Mr. Speaker, the majority of the 
changes being proposed in this Bill are simply housekeeping. 
We have no concerns with these small changes. It is the larger 
and more significant impacts that will come out of the 
implementation of these changes that concern me somewhat. 
 
Several stakeholders have contacted my office with some 
serious and very well-founded concerns. Mr. Speaker, The 
Planning and Development Act will have a significant impact 
on people across this province, not just on those in my 
constituency that I have been in contact with. 
 
The true mandate behind the changes of this Bill are to give the 
NDP government more control over the lives of the people in 
this province . . . is to have more control over the lives of the 
people in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we do not agree with this type of 
government. We were elected to represent the people, not to 
control their lives. I believe that the power to make this decision 
should continue to be in the hands of the people of this great 
province. 
 
The greatest concern that I have with this Bill is that it transfers 
even more power into the hands of the minister responsible for 
Municipal Government. The people of this province do not 
deserve to live by the heavy-handed regulations of this minister 
and her government. 
 
This Bill allows the Minister for Municipal Government to 
make decisions without consulting the people that will be 
affected, and she will no longer have to publish her decisions in 
the Gazette. What does this minister feel needs to be hidden 
from the people of this province? Everyone has a right to access 
to the decisions that are made by ministers on a regular basis. 
 
Another concern I have is with the issue of buffer strips and the 
sale of these strips by the minister with no consultation with the 
municipalities that will be affected by these sales. This is 
another example of this government making decisions and then 
telling the people involved, instead of going through the 
consultation process before the decisions are made. 
 
I believe that members opposite have lost touch with the people 
of the province. They have forgotten that they have been elected 
to represent these people and not to unilaterally make decisions 
that will affect the lives of many people across the province. 
 
I have some major concerns with the appeal process and with 
the restrictions placed on building permits by this government. 
How strict are the parameters going to be? If a person is 
halfway through construction of a building and then decides to  

change the plan slightly, will these changes be caught in a 
bureaucratic web? This issue will need to be discussed in 
greater length in Committee of the Whole. 
 
The people of this province need a government that will, 
through its legislation, create an atmosphere that will promote 
economic development and sustainable job creation. We want 
to see more construction and expansion of businesses. Mr. 
Speaker, the main concern, when it comes right down to it, is to 
ensure that the people of this province are not stifled by 
unnecessary levels of government and bureaucracy. 
 
We have, as of late, had the opportunity to consult with 
stakeholders and get their input on the possible impacts that this 
Bill will have on the people of northern and rural 
Saskatchewan. A considerable number of concerns with this 
Bill have been brought to our attention and we, through this 
Assembly, will be bringing those concerns to the attention of 
members of this government. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology 

 
The Chair:  I will ask the minister to introduce his officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today Lily Stonehouse, the assistant deputy minister in the 
department; and Melodie Olineck, who is the liaison with the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
members of your staff, Mr. Minister, welcome, and we look 
forward to a productive afternoon. 
 
I note that in 1992, Mr. Minister, a committee was struck to 
review SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology). Might you be able to inform us as to who 
comprised that committee and the people that were on it and 
what kind of a report was put to you? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, it took 
me a few moments to be briefed on it because I had not 
anticipated the question. 
 
I believe that the review that the member is inquiring about is 
the one that was chaired by Mr. Green, Mr. Stan Green. His 
committee consisted, if memory serves, of about half a dozen 
people, and they inquired into a number of internal issues in 
SIAST, primarily internal issues. 
 
This report was in due course delivered to the then minister,  



1132  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

who is the present Minister of Municipal Government  she 
was the minister of Education at the time  and she turned the 
report over to the board of SIAST. And I’m advised that the 
recommendations in that report were all, or for the most part, 
implemented. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. While you’ve 
indicated that most of the recommendations were implemented, 
and I trust that that is the reason why we’re seeing the SIAST 
Act — as a result of those recommendations — are there any 
. . . would you say that there were any critical recommendations 
that probably would have changed philosophy or done 
something quite contrary to what has been suggested and are 
being implemented in this new SIAST Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member will have noted that the 
changes that are being proposed in the Bill now before the 
Assembly are housekeeping in nature and don’t reflect any big 
change in policy or anything like that. The committee report, 
however, dealt with a wide range of matters which did not 
require legislative change and therefore are not reflected in the 
Bill. 
 
But the things that are here  the reference to the secretariat, 
the reference to the four institutes, and the other changes that 
are here  for the most part do come out of the Green report. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The question then would be, is that the board 
of directors of SIAST, as far as their proposals to you in 
regarding the changes from The Institute Act to the SIAST Act, 
if we would go back to the committee that was in place for the 
review, would they generally be satisfied with the 
recommendations that are being put forth in this new Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, Mr. Chair, they would. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Good. Thank you. 
 
Under section 5(1)(h), there’s reference to SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management corporation) and its 
relationship with SIAST. I was wondering if you could explain 
to the House as far as the . . . what role SPMC plays in building 
. . . that is, is it involved in actual capital? Is it involved only in 
terms of furniture, stationery supplies? What role does SPMC 
have in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, SPMC 
owns the buildings and the real estate that is occupied by 
SIAST. It is therefore the landlord from whom we rent the 
premises. SPMC also is involved in the tendering for major 
equipment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The ownership is of all four campuses, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The situation is that on each of the four 
campuses, if I can use that term, each of the four institutes, the 
major buildings are owned by SPMC. There are, I think in every 
case, some buildings, a building or buildings, that are leased 
from other owners. I want to just correct my earlier answer; I 
ought to have made that clear. But for the most part  

SPMC is the owner of the real property. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  A final question around this section would 
be, what amount of money is transacted between SIAST and 
SPMC for the tendering and the rentals of property that SPMC 
would acquire? What amount of money is the total transaction 
between SIAST and SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The estimate for this current fiscal year, 
‘96-97, is as follows: accommodation, 13.334 million. There 
will be mail charges, mail charges, of approximately 225,000. 
And there will be approximately a million dollars, 
approximately $1 million in major equipment purchases. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Good, thank you, Mr. Minister. If we might 
refer now to section 6(8) where we note that that section 
actually talks about the remuneration to board members. What 
is the make-up, in terms of number of people, on the SIAST 
board? Do those appointments change often? And what would 
be the remuneration that is paid to these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There have been two recent resignations 
from the board, and our current complement at the board is 12. 
We are close to making new appointments. This has been a 
fairly stable board over the years of our government since the 
first appointments, but there are in the normal course people 
coming and going, resignations that happen. But it’s quite a 
stable board and quite a hard-working board. 
 
I should also address the question of remuneration. We don’t 
have the information with us, but I think that the compensation 
for board members is about 150 or $155 a day. Whatever it is 
generally for other boards, it is the same for the SIAST board. I 
believe that the Chair gets an extra remuneration, although I’m 
not certain of that. And what I will undertake to do is to provide 
that information to the member today if I can. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Still on the same 
section, I note that it indicates that board members may serve a 
maximum of two terms, and each term is not to exceed three 
years. Do you do a tendering or do you post the positions that 
will become available, not because of resignations, just because 
of the fact that the term has expired for a board member 
because they’ve served six years. What process do you 
undertake to get new appointments to the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  As I indicated to the member, we’re in 
the course of appointing new members to the board. And the 
member will know that I have quite a latitude there as to the 
number of people on the board. I can, I think, go up to 20 under 
the legislation. 
 
I don’t intend to go that high but what we strive for is a number 
of things. We’re interested in a regional representation so that 
all parts of the province will have a representative on the board. 
We are interested in appointing people who have an interest in 
the kinds of programs that SIAST delivers, and that’s quite a 
wide-ranging program. But obviously we want people on there 
who are prepared to devote some time and energy to the project. 
We strive for an approximate gender balance and we insist upon 
aboriginal representation. These are some of the  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

criteria that we use. 
 
We don’t advertise. We do however make a number of 
inquiries. We ask for suggestions. We have a union 
representative on the board and a student representative on the 
board. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You’ve answered one of my questions, which 
was whether there was a student present, and I hear you indicate 
that there is one. 
 
Currently on the board that you’ve indicated that there are 12 
people left, is there an aboriginal person sitting on the board at 
the moment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Not at the moment . . . well there is 
actually. The person who is acting as the Chair is aboriginal. 
And we have another nominee that we will be appointing in due 
course. Joan Greyeyes has been a member of the board for some 
years now and she has resigned because of the pressures of her 
regular job. And we are about to appoint another. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I note that one of the changes that is 
suggested in the new Act is that the number of meetings will be 
decreased from 12 to 10. I trust that that is probably due to 
summer holidays. So my question would be, is that true? 
 
And secondly, which I don’t believe that you answered the 
question when I first asked it was, the payment to the board, is 
it made by the SIAST board of directors . . . sorry, is it made 
from the grant to SIAST? Who pays the board of directors? And 
tie that into, if you would, the summer break as far as the cost 
. . . how will business be done without the two summer 
meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The reference to 10 regular meetings 
reflects the practice of the board in recent years. I would expect 
that in the next 12 months there will be more than 10 meetings 
because of the kinds of decisions that are going to have to be 
made at SIAST during that period. But as I say, this reference in 
clause (c) to 10 regular meetings reflects recent practice. 
 
The members of the board are paid from the SIAST grant. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Chair, I can give more precise 
numbers on the honoraria that is paid to board members. I was 
correct that board members are paid $155 per day and that the 
Chair is paid $235 per day. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In light of the fact that you’ve indicated that 
the number of meetings that can be held can exceed 10, I trust 
then that there isn’t any situation that can arise in the summer 
months that cannot be dealt with. In other words the question 
would be then, is the meeting at the call of the Chair such that if 
there is an important issue that they will meet and will discuss 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, the Chair could call a meeting 
whenever he wishes. It could be during the summer months.  

There is also an executive committee that could make decisions 
to a certain level. So they have the capacity to function through 
the summer if need be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that we report progress and 
move on to the next Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 
 
The Chair:  The next item of business before the committee 
is item no. 2, Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The University of 
Saskatchewan Act, and I will ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, just for the record, it is The 
University of Regina Act, and . . . Yes. The University of 
Regina Amendment Act, 1996 actually; correct myself. 
 
Mr. Chair, I have with me today Brij Mathur, who is the 
associate deputy minister in the department, and Arleen 
Schultz, who is the manager of the institutional support unit. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to your 
staff, Mr. Minister. 
 
When I look at section 6, which is the, I think, the large clause 
of the amendment, I note that it indicates of course an 
investment procedure. 
 
And I guess my question, Mr. Minister, is the fact that the 
university has made probably what can be considered a poor 
investment in the past, regarding the $2 million loss to Olympia 
and York’s Exchange Tower project, and I’m wondering if this 
change in legislation . . . Would you say that this legislation has 
come about as a result of that poor investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, that’s a 
natural question; I understand it. The answer is no, this is not 
related to that. 
 
While I’m on my feet though, about that very question of the 
investment in Olympia and York, it was, at the time that the 
university put the money in there, considered to be an excellent 
investment. And their advice from their financial advisers was 
to that effect. And the rating of the company at the time of 
investment was of the highest order, the very highest order, and 
there was no suggestion around that the company may collapse 
in the way that it did. That’s an interesting thing and I just want 
to put that on the record of this House because it’s often 
referred to. 
 
The changes that you see to section 6 have been requested by 
the University of Regina and parallel changes that we made to 
The University of Saskatchewan Act last session in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I note that the  



1134  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

University of Saskatchewan did not invest in this particular 
good project. And I wonder if, when the University of 
Saskatchewan was controlled by some other regulations in 
relationship to the University of Regina . . . 
 
That is the question that I was asking, whether or not we are 
removing some restrictive investment procedures from the U of 
R (University of Regina) that now will allow them to stay more 
in tune with the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), or was 
this still a decision made by the board of governors? And can it 
still be made in exactly the same fashion in terms of 
determining an investment, and then that investment may still 
go sour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, the university could make the same 
decision now that they made then, in the same way. And the 
amendments that we’re considering today don’t touch upon that 
right. It’s a natural thing to do, when an organization like a 
university has cash on hand that they’re going to be holding for 
a while, to put it into an investment that will return a rate of 
interest. And they always . . . they’re not speculative about it, 
they’re not trying to make a big amount of money on it, but 
they’re trying to find a safe investment to give them a fair return 
until they need the cash. And that’s what they tried to do with 
the Olympia and York situation that blew up in their face. 
 
But they could do that at the time they did it and they can do it 
now. It’s a matter for them to decide, and these amendments 
don’t affect that power. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You referred to “they” making the decision, 
and I’d like to know who has the decision at the universities? 
Because this Act is bringing it into line with the University of 
Saskatchewan, so I guess we’re talking about both universities. 
Who at that body has the decision as far as where the 
investment will be made, what degree of risk is involved, and 
whether or not a decision is made that only an investment of the 
particular risk will be actually adhered to. 
 
And the other part of the question I guess will be, is, what 
amounts can be invested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The authority lies with the board of 
governors. On a day-to-day basis the authority is delegated to 
the administration of the university, who will report on the 
matter to the board, and the mechanisms are in place for that to 
happen. But as far as the legalities are concerned, it is the board 
of governors that have the statutory authority and anything that 
is done is done under their authority. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. In the case of the bad investment 
in ’91 that you’re suggesting that no one really knew about, 
how does a university go about trying to make up that shortfall? 
Will they be passing it off as a tuition fee increase to students; 
will it be government who will then supplement that loss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The deficit at the University of Regina 
is of some considerable years standing. And they had a debt 
retirement program in effect at the time of the loss that the 
member refers to, and they were making progress with respect 
to the retirement of the debt when they had this further reverse. 

As to where they find the money to implement a debt retirement 
plan, the answer is within the four corners of their budget. We 
do not provide them with any additional funding in recognition 
of the debt situation in which they find themselves. 
 
And I made that very clear, that we’re not going to move in to 
cover that for them. They’re going to have to find that within 
their own resources; within the four corners of their own 
budget. 
 
The budgetary situation is complex, naturally. The collective 
agreement operates and they live in the real world. They buy 
their goods as you and I do, and we know that costs continue to 
rise. So, you know, it’s a challenge to them. And included in 
that challenge is to dedicate an amount to the retirement of this 
indebtedness. 
 
Now as to where the revenue comes from. We provide our 
grant. They do charge a tuition. They are charging course costs 
this year at the University of Regina. And they have other minor 
funding sources in addition to that. But all of that gives them a 
budgetary situation in which they have implemented a debt 
retirement plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, is there a maximum amount of 
investment that the university can make outside the borders of 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are no limitations of which I’m 
aware. There’s certainly none in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. A final couple of questions. 
When you talk about investments and the university making 
these investments, of course they’re hoping to glean interest 
from them. And you talked previously about a debt reduction 
plan that was in place. 
 
I’m wondering if any thought has been given to have the 
university, I guess not necessarily controlled but influenced, 
such that a debt reduction plan be implemented and that 
investments that are going really, really well, suddenly that isn’t 
a windfall of interest that is put towards creating, you know, 
new programs. Like I think, should there be a plan in place that 
puts this against debt, or at least a certain amount of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We are not inclined to consider that 
because of the autonomous nature of the universities, and we 
look to them to deal with this problem in a prudent way. And 
we are confident, knowing the administration of the university 
as we do, that they will handle this in a responsible and prudent 
manner. 
 
And no doubt they are doing something along the line that the 
member refers to. But we, as a matter of long-standing 
tradition, just simply don’t interfere with their administration to 
that extent. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Final question, Mr. Minister. You mentioned 
the board of governors being actually the body that is 
responsible for making the decisions, making the investments, 
handling the debt, etc. What is the size of the board of  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

governors for the U of R? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are 12 members of the board of 
governors, six of which are appointed by the government. At 
the moment there are 10 people serving on the board; there are 
two vacancies. I might say to the member again that we are on 
the verge or on the eve of filling those vacancies. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Supplementary . . . (inaudible) . . . small 
question then would be, is, as a body of 10, in terms of making 
decisions  and I know we’re talking about a review taking 
place over the course of the next short while  is that going to 
have any effect, the fact that there isn’t 12 bodies there? And 
are the two that are missing, are they appointees or are they 
people that will be elected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The two vacancies are government 
appointees, and again we will be appointing them. The criteria 
for appointment roughly parallel the ones that . . . the criteria 
that I mentioned in connection with SIAST. 
 
But those vacancies will be filled before the board gets into any 
of the questions that have been the subject of public comment 
in the last few weeks. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In light of the fact 
that this  as we see it and as you’ve indicated  this 
amendment brings in line the U of R with The University of 
Saskatchewan Act and they parallel one another quite nicely, I 
would think that that would be sufficient in terms of questions. 
 
And I would again appreciate the fact that the staff has been 
helpful. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’d like to thank my officials for coming 
today to assist the committee with its work. 
 

Bill No. 5An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right is Craig Dotson, deputy minister of the 
Department of Education; to my left is Michael Littlewood. 
One of his duties is to deal with third-party funding and 
legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the two gentlemen, Mr. Dotson and Mr. Littlewood. I appreciate 
your contributions to this afternoon. 
 
My first question I guess, because the Act covers many 
different areas, I think I’d like to look at some of the questions  

around some of the more, shall we say, less controversial items. 
And I’d like to begin with the amendment to the Saskatchewan 
Book Bureau fund, subsection 10.4, clause no. 4. 
 
When you’re suggesting a name change, obviously that’s more 
in tune with — as I’ve indicated in this House — that’s more in 
tune with what really is happening with the bureau. 
 
Could you give us an idea of what the time frame would be as 
far as implementation of this name  changing all the things 
that circulate around the province, and indeed, what might the 
cost be to the department to have this done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  First of all, the Book Bureau operates 
on a revolving fund; it does not get an administrative budget 
from the department. So it generates its own fees. 
 
All existing supplies with the name Book Bureau will be used 
up before we change the title. I’m advised by the officials that 
we anticipate, because of computer changes, that there will be a 
one-time cost of about a thousand dollars. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that, you know, supplies are going to be used up, in terms of 
cost. 
 
If there are additional costs, will there be additional charges 
within that revolving fund since there is no additional financing 
or funding from government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t anticipate that the name 
change is going to create any difference. It’s such a minor 
adjustment in terms of the overall scheme of things at the Book 
Bureau. So we’re not anticipating any huge increases in terms 
of fees as a result of the name change. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. We could refer now to clauses 5, 
6, and 7, because I think they’re all connected in that those 
clauses deal with the school boards’ and the conseils scolaires’ 
ability to do certain things with funds. 
 
As the Act sits, or as it is stated right now, what kinds of 
functions were boards, or I can say scolaires, not allowed to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised that there was a school 
board in the province that wanted to make a direct deposit 
electronically in terms of paying utility bills and the Act didn’t 
give them the authority to do that. 
 
As well, when our officials took a look at the Act, there was no 
authority for making direct deposit of payroll and those kinds of 
things. So this is a request coming from school boards as a 
result of their inability to legally engage in some functions 
because the Act is limited. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Then, Madam Minister, boards of education 
who have been doing electronic payroll to teachers, has this . . . 
not legal according to the Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised that the Act does not cover 
that provision. 



1136  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Mr. Krawetz:  Then I’m very, very pleased to see this 
happening. My other question then would be, if we’re 
expanding this to now include utilities  you mentioned utility 
companies  and if we’re expanding it to include payroll and 
the teachers and non-professional staff as well, what about the 
vendors, the people that are owed money on a regular basis  a 
gas company or book company  are these going be included 
in this as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised that the new restrictions 
. . . or the new provisions are not restrictive. I’m advised the 
new provisions are not restrictive, that school boards will be 
allowed to pay out automatically any ongoing vendors or 
businesses that they have regular contracts with. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  So if there was an agreement set up between 
the board of education and the vendors, banking institution, 
they will be able pay. And an affirmative nod suggests that that 
is correct. Okay. 
 
I noticed in the three clauses it indicates chartered bank or 
credit union. Is there any reference to trust company or does 
trust company not fit into those two categories? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised that it does not cover trust 
companies. We’ve retained the current language in the Act 
when we refer to chartered banks and credit unions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  That is the current language. Pardon my lack 
of knowledge here. Is trust company included in that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I indicated that it was not. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, section 146 of the current Education Act is the section 
that deals with, of course, release of records. And under section 
8 of this amendment, we’re proposing to completely repeal 
section 146. And I know that you’ve indicated in explanatory 
notes that section 146 is a more restrictive section as far as 
dealing with release of records than what is currently being 
followed by other local authorities. 
 
Could you indicate how we’re going to move in the direction of 
actually now using an Act outside of The Education Act to 
control student records? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act is now the statute of 
authority when it comes to information. And The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act applies to health, municipal government, and education. 
We have concluded that it’s best to follow one statute rather 
than having two statutes that may be confusing. So as a result of 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act applying to health and municipal government, it 
now applies to education as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think that’s a 
wise choice because people need to understand one rule and be  

familiar with it, whether we’re talking health. My question then 
will be, as is indicated, I believe, under clause 13 you are 
actually suggesting that section 8 will not come into force on 
assent but actually on proclamation. And I’m wonder what kind 
of a mechanism is being put in place so that the schools, the 
principals, the teachers, the school boards, etc., will know about 
the privacy Act and be assured that they understand that Act 
completely before we say, okay, we’re not dealing with the 
section 146 anymore? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  This Act was passed a couple of years 
ago. Since that time, the Department of Education and Justice 
have held orientation meetings with school trustees and SASBO 
(Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials) 
members in terms of the legislation, what’s in the legislation, 
and the appropriate forms. 
 
We have been working with our partners in education regarding 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act in the last couple of years. We believe that we 
require more time to work with the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) and trustees and SASBO, 
secretary-treasurers, and directors of education, to ensure that 
they know what the differences are with the new Act. And we 
anticipate that we . . . this will come into force in the new 
school year, meaning the fall of 1996. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As I’ve 
indicated, those are probably the three sections that I see as 
being the least controversial of the Bill, and I have further 
questions on the other parts of the Bill but my colleague from 
Rosthern has a few questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Madam Minister, continuing with 
some of the questions dealing with student records, regarding 
the removal of requirement of parental attendance for students 
to view their records, I understand some of the validity behind 
that, but I’m somewhat confused as to why you deleted the 
entire clause. It seems to do away with any kind of 
confidentiality with student records. Why was that done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The other statute, The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, clearly 
protects education information, so students are protected, if you 
were to take a look at that statute. 
 
So as I said earlier to the Liberal critic, this is about having one 
authority and not having the privacy Act, and The Education 
Act, which may be confusing to the public. So we’re going with 
the local authority Act and we believe that students will still be 
protected. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  If we put the responsibility for student 
records . . . taken them away from Education, what link does 
Education still have to make sure that any changes that might be 
made from that avenue on record confidentiality that you still 
have an input into that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There are several different local 
authorities. As I said earlier, there are health authorities, 
municipal authorities, and education authorities. And I would  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

anticipate that if there were to be changes to The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act, that obviously our various partners that are guided by that 
Act would have to be consulted. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Explanatory notes for that section 
say that the amendment is intended to facilitate integrated 
service delivery which involves the sharing of information 
among human service providers. Now I think that aspect is 
obviously very needed with the fact that schools have so many 
more organizations that are playing a part in that. On the other 
hand, it tends to sound just a little on the ominous side because 
this information is going to a wider scope. 
 
What ability is given to either the students or their parents to 
monitor, control, or correct personal information that’s 
distributed to other government departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What’s important here is that people 
have access to their own files. As an individual you could have 
access to your own file. If there’s incorrect information, you 
would have the duty to correct that information. 
 
As well, I’m advised that records are not going to be distributed 
widely; that the sharing of information is done in the context of 
being supportive to the individual for whom the information is 
being shared. 
 
And as you know, there are times in schools when a student 
will come into a school and into a classroom and the principal 
and the appropriate teacher will not have the appropriate 
information in order to ensure that there is an appropriate 
education plan for that young person. And this is to facilitate 
the whole notion of integrated services, where we not only have 
Health, Social Services, Education, and Justice involved, but 
it’s to ensure that there is an appropriate sharing of information 
to support and enhance that young person’s chances for success 
in school. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Could you explain, if we’re going to work 
through the integration of those very services that you mention, 
what the procedure would be for a school to get information, 
let’s say from Justice or any one of the other four or five 
organizations that you mentioned. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We have an interdepartmental 
committee that has been dealing with this information . . . or 
with this situation of sharing information that is appropriate to 
enhance the young person’s chance for success. And we 
anticipate that there will be a protocol arrangement that will be 
shared with the appropriate agencies to ensure that we protect 
the information regarding the young person, but that we ensure 
that the information that is shared will enhance the well-being 
of that young person. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Moving on to changes to section 198(9), 
allowing replacement teachers the right of first refusal to 
replace an absent teacher. First question is . . . or two questions, 
I guess on that. Why was it introduced, and where did the 
direction come from to produce that change? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  This provision has come about as a 
result of a need to clarify circumstances that boards of 
education can hire teachers other than teachers that are hired on 
permanent contract. I think it’s fair to say in the two and a half 
years that I’ve been Minister of Education, there have been 
many concerns expressed by all of the partners in education 
about the lack of clarity with regard to the hiring of teachers 
other than permanent teachers on contract. 
 
You may know that all of this culminated in a court case and 
there was a desire on the part of the school trustees, the 
teachers, the directors of education, to clarify the situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
 (1615) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 3 and Bill No. 5. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I would like to introduce my deputy, Ray Clayton, to 
my right; as well Bruce Wilson to my left, the executive director 
for petroleum and natural gas. Behind me is Donald Koop, the 
assistant deputy minister of finance and administration. And in 
the rear, George Patterson and Malcolm Wilson  Malcolm is 
the director of energy development branch, and George is the 
executive director of exploration and geological services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Minister. I 
would like to take this opportunity as well to welcome your 
officials and hope that we can have a very pleasant, enjoyable 
process of scrutiny of your department and all the fine work that 
your officials are initiating. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all when I start, what I would like to do is 
give you an opportunity to please give us a brief overview of 
how you see the priorities of your department and an overview 
of how you see the whole thing operating in this next fiscal 
year. 



1138  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much to the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I guess the Department of Energy and Mines is 
an arm of government that I guess is viewed and should be 
viewed rightly so as an economic development arm of 
government. They’re responsible for regulating and facilitating 
the development of our energy sector. Specifically oil, natural 
gas, all of the different mining operations that go on in the 
province are under the purview of this department. 
 
I would like to just say a few words about the department and 
what I hope that we can achieve as a government working with 
this arm of executive government in the next year. But in order 
to do that, I would want to say just a few words of the 
perspective that industry has shared with me, their perspective 
of the department. 
 
It’s a well-established arm of government. Energy and Mines 
has been I guess for the most part, one of the most stable 
departments within government. The officials that work within 
the department, many of them have been with government 
through different political parties  Liberal, New Democrat, 
and Conservative. 
 
And it’s a department that industry tells me that they’re very 
comfortable in dealing with in that, one, they have access. It’s 
not a cumbersome administration; it’s fairly streamlined. They 
are listening to industry when industry brings a concern to 
them, and that’s a relationship that I hope, as minister in charge 
of Energy and Mines, to continue in the next year. 
 
Of course market conditions have a great impact on how much 
activity we see in the oil and gas sector, the potash sector  
which is a very major player in terms of our development  
and the uranium sector. We’ve got some new opportunities 
coming on stream with respect to gold and other initiatives the 
department is working with. 
 
And so I guess what we certainly would want to and hope to 
achieve next year is a good revenue flow for the Consolidated 
Fund, which means we have to have a good, positive working 
relationship with all of the sectors that I’ve mentioned. So I 
guess that’s really what we would hope to achieve. 
 
I want to see some stability within the department, and I think 
we’ve had that and I think we’ve got that. We’ve got some very 
competent and capable people working for the department. And 
I don’t say that just because they’re here; I say that because 
that’s what industry tells me their perception is. And from my 
perspective that’s very important. 
 
The other aspect of it is, I guess, is working with the other arms 
of government, the Department of Environment. Quite clearly 
the impact on the environment with some of the expansion and 
some of the development is a concern both to the department 
and to the department of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management), the environment arm of our 
government, in that we know if we’re going to have good, 
positive working relationship with the people of Saskatchewan 
whose resources we are developing, that they’re also concerned  

that we protect the air and the ground and the area that means 
so much to all of in Saskatchewan. So I guess working with the 
other departments is another element of what we hope to 
achieve. 
 
I think I pretty much condensed where we hope to head in the 
next year. And I think I would want to say that the bottom line 
though has got to be that the department has to work in 
partnership with the people of Saskatchewan, the shareholders 
of our resources, and with industry who we invite to the 
province to develop on our behalf and create job opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. In the Speaker’s gallery 
I’d like to introduce to you Kathy Somers. She’s a student from 
Thom Collegiate here in Regina. She’s come to the legislature 
to discuss the duties and responsibilities of an MLA, and this is 
her very first time in the building. So welcome, Kathy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 23 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, I really 
appreciate that overview of the department. And I also 
appreciate particularly the stability that you indicate is within 
that department. And I think that governments, past and present, 
should be commended for the fact that that is true. But I think 
more so, as you rightly indicated, it has more to do with the 
quality of officials and the efficient running of the department, 
to make sure that stability is indeed intact. So I certainly join 
you in commending the people in your department and the 
officials that are leading to that stability. 
 
Minister, I think one of the things that’s becoming increasingly 
obvious to all of us and certainly to people in your department, 
that mining and . . . particularly the mining industry is 
becoming an increasingly important component of the 
Saskatchewan economy that has largely in the past been based, 
or seemingly based on agriculture. And while that continues to 
be a very important segment of our economy, mining and the 
whole mining industry is something that’s had an increasing 
impact on our economy. 
 
I wonder if you would mind indicating how you see the role of 
the department, and certainly the mining industry in particular, 
leading into the 21st century and its impact on the provincial 
economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, and to the  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

member from Melfort-Tisdale, as I’ve indicated, much of the 
expansion is market driven. And there are some global 
pressures that come to play in terms of mining. Investors . . . it’s 
becoming a much smaller world. Trade barriers have been 
relaxing over the number of years. Investment opportunities 
have been opening up not only in Saskatchewan, but in all of 
the world. And I guess what investors are looking for is a stable 
climate, a stable place in which to invest the hundreds of 
millions of dollars that go into the mining sector. 
 
One of the initiatives that I as the minister have been working 
on is at a federal-provincial level. Working with our federal 
counterparts, the other Energy ministers from across Canada 
have been working to try and create an environment where we 
can attract some of this global investment. 
 
Quite clearly, in Saskatchewan we have the richest uranium 
deposits in the world. We have a massive abundance of potash. 
We’ve got opportunities in gold, other precious metals, other 
minerals. The deposits are here. And what we need to do is to 
create an economic environment where that investment can take 
place. 
 
As I’ve indicated, we’ve been working with our federal 
counterparts, and one of the initiatives that we’ve been 
attempting to broach with both the Minister of Natural 
Resources and the former minister of Environment, the Deputy 
Prime Minister, is to try and reduce the duplication of red tape 
that is required, reduce the process to a reasonable process 
where environmental concerns can be addressed but that they 
can be done at a cost that isn’t prohibitive to investment in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think the other thing that we’ve been doing as a 
provincial government is creating an economic climate with 
some stability. We’ve been working since our election in 1991 
diligently with the people of Saskatchewan, with the business 
community, to put our financial house in order. 
 
And I think that’s one of the key things that investors are 
looking for, because with growing deficits and growing debt 
load on the province, that can only mean a couple of things, and 
that’s cut-backs to services or increase taxes. And so what we 
want to do is have a royalty regime that will foster development 
in Saskatchewan. We want to have a tax regime, corporate and 
private taxes, that are reasonable and comparable to other areas. 
 
So in order to achieve that, what we needed to do was put our 
financial house in order. And quite clearly I think the fact that 
we’ve been able to balance successive budgets and are 
forecasting balanced budgets to the year 2000 under the 
leadership of this Premier, that we’re creating that environment. 
 
I think that the markets will show that potash is going to do 
well and create revenue flow for the people of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve got some soft markets with respect to natural gas right 
now, but that does benefit other sectors of the economy. The oil 
prices seem to be fairly strong. Uranium prices are up. 
 
So if I look at the whole piece, the players within our energy 
sector, within the oil and gas, and within the mining sector, I  

think we have some good opportunities to do some good things 
both for the investors and for the people of Saskatchewan 
whose resource we’re harvesting. 
 
(1630) 
 
I would want to say that I think we’ve done very well in the 
past. If you look at the . . . I guess the confidence in the 
province of Saskatchewan that the oil and gas sector has shown 
by their investment, by land sales, it’s quite clear that we’ve 
been able to foster a good partnership with that part of the 
industry. 
 
Potash, we’re looking at some, hopefully in the future, some 
expansion on production and maybe some expansion in 
capacity. And we’re in constant contact with the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association and their members. And so I think that we 
can expect good things to continue in potash. 
 
The uranium industry, as you will know, is a global market for 
us. We’re the major players in the world in terms of the 
resource. And we will continue to work with those industries to 
foster development in job opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
I think though the bottom line in terms of advancement and 
development of those resources has to be, and should be, and 
should continue to be what we’ve already built, and that is a 
good working relationship with industry. So I think if I’m to 
forecast what we can expect for next year, I think we’re going 
to see a reasonable revenue flow. Those numbers have been put 
forth in our budget and I think you will recognize that we’ve 
always been reasonably conservative when we’re estimating 
that revenue flow. 
 
So I think the people of Saskatchewan can look forward to a 
good return on their resource. Hopefully we can foster some 
investment in some other areas that are not yet developed. And I 
think overall this holds a very bright future for us. 
 
And as you’ve indicated, Saskatchewan has become more than 
agriculture; it’s become more than forestry. We have a very 
diverse economy and we are working with industry and the 
people of Saskatchewan to take advantage of the benefits that 
we can reap from those resources. 
 
Mr. Langford:  I’d like to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a couple 
of constituents of mine, a long-time supporter of the New 
Democratic Party, Ray Funk, and his wife, Shirley Folstead. 
Welcome. 
 
I’d like everyone in the Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1140  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I certainly want to commend you on your comments 
and it certainly leads in a great number of directions that 
potentially there will be questions. 
 
And I note in particular, items like impact studies and things 
like that that need to be done when new mines and development 
occurs. The whole field of the potential and the impact of the 
oil and gas industry. The question and the impact of the royalty 
structures in a great number of areas. The whole question of 
markets and how they’re developing and where our potential 
opportunities are that way. The whole issue about investment in 
the mining industry and what potential your department may be 
doing in order to encourage that. 
 
I note with interest your comments on trade barriers and the fact 
that free trade and the international economy is changing. So 
those are not necessarily the great evil things that very often 
I’ve heard your government say that were there in the past, but 
you’re now regarding as opportunities, and I think that that is 
right on. 
 
And then certainly when you also mention the fact that 
individual industries like the potash industry, the uranium 
industry, the gold industry . . . and I hope, Mr. Minister, 
because I hear in the Fort à la Corne area which is very near to 
my constituency, that the diamond industry may indeed become 
something that is viable in Saskatchewan. I know many people 
in our neck of the woods would be very hopeful that Debeers 
would move from South Africa to my constituency. We’d be 
very pleased with that. 
 
And I also suspect that all of us would be delighted because 
we’d be able to buy those diamond baubles for our significant 
others at a much greater impact to the provincial economy, and 
that would be better. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, what I’d like to do now is to, if I may, move 
a little more specific in terms of your department and the 
operation of your department. I notice in the figures that I have 
that in the Estimates for 1996-97 there is 234.4 full-time 
equivalents. Would you have the information going back to say, 
‘91-92 as to what the full-time equivalents are and how they’ve 
changed over the past number of years in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Okay, to the member opposite. We 
only have last year’s figures and this year’s figures which we’ll 
send across to you, but I will undertake to get the number of 
full-time equivalents from 1991 to the forecast for this year. I 
would want to indicate to you that you will see a reduction this 
year from last year in terms of the numbers. And I might as well 
share with you that that was temporary employees that were put 
in place to take care of the backlog of paperwork that was 
incurred by the massive amount of investment done by the oil  

and gas industry. 
 
As you will know, when people purchase land it creates paper 
flow; paper flow creates jobs. So I guess that’s just an 
indication of the importance of this department in terms of job 
creation and how important it is to have the investment from 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I also would ask when 
you’re doing that, would you mind breaking down your 
in-scope and out-of-scope breakdown in those full-time 
equivalents so that we may be able to have a look at how those 
shifts have been happening. 
 
I think the other area that I want to then move into in more 
specifics is the whole question of the Saskatchewan Energy 
Conservation and Development Authority. In the past, I believe, 
last year, it cost something in the order of a million and a half 
dollars since it was instituted, and this year is being dismantled. 
 
How is the function of this authority going to be absorbed into 
your department? Or can you explain to us please, perhaps even 
going back a bit, the rationale for establishing it in the first 
place? And then, secondly, how whatever useful functions there 
were within that authority are now going to be covered within 
other aspects of your department or government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well let me begin by describing the 
initial mandate. SECDA (Saskatchewan Energy Conservation 
and Development Authority) was established shortly after our 
election. We were attempting to put together an energy strategy 
for the province that will take us into the next century. And it 
was the desire of government to explore different options in 
terms of what would make sense for us in Saskatchewan, what 
kind of energy we should be developing. 
 
As you will know, the vast majority of the electrical energy in 
our province is either hydro . . . the vast majority of it though is 
with low-grade lignite coal. And of course we do some natural 
gas fuel . . . we use natural gas to fuel some of the generating 
stations. And the government wanted to explore different 
alternatives to see what would make sense for us in 
Saskatchewan and have some recommendations come from an 
independent body, which SECDA was, and share those with the 
people of Saskatchewan and with government. That part of their 
mandate was completed. 
 
And the other portion of their mandate was to look at energy 
conservation initiatives which will now become the 
responsibility of the Saskatchewan Research Council, working 
with Energy and Mines and with our utility corporations. 
 
I would want to say that I know, to the member, that there are 
those who would have rather seen SECDA continue. There was 
a feeling by some members of the general public that the 
initiatives that they were dealing with with respect to energy 
conservation were very positive. And I want to say to you and 
to the people of Saskatchewan that I agree with that. 
 
One of the initiatives that they put together, working with the  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

former minister, the member from Battlefords, was the ice rink 
energy audit program, a great program. It saved thousands of 
dollars for many Saskatchewan communities. And I want to say 
that that will be a program that will be continued. 
 
We believe that there’s an opportunity to save the people of 
Saskatchewan money, continue those initiatives. We’ve 
encompassed the energy alternative study done by SECDA into 
our Saskatchewan energy strategy which I tabled, I believe, last 
March in the legislature. And it was very good work done by 
SECDA, and we appreciate all of the work that the employees 
in SECDA have done. 
 
But I want to say that as we put together our budget, Energy and 
Mines was charged with, as other government departments 
were, the responsibility to find areas of administrative savings 
where we may be able to achieve those savings but still 
maintain the positive work that government departments are 
charged with doing. 
 
The decision was made that we could continue the energy 
conservation initiatives, some of them at the Saskatchewan 
Research Council, that the mandate with respect to energy 
options had been fulfilled. And subsequent to those 
discussions, SECDA is in the process of being wound down. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, can you share will me, please, 
how many employees were involved with SECDA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
officials that there were two contract employees, but there were 
18 employees of SECDA. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. If you indicated to me 
earlier that the six full-time equivalents that your department 
reduced were temporary people that were dealing with the extra 
paper burden because of the oil and gas industry. So if you 
really exclude them, then there was no reduction of full-time 
equivalents in your department. What happened to the 18 
SECDA people? Where are they accounted for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 
we’re in the process of negotiating a severance with the 18 
full-time employees at SECDA. We’re looking at the possibility 
of some opportunities within the Saskatchewan Research 
Council for some of those employed right now at SECDA. 
 
And that process is not yet complete, but we would expect that 
after discussions have been completed with the employees at 
SECDA, we can better give you an idea of how many may in 
fact have opportunities in other arms or in other branches of 
government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Would it be correct in assuming then that 
these 18 employees are then part of the current numbers: 234.4 
Energy and Mines employees? I’m asking where are those 18 
accounted for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials that 
because they’re not part of executive government, they don’t 
show up in the number of employees and full-time equivalents  

within the Department of Energy and Mines. Those are separate 
and apart from Energy and Mines. 
 
If I could, Mr. Chairman, I just want to offer my greetings to 
Ray Funk and his wife Shirley. I’m glad to see them here. I 
know Shirley has some special interest in the oil and gas 
business, having spent a number of years working in the 
industry, and so I’m hoping she will find today’s deliberations 
entertaining. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In dealing with 
the negotiations for severance and those type of things with the 
SECDA employees, the potential cost of those severance 
packages . . . and there was newspaper article on April 2 that 
quoted . . . and heaven forbid that we necessarily take 
newspaper articles at face value. But it was suggested that as 
much as a half a million dollars in severance may be on the 
table in these negotiations. 
 
Where in your line items would these type of settlements be 
included? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, that will be a charge 
that will be levied against the previous fiscal year because that’s 
when the decision was made. And if there was a shortfall, an 
appropriation, it would be dealt with in the appropriate fashion. 
 
I want to say to the member that we looked long and hard at this 
whole budget, and some of these decisions were not easy 
decisions. We have some external pressures on government this 
year that had to be dealt with if we were to maintain services. 
 
So some of these decisions, as I said, you know, I’m sure that 
you will agree that we would rather not have seen. But I think 
in the best interests of the province as a whole, some of the 
tough decisions have been made. 
 
And so I would say we know that there will be some 
wind-down costs associated with SECDA. But we feel that the 
employees have to be and should be treated fairly, and that’s 
what we intend to do. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Chair, I ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce a 
former MP (member of parliament) of mine who is visiting the 
legislature today as well. I’d like to introduce Ray Funk as well 
as his wife, Shirley Falstead. 
 
And I’d like to ask the Assembly to please welcome these two 
fine people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1142  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1996 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Minister, I realize that we’re in very difficult financial times 
and that difficult choices need to be made, but I really question 
the logic of the decision that you’ve made in regard to SECDA. 
It strikes me that here was a body that was functioning very 
pro-actively, very much looking into the future, looking into the 
needs of consumers very often, rather than producers of energy. 
And I know that seems sometimes to be a contradiction, but I 
think with the increasing costs of energy in all aspects that that 
was a very important component. 
 
I’m at a bit of a loss. Where you had a body that you’re giving a 
grant of a million and a half dollars to and were doing all these 
things, I fail to see where you’re going to make savings. 
Because surely if these 18 people, in the functions that this 
authority was doing within its own realm was occurring and 
was a great value . . . How in the world is the Saskatchewan 
Research Council going to pick this kind of load up without 
cutting some other programs that were very important? And you 
might be pipe dreaming when you think that you can just sort of 
say to us that Sask Research Council is going to pick this thing 
up. 
 
How much are the grants going to up to the Saskatchewan 
Research Council in order to take over the functions of 
SECDA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said 
before, there were some difficult decisions made in this budget. 
And the member may not agree with the direction that we took 
with respect to cost saving in some areas. And that’s his 
privilege, and that’s his prerogative. 
 
I would want to say that I didn’t agree with the moves that his 
federal counterparts made, the Liberal Party in Ottawa made, in 
terms of cutting back in health, education, and social services, 
to this province of $106 million. I thought that was priorized 
wrong. I thought there were other areas  and I still do think 
that  there were other areas in that budget that could have 
been cut without impacting as dramatically on the people of 
Canada and the people of Saskatchewan and destroying 
potentially our social network. And that’s my prerogative to 
disagree with the decisions that they make, as yours is to 
disagree with the changes that we made with respect to 
SECDA. 
 
But I want to say to you that this government is no less 
committed to energy efficiency and energy conservation. And 
you will understand and you will know, I’m sure, that there are 
initiatives that are taking place within our Crown utilities, 
within SaskPower and SaskEnergy, that the Department of 
Energy and Mines is working closely with industry, that 
industry, by the way, is doing an awful lot in terms of energy  

conservation on their own. And I don’t think necessarily that it 
needs to be government that invests the money with respect to 
energy conservation initiatives that can be and should be done 
by private industry. I think that’s a responsibility of theirs. 
 
Is it a responsibility of this government to facilitate energy 
conservation? The answer is, absolutely. And we’ve signed on 
to the agreement, the international agreement, with respect to 
carbon dioxide emissions and reduction as a government, and 
you will know that. So we’ve made a commitment. 
 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation has an energy 
conservation initiative to deal with government-owned 
buildings. And what we will attempt to do, and this will 
manifest itself in the coming weeks and months, is coordinate 
and develop a streamlined administration for the energy 
conservation initiatives that take place in this province. 
 
I want to say to you that the Saskatchewan Research Council 
has been around this province for a long, long time. It has 
developed a reputation with industry and with the general 
public for facilitating, at a cost-recovery basis, on a 
cost-recovery basis, very positive initiatives that help us not 
only with respect to economic development but help us with 
respect to protecting our environment. 
 
And so I don’t want the member to feel, because we’ve made 
some administrative changes and because we’re reshaping the 
look of government in attempting to decrease the amount of 
administrative costs, that we in any way are neglecting our 
environmental responsibilities, because that just isn’t so. 
 
What we are charged with and why we received a second 
mandate is because the people of Saskatchewan saw us to be a 
very pragmatic and efficient government with respect to how 
we’re spending their dollars. And I say to the member, if we 
can achieve our goals, that being a safe environment in this 
province, with a lesser expenditure, then that’s what we intend 
to do. I don’t believe  and I hope the member doesn’t believe 
 that just because you throw money at an initiative it’s going 
to create a result that can be done for fewer dollars. We’ve seen 
that in this province. I don’t think we want to return to that. 
 
I can use an example of agriculture. We still spend $400 per 
capita on agriculture in this province. And I think that’s a 
responsible expenditure. But what we are attempting to do with 
the farming community is to work with them to make them less 
reliant on government and develop programs where they can 
enjoy a good bottom line with fewer government dollars being 
expended. 
 
And I don’t think that that should be isolated to any sector of 
government expenditure. We have a responsibility, both you 
and I, to ensure that we are delivering services at the least 
possible cost. You may disagree with how we do it. And I have 
no quarrel with that, and I think it’s positive that we debate 
your ideas, your thoughts, and my thoughts, because that’s how 
I think we can deliver a better government, so I appreciate your 
input. 
 
But I want to say that I believe we can achieve the goals that we  



April 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

have set out, that being energy conservation initiatives, and we 
can do it with less expenditures than was previously the case. 
So I close my comments just by saying that, don’t feel that 
we’re neglecting our responsibility as a government to ensure 
positive energy conservation initiatives because that’s not the 
case. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was not 
implying that you’re not being committed to energy 
conservation. But I simply am questioning the choices that 
you’re making. Here you had an agency that operated with a fair 
bit of autonomy, who had the interests of consumers largely at 
heart, who was looking at the authority that provided technical, 
economic, and marketing services; that looked at alternatives in 
terms of energy sources and research and development of new 
technology. 
 
And now you’re telling me that you can just dismantle this. And 
while I’m not questioning the responsibility and the role of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, I’m saying when you unload 
all those projects on the Saskatchewan Research Council, 
something else has to fall out of the other end or, Mr. Minister, 
you’re going to have to provide some money. 
 
If you’re going to have SaskPower do this, you’re going to have 
to provide extra money and funding in the SaskPower 
bureaucracy. If you have SaskEnergy do it, you’re going to have 
to have that bureaucracy picking up the slack. 
 
And the question that I’m putting to you, Mr. Minister, is that if 
you think that you’re simply unloading something and that there 
is just pure $1.5 million of economic saving, then you’re 
kidding yourself. It’s not necessarily throwing money at things 
that creates solutions, but spending money smartly in the 
interests of the people of this province is good economic 
investment in this province. And I think you’ve missed the boat 
by a mile on this one. And I know that many people in this 
province are very disappointed with this, among other choices 
your government has made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to 
respond briefly to the member. I can see that we probably won’t 
find common ground. But just let me say that with respect to 
energy options, as I’ve indicated previously I think, SECDA did 
a great job in terms of informing government and putting 
together information that we encompassed into our energy 
strategy, the Saskatchewan Energy Strategy. So that part of 
their mandate is complete. 
 
With respect to energy conservation, you may be right, and it 
may be that we will not be able to do all of what we could have 
or maybe wanted to achieve with SECDA. But I say to the 
member that we will do as best we can with what resources 
we’re left, after a federal offload of $106 million, to ensure 
energy conservation in the province. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1115 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1116 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1116 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1116 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1116 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
Pringle .......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................1125 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1125 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1138 
Langford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1139 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1141 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Secretaries Week  

Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1117 

Humboldt SADD Chapter  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1118 

Tribute to Spouses of Members  
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1118 

Waterhen Lake Housing Initiative 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1118 

North-west Trade Fair  
Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................1118 

Saskferco Expansion  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1119 

Women in Agriculture  
Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................1119 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments  

McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1119 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1119 

Crop Insurance Office Closures  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1120 

High-risk Offender Identification  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1120 

Nuclear Industry Development  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1121 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1121 



 

Occupational Health and Safety Changes  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................1122 

Treatment of Welfare Recipients  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1123 
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1123 

SaskTel Strike  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1123 
Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1123 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS  
Announcement of Saskferco Expansion  

Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1124 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1124 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1124 

Sale of Cameco Shares  
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1125 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1125 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1126 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 61  An Act respecting the Practices of Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts  

Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1126 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1127 

Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act  
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1128 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1129 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1130 

Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public Employees  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1130 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1130 

Bill No. 73An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1130 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology  

Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1131 

Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act  
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1133 

Bill No. 5An Act to amend The Education Act  
Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1135 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1135 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1136 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act  

Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................1137 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Energy and Mines Vote 23  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1137 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1137 

 
 
 
 


