


















































March 25, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 469 
 March 25, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of a great many concerned citizens of Saskatchewan regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the names on this petition are from Oxbow, Regina, 
Grenfell, Broadview, Weyburn, and Stoughton  virtually all 
the small communities in southern Saskatchewan as well as 
Regina itself, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
such places as Grayson, Regina, Stockholm, Waldron, and 
numerous other southern Saskatchewan centres. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are from Esterhazy, 
Preeceville, Weyburn, Regina, Canora, and many more places. I 
so present. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
petitions of names of people throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Carlyle. 
They’re from Moose Jaw, from Manor, from Regina, and all 
over southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions from . . . names from many, many people from eastern  

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker : 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed from the residents of the 
Melville-Grayson area in eastern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, once again I rise today to 
present further petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina. They’re from Balcarres. There’s even one from 
Calgary here. 
 
They’re all from throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of the committee and those that 
are trying to save the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, most of the people that have signed these petitions 
today are from the Viceroy area, but many from Regina, and in 
fact the constituencies of Regina Albert South and Elphinstone 
in particular. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to Protect 
the Public from Convicted Pedophiles, and short title, The 
Public Protection from Pedophiles Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Municipal Government 
regarding budget day: (1) what managers from the 
Municipal Government department have been instructed to 
fan out in rural areas on budget day or shortly after; (2) to 
what locations are these employee/managers being sent; (3) 
what is the purpose behind the minister asking these 
individuals to fan out to rural areas? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I give notice that on day no. 23 I’ll ask the 
government the following question: 
 

(1) What is the average increases in percentage terms of 
northern Saskatchewan power bills as of January 1, 1996 
rate hike; (2) has there been any consultation with business 
and consumer groups in the North with regards to the 
subsequent impact of these power hikes on the already 
high power bills; (3) are there any public awareness plans 
in place now to assist homeowners and other SaskPower 
customers in ways of reducing excessive power use in the 
North; (4) what is SaskPower doing to address the constant 
power failures that occur in northern Saskatchewan; (5) in 
terms of the long distance that the power must travel to 
bring services to the people of the North, what percentage 
of power losses incurred over these long distances; and 
finally, (6) why do the people of the North seem to pay a 
higher power rate from the rest of Saskatchewan when they 
receive a lower quality and quantity of service? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 
amend The Balanced Budget Act  short title, The Balanced 
Budget Amendment Act, 1996. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly 26 grades 5 and 6 students in the west gallery. They 
are accompanied by their teacher, Alice LaCroix, and chaperon, 
Vince LaCroix. And I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and all members of the legislature a number of  

special guests here today to witness very important ceremonies 
here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us today are  and I would ask them to 
stand and be recognized  Mr. Donna Berard of Kindersley; 
Cindy and Chuck Annabell of Kindersley; Lee Ann and Jeff 
Brady of Eatonia; Wilf and Kay Berard of Kenosee; Art and 
Glenda Berard of Lumsden. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to welcome these 
special guests this afternoon for the ceremonies. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I also want 
to introduce some very special guests, and I’ll ask them to stand 
as I introduce them. 
 
First of all the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Max Morin, with 
his wife Christine; also his three sisters: Sandra, Patsy, and 
Margaret; his brother-in-law, Stuart Koochicum; his niece 
Jolene. And as well we have a number of people from the Metis 
nation here that are visiting us this afternoon with the president, 
Jim Durocher: Allen Morin, Don Favel, Michelle Harding, Kim 
Sinclair, and Vanessa Gardiner as well. 
 
And I would ask the Assembly to please welcome these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members a grade 5 and 6 class 
from St. Augustine School in the constituency of Regina 
Victoria. They are seated in the west gallery. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Suzanne Louttit, and by the 
teacher associate, Linda Scott. 
 
I am pleased that they could be here today. St. Augustine 
School has a very strong volunteer base in our community, and 
I would ask the members to join me to make them feel 
especially welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Week 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to recognize March 24 to 30 as Agriculture Week in 
Saskatchewan. I invite all citizens of Saskatchewan to join with 
me in the recognition of the agriculture and food industry as a 
foundation for Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
The Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association initiated 
this special week-long promotion of the industry a number of 
years ago in recognition of agriculture’s importance and its 
contribution to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year Agriculture Week’s theme salutes 
agriculture, Saskatchewan’s economic foundation. Our  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

foundation is strong because of our progressive livestock and 
crop production, diversification, new and changing markets, 
agricultural biotechnology, value added crop processing, and 
the most advanced dry land farming technology in the world. 
 
Many companies in the growth area of agri-food are based in 
rural Saskatchewan and contributing to employment and the 
economy. There are almost 300 companies now involved in the 
food processing industry. Farmers, agri-food businesses, and all 
Saskatchewan people continue to turn challenges into 
opportunities, responding to changing market conditions and 
contributing to the provincial economy. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers have lead the agricultural field for 
generations because of their ingenuity, visionary outlook, and 
hard work. And I might add, they still lead the way. As I stand 
in my place, I am proud to say I am a farmer and part of the 
great Saskatchewan tradition. I invite everyone to join me in 
saying a warm and sincere thank you to our farmers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
recognize the distinguished group in our province this week 
with Agriculture Week. 
 
Right now thousands of farmers, Mr. Speaker, across 
Saskatchewan are biding their time until mother nature can 
cooperate so that we can roll onto the fields and begin spring 
seeding. 
 
When farmers first started breaking Saskatchewan’s land, the 
forces of nature were their main concern. The events of the past 
year, including the massive flooding, series of wind storms and 
tornadoes, bertha armyworms, wheat midge, and early frost, to 
name a few, show us that nature’s forces are still a grave 
concern. 
 
But Saskatchewan farmers also cope with layers of government 
bureaucracy and its meddling in programs and operations. Now 
more than ever, many of them are trying to decide if they can 
continue to survive in the agriculture industry. While 
Saskatchewan’s economy is slowly becoming more diverse, 
agriculture is still our province’s economic foundation. 
 
This is a critical time for Saskatchewan farmers. Agriculture 
technology is rapidly advancing, and today’s farmers are trying 
to absorb the vast knowledge regarding world grain and 
livestock markets. They are the most innovative group of people 
in this province, constantly looking for more efficient farming 
methods. 
 
And I would like to salute, Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan 
farmers for the determination, endurance, and pioneering spirit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus, each of which is 
involved in agriculture, I’m pleased to acknowledge agriculture  

this week in Saskatchewan. The theme of Agriculture Week this 
year is, agriculture: Saskatchewan’s economic foundation. 
 
This is a vital and important message that the members of this 
Assembly and the members of the public must always keep in 
mind. The importance of agriculture to this province does not 
end at the farm gate or at the elevator. Whether you live in the 
country, in town, or in the city, the agriculture industry touches 
your life in more ways than you can know. Thousands of people 
in this province draw paycheques that would never exist if it 
weren’t for the profound economic clout of the farming sector. 
People in smaller centres know this instinctively. Businesses in 
small towns live or die by the health of the local agriculture 
economy. 
 
In the city, it’s harder to see the direct effects on the daily life, 
but they are there, and they are just as significant. All too often, 
it is easy for the urban-based media and politicians to forget 
this. It is easy for them to think that Saskatchewan life begins 
and ends at the city limits of Regina or Saskatoon. For this 
reason, we do not always pay enough attention to critical rural 
issues: the elimination of the Crow, the demise of GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program), and the claw-back of GRIP 
payments, the closure of Crop Insurance office. And it’s easy 
for some people in the city to pretend that these issues affect 
someone else, but they affect us all right in the pocketbook. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 
the start of Provincial Impaired Driving Awareness Week in 
Saskatchewan. As you will know all too well, Mr. Speaker, our 
province has a much higher rate of impaired driving than the 
national average. 
 
In 1995 alone, Mr. Speaker, 57 people were killed and nearly a 
thousand injured in alcohol-related car accidents. Our 
government has now taken steps to counter these statistics with 
the introduction of new legislation aimed specifically at 
impaired drivers. 
 
The legislation calls for a lower blood alcohol content and more 
severe penalties for drinking drivers. We believe this will 
reduce the tragic number of preventable deaths and injuries in 
Saskatchewan caused by alcohol related collisions. As we know 
from public consultations and the work of the all-party select 
committee on driving safety, of which you were the chair, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan people will not tolerate impaired 
driving, and nor will our government. 
 
I urge everyone to keep in mind the special significance of this 
week and drive with care. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condolences 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to ask this  



472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Assembly to join with me in expressing the sincere condolences 
to a former member of this Assembly and his family. 
 
On Thursday, March 21, Mrs. Betty Hodgins passed away 
suddenly, following a lengthy depressive illness. She will be 
sadly missed by her loving husband Bill and her son Grant, who 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly. As this Assembly 
may be aware, the Hodgins family has also suffered an earlier 
loss of Grant’s brother Russell as well as his sister Beverly. 
 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale is in attendance at the 
funeral today and will carry the condolences on behalf of this 
entire Assembly. I ask this Assembly to join with me to express 
our sincere condolences to the Hodgins family. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to reiterate 
from our caucus that we would like to acknowledge our 
condolences to the Hodgins family as well. 
 
But I would like to also join with the member opposite on 
behalf of our caucus and acknowledging the work of SADD 
(Students Against Drinking and Driving) members and different 
groups across this province regarding Impaired Driving 
Awareness Week. 
 
Every year our province has witnessed countless deaths and 
injuries due to impaired driving. This waste of precious human 
life is tragic, deplorable and just downright stupid. For many 
years a wide variety of groups have worked to educate the 
public on this issue: SADD, Students Against Drunk Driving; 
MADD, Mothers Against Drunk Driving; and SCARED, 
Saskatchewan Citizens Advocating Responsible Educated 
Drivers . . . have done tremendous work in this regard. They 
and other groups like them deserve society’s profound thanks. 
Yet in spite of all this effort, Saskatchewan still has a shameful 
distinction of having among the highest drunk driving rates in 
Canada. 
 
Clearly this is an area where we, as legislators, can do much 
better. In acknowledging Impaired Driving Week, I think that 
the members of this Assembly must also renew our 
commitment and our responsibility to fighting this senseless 
crime. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Indian Child and Family Service Agency Agreement 
 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday, the 
Minister of Social Services and the Saskatoon Tribal Council 
signed a highly significant agreement. This agreement will 
promote the development of an Indian child and family service 
agency, an agency that will assume responsibilities for the 
delivery of child and family services to the first nations people. 
This is the 12th such agreement signed in our province. 

The first nations of the Saskatoon Tribal Council include two in 
my constituency, Mistawasis and Muskeg Lake. Also part of the 
agreement are Muscoday, Kinistin, One Arrow, Yellowquill, 
and Whitecap Dakota. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the best way to encourage family 
harmony and child protection is to promote the culture and 
traditions of the people involved. People with a strong heritage 
are likely to have strong families. It is important that we as a 
government work with the first nations to help facilitate first 
nation’s responsibility for their children and families. This 
agreement will do just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Tribal Chief Joe Quewezance and 
all members of the Saskatoon Tribal Council for their work in 
establishing this family service agency. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Oscar Night 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight should be 
another exciting night in Saskatchewan. We can either go 
outside and look at the comet in our northern skies, or we can 
stay inside and watch Oscar night in Hollywood. 
 
There are five excellent films that are nominated for best 
picture. But in the light of recent events, I think we all know 
which one the Premier is pulling for. Babe is a heart-warming 
story of a talking pig  a determined little pig who quickly 
learns his way around the trough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in honour of the recent MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) pay hike, I would like to present the 
Premier and his caucus with a copy of Babe the talking pig 
movie. I’m sure you’ll find it inspirational viewing at your next 
caucus meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight many of 
my constituents and thousands of other people across this 
province will be gripped to their television sets. They will be 
joining almost a billion people worldwide in watching 
Hollywood hand out the Oscars. The movies, Mr. Speaker, have 
become a dominant art form in this century and will 
undoubtedly continue to do so for years to come. 
 
It’s a strange coincidence that while it’s Oscar week around the 
world, it’s budget week here in Saskatchewan. Tonight we’ll 
find out who the winners and losers will be. Will Sense and 
Sensibility beat out Braveheart and The Postman for best 
picture? Or will the movie about a little pig called Babe be a 
surprise winner? 
 
Mr. Speaker, while my constituents watch anxiously to hear 
what’s in the envelope, so too do they await what’s in the 
provincial budget. They wonder whether the postman will bring 
more bills to more unsuspecting people like farmers. They 
wonder whether sense and sensibility will win out in the minds  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

of the members opposite when it comes to cutting our health 
and education. They wonder whether this government will show 
a brave heart and stop blaming Ottawa for all their problems. 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, they’re wondering whether any appointees 
will continue to be winners at the trough. 
 
In closing, be it the Oscars or a Meryl Streep-like performance 
on budget day, we all will be wondering what comes after “the 
envelope, please.” We’ll all want to know who wins or loses. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

High-risk Offender Identification 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Last week members in this 
House asked what the government was prepared to do to calm 
fears of Saskatchewan residents regarding the release of 
dangerous offenders into their neighbourhoods  namely, 
people want to be warned when this happens. 
 
All we got out of the minister was a promise to perhaps study 
the matter with perhaps some draft proposals in three months. 
The Saskatoon police attempted to warn residents there of just 
such an offender. However, the law only allows them to go so 
far. 
 
While everyone is innocent until proven guilty in our society, 
given what allegedly occurred with this offender in Saskatoon 
over the weekend, will the minister give his commitment today 
to take some immediate action in this regard so our citizens, our 
children, can feel safe again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 
member for that question. As the hon. member knows, the 
matter is before the courts and I cannot comment about that. 
What I think it does do, though, is brings out what the real issue 
here is, and the issue is that when offenders, dangerous 
offenders have served their full term then there is no longer any 
sort of control that we can place on them because they become 
free members of society. 
 
In February, we had planned a meeting of the ministers of 
Justice with the federal Minister of Justice, Mr. Allan Rock, to 
discuss this issue because the issue is a federal issue, federal 
Liberal caucus issue relating to amendments to the Criminal 
Code. And there are some suggestions that we strongly support, 
as the Government of Saskatchewan, that deal with providing 
some kinds of control for these high-risk offenders as they have 
fulfilled their full term and are out on the streets, and we are 
working towards that to the next meeting which will be in May 
because it was delayed by the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, that alarms me somewhat because  

I do not understand anything that cannot allow us to protect our 
young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other jurisdictions in and out of Canada are far 
ahead on this issue. At some point, the rights of the community 
as a whole have to outweigh the rights of violent criminals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the March 16 issue of The Billings Gazette, out 
of Billings, Montana, there appears an item released by the 
Montana Department of Correction listing the name, vital 
statistics, and pictures of a sex offender who had been released 
into the public. Manitoba is also taking very clear action in this 
area. 
 
Will the minister commit to following a similar course of action 
in Saskatchewan when that’s what many people clearly state 
they want? This is for the protection of our young people, 
similar to our neighbouring jurisdictions. And I would like to 
hand a copy of this newspaper article to all the cabinet 
ministers. 
 
Will the minister commit to taking some action earlier than 
three months? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the next question. I think the member has not understood that 
the incident that he is referring to today does not involve a 
young person. It’s an adult person. So I think that should be 
clarified. Also, the whole situation relating to the release of 
information  there are no rules right now that prevent the 
police from releasing this information. 
 
The bigger issue is the liability question about when the police 
do release the information. And I think it’s important that we all 
recognize that this is an extremely serious issue that involves all 
of the members of this legislature, people in the police 
community, people in our prosecution . . . our Justice 
department. We all have to grapple with this and come up with 
a solution that works appropriately. 
 
It’s entirely inappropriate to use this forum and the types of sort 
of media hype that the members opposite seem to want to do to 
grapple with this difficult question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  I thank the minister for his answer, Mr. Speaker. 
We have heard from the public; they are calling and writing 
asking that we pressure the minister to expedite this matter and 
take some concrete action. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier I gave notice of a Bill respecting public 
protection from pedophiles. Can we have your commitment, 
can we have the minister’s commitment, Mr. Speaker, to 
support this Bill or table a government Bill to protect our young 
people in this province? Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for the third question. I think the answer to my first question 
answers what he’s just asked now. This is a matter for the 
federal government in amendments to the Criminal Code to 
deal with and we are going to be working with them. 
 
I suggest that if the hon. member and his caucus have ideas that 
we can use, I will accept them and take them with me when I go 
and meet with the Justice minister in May, for sure, and 
possibly earlier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wildlife Damage Compensation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is for the Minister of Sask Environment and Resource 
Management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday evening I attended a meeting in Melville 
with many farmers from across Saskatchewan. All of them 
wanted the minister to explain why the government will not 
compensate them for damage done to their crops by deer. While 
the minister did offer some possible options for next year, many 
of these farmers say they need help now or they will not be able 
to seed a crop this spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of this meeting, the minister left 
everyone in attendance with the impression that he would take 
these concerns back to cabinet and request appropriate funding. 
Can the minister tell us whether the cabinet has agreed to a fair 
compensation package for these farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for the question. I was pleased to see the hon. 
member at the rally in Melville the other night as well. We had 
a good meeting, a very productive meeting, good two-way 
conversation, and we certainly heard exactly what the problems 
were. Unfortunately we do not have a pot of money which we 
can dish out for compensation. 
 
And I can further say that we did offer a number of alternatives 
for next year, including fencing of the feed stacks, the further 
use of deterrent methods such as intercept feeding to keep the 
animals away from feed stacks, and hopefully we won’t have 
196,000 acres of crop out again. 
 
But in the event that we do have that, we are looking at a long-
term compensation program for future years. We’re working 
with the wildlife federation, SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities), farmers, hopefully the federal 
government on this as well. So we are looking at a number of 
options. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, that’s definitely not the 
answer that these farmers had hoped to hear, so therefore my 
next question is for the Premier. 

Mr. Speaker, everyone enjoys the wildlife in this province and 
yet only farmers with crops devastated by deer are expected to 
pick up the tab. Money was found for flood damage last spring 
just before the election, and crop damage caused by wildlife is 
also a disaster to these farmers. 
 
Will the Premier find some compassion and allocate funds to 
compensate Saskatchewan farmers for wildlife damage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again as I pointed 
out to the farmers at the meeting and also at the SARM 
convention, the government simply does not have a pot of 
several million dollars to hand out for compensation. 
 
It’s a very unfortunate situation. We’ve never had these 
circumstances in the history of farming in Saskatchewan before 
with so much crop being out, such a severe winter, and also 
relatively high population numbers. But we are working with 
landowners and doing everything that we possibly can to reduce 
the damage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
High-risk Offender Identification 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Minister of Justice as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, a week ago our caucus moved an emergency 
motion regarding pedophiles. That motion is all that really is 
necessary to deal with this very important issue. It called on 
your government to adopt the community notification process 
for released sex offenders similar to the policy used in 
Manitoba. You defeated that motion and continue to do nothing 
about this problem. It’s not a federal concern; it’s a concern of 
every parent in this province. 
 
The worst fears of the police have been realized in Saskatoon 
and the parents in Saskatoon. The convicted sex offender, who 
Saskatoon police were concerned about, has now been arrested 
for sexual assault. The police did everything they could to 
notify the public; your department did nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to make the changes to allow 
greater public notification about dangerous sex offenders? The 
real issue, Mr. Minister, needs attention now. When is the 
protection of the public going to start taking precedence over 
your protection of convicted pedophiles? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
the question. 
 
As I previously stated, this is a difficult issue, but I would 
appreciate if the appropriate facts would be presented to this 
Assembly. The matter that was in the paper this morning does 
not involve pedophilia. It’s a sexual assault of an adult. It’s a 
different issue. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

Now on the issue of protection of the public as it relates to the 
protocol from Manitoba or other procedures, we’re working on 
this. It’s a difficult issue to have it all resolved. 
 
What I would say is that the police have the option of 
presenting the information the way they have. The major issue 
for them is their liability. And that’s the kind of issue that we’re 
discussing, because they’re concerned about any possible 
lawsuits against them. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that just 
simply isn’t good enough. This sex offender has re-offended. 
It’s not a difficult issue at all. Parents in this province want you 
to address it now. 
 
Mr. Minister, on Friday you introduced legislation to allow 
Saskatchewan to work with other provinces in the area of film 
classification. I agree that protecting our children from certain 
movies is important, but protecting our children from child 
molesters is far more important. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you join with Manitoba and adopt a 
community notification program? What’s the hold-up? The 
police are doing everything they can to protect the public. Why 
don’t you get behind them and address this issue now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would reiterate that this matter is a 
matter relating to dangerous sexual offenders, dangerous 
offenders of many kinds who have served their full sentence. 
The person who is involved as the focus of this whole situation 
has completed his sentence and he’s out of the institution, or he 
was out of the institution. And what we’re dealing with is 
amendments to the Criminal Code which have to be done by the 
federal government. 
 
There are some proposals that look at 10-year supervision 
orders after completion of a sentence where appropriate. There 
are some other proposals that look at community notification 
through various protocols. Manitoba is the first province that 
has done this. Alberta’s looking at it. We are looking at it very 
seriously and we will continue to do that. And our ultimate 
concern is the community, the children in our community, and 
we are working toward that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, no changes to the 
Criminal Code are necessary here. Manitoba has already 
adopted a policy that’s working and working very well. 
 
Mr. Minister, setting aside politics here, we know what the right 
thing to do here is. The member from Greystone last week 
spoke about the issue as well. The Liberals are on side on this 
issue. Now is the time for action, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you move to adopt that policy here this 
afternoon? We will give you our full support and leave to do so, 
and we will see that that issue is dealt with this afternoon and 
passed. 

Mr. Minister, instead of wasting more time, will you simply 
introduce that motion here this afternoon and allow for that 
passage and allow for the parents of this province to have their 
children protected in this province the way they should be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say that 
the Manitoba protocol is one appropriate way to deal with it. As 
I reported last week, in the first six months of operation there 
were 12 cases that were presented to their committee. Only one 
case was given full publicity like has been done in Saskatoon. 
 
The issue behind that protocol is whether the province takes 
over the liability of the police when they release information. 
And that is a Treasury Board issue; it’s a financial issue. And 
we are going to deal with that, but it’s a tricky issue. 
 
What I would say is that the way the member opposite has been 
dealing with this, and other members opposite, has created a 
media hype on this issue which is totally inappropriate. 
 
What I would like to quote from is an article from the Canora 
Courier where a Mr. Brian Zinchuk says: 
 

There are a number of complications (dealing with 
pedophiles) arising from the whole affair. First, by 
focusing on one man, all others are forgotten. (You have to 
remember that). Second, one must acknowledge that the 
man has served his time. 

 
So we have this complicated process. It’s a balance between the 
rights of that individual and the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
a supplementary this afternoon and I wish to point out to the 
Minister of Justice that indeed it was the city of Saskatoon 
police department who raised this issue; the citizens of 
Saskatoon who raised this issue, not the politicians and the 
media of Saskatchewan, sir. 
 
I wish to pass to you, Minister of Justice, a list of 2,031 names 
of concerned citizens from Saskatoon who, in the absence of 
your government’s rational provincial protocol to deal with 
pedophiles released from prison, are putting forward their own 
solutions. And is this the way that you would like things solved 
in this province, Mr. Minister? 
 
I ask you now: will you or will you not accept responsibility for 
what is within the power of your government to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for the 
question. My offer of March 18 still stands to that hon. 
member. I invited her publicly to come and discuss this matter 
with me and work with me. I have not heard a thing from her 
about this. And what I would say is once again that the way that 
the members opposite have gone about this increases sort of the  



476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

fear level in the community. 
 
We are working with the police. We are working with the 
Justice department officials, and we are trying to deal with a 
very difficult situation that involves balancing the rights of the 
community over and against the rights of individuals. Our 
prime goal is the protection of the community, and that’s what 
we are working on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Five-year Budget Plan 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government brought down a budget recently that 
provides the provinces with a five-year picture by which to 
budget funds from Ottawa. This will allow the province the 
certainty of knowing what level of funding it has to work with 
for the next several years. 
 
Will the Finance minister now act to provide local governments, 
health boards, and school boards in this province with the same 
five-year plan to assist them in budgeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite for that question. The 
member will have to wait for the budget to find the answer to 
that specific question, but I will say two things. We will provide 
a four-year plan as our balanced budget legislation requires us 
to do, and we will focus our budget on how this province is 
going to deal with what Ottawa handed us. 
 
What the members opposite, the members here, refuse to 
address is the reality that in the recent federal budget for ‘96-97, 
in that budget, 73 per cent of all of the cuts are to health, 
education, and social programs. And I would remind the 
member opposite when we proposed a motion in this House to 
express our concern about those cuts, these members did not 
participate with us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will deal with the concerns of 
Saskatchewan people. We will address a long-term plan, and we 
don’t need advice from people who aren’t concerned about 
health, education, and social programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, it looks like we’ve had a 
preview of the Oscars here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, local governments, school boards, and health 
boards are waiting for this government to bring down its budget 
before they can plan their spending for the next year and try to 
map out long-term strategies. Given this fact, along with the 
tax, utility, and fee hikes that these boards are constantly having 
to struggle with, a five-year plan would allow them a much 
greater deal of predictability and flexibility. Will the Finance 
minister commit to providing such a plan in this House today? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. Again he will have to wait for the 
budget to see specifics. 
 
But I will ask the member opposite a question as well. Why do 
the members opposite sit in this House, representing 
Saskatchewan people, and act as a mouthpiece for Ottawa? 
Everybody in this province, except perhaps the 10 members 
opposite, know that we’re losing, over a four-year period, about 
$250 million in funding for health, education, and social 
programs  about a quarter of a billion dollars in loss. 
 
The member opposite himself has had his own health board 
write to him, write to the federal Finance minister, saying: if 
you care about medicare don’t allow these cuts to pass 
unnoticed. And yet we hear silence. We hear them saying, well 
what are we going to do? If they would have joined with us and 
expressed their concern about the magnitude of the cuts, 
perhaps we wouldn’t be in this dilemma. I call on them to do 
what we’re doing  speaking up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I would remind the minister 
opposite that I was a resident of Saskatchewan last year as well, 
and I was privy to all of the guarantees made by the government 
with respect to guaranteed funding for a number of the groups 
that I’m up here asking for today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain in this House today why 
it is that the federal government, with its massive operations 
and budgeting concerns, can provide a five-year financial plan 
for those jurisdictions that rely on federal funding, yet the 
Premier and the Finance minister of this province refuse to 
allow the same degree of comfort for those relying on 
provincial funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, first of all to the 
member opposite, what I said to him is he has to wait for the 
budget. Please don’t put words in my mouth. 
 
I would say to the member opposite as well, why has he chosen 
to ignore the people of Saskatchewan? Why does he stand in 
the Saskatchewan legislature, speaking up for Ottawa? If he 
wants to speak up for Ottawa, he should go to Ottawa and 
become a member of the federal caucus. If he is in this 
legislature, he should represent the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would ask him again, why, when we had a motion in this 
House expressing our concern that the federal budget had 73 
per cent of its cuts  73 per cent — in health, education, and 
social programs, why would they not participate with us and 
express the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan? We will 
continue to speak up for the people of Saskatchewan. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic 
Development stated in the Partnership for Growth document 
that in order to entice the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce) call centre to Saskatchewan, he had to give them a 
$3.4 million grant and eliminate the sales tax on the 1-800 
numbers. The document stated, and I quote: 
 

Elimination of the sales tax on 1-800 numbers was a key to 
attracting major telephone call centres to the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, does this mean the Minister of Economic 
Development is actually admitting there could be no economic 
development or job creation under the stifling taxation policies 
of this government without tax elimination? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite I appreciate her support for the changes that 
we made to the tax regime to attract call centres to 
Saskatchewan. I want to say as well that coming from an 
opening of a regional economic development authority this 
morning with my friend and colleague from Moosomin, I can 
tell you that there is a great deal of optimism in rural 
Saskatchewan and right across the piece. 
 
The exports from Saskatchewan in non-traditional areas is at 
record levels as the member opposite well knows. The 
Partnership for Renewal has worked well. I tell you frankly that 
the business people and working people developed that 
document. We implemented it in 1992 with very excellent 
success. We campaigned on it 1995. 
 
And I tell the member opposite that she should get out of the 
gloom and doom mentality and work with us to remodel the tax 
regime. And while she’s at it, she might write a letter to the 
Prime Minister asking that the GST (goods and services tax) be 
eliminated as promised in the last federal election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic 
Development said in the House last Monday that I had input 
into the Partnership For Growth. He said, and I’ll quote: “In 
fact she herself came into our office and had input into this 
document.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister knows I did not have input into this 
document. I was shown the document after it was printed. If 
that’s the minister’s idea of consultation, then I can understand 
why so many people are upset in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic Development admit 
that the Partnership For Growth document is nothing but a 
piece of NDP (New Democratic Party) propaganda intended to 
pay lip-service to the business community of this province? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to make a 
question out of that very partisan statement, but I will respond 
to her comments. 
 
At this time, if the member has any input  is what I said in the 
House the other day  that she wants to add, now or later, I’m 
willing and members of our caucus are willing to meet to listen 
to you. 
 
But to date, all I’ve heard is snivelling and whining from 
members of the Liberal caucus about the economy in 
Saskatchewan. I was at the apparel and garment annual meeting 
at lunch today  great optimism about the work being done to 
manufacture clothing and apparel in this province. We were at 
the regional economic development authority launch in 
Moosomin, a great deal of excitement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only area of this province that there is 
depression is in the 10 members opposite. And with what 
they’re doing to their former leader, there may be good reason 
why you should be ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Computers for Schools Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to share with the Assembly an 
exciting program, one that shows the way for new directions in 
partnerships and learning. It is my pleasure to advise the 
members that the provincial government and Crown 
corporations have partnered to donate 1,000 personal computers 
to Saskatchewan K to 12 schools over the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to publicly commend SaskTel, SaskPower, 
and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) for their 
significant contribution to many young people in schools across 
the province. The computers will be distributed through the 
computers for schools program which is being coordinated by 
the volunteers with the SaskTel Pioneers. 
 
Preparing our youth for participation in a knowledge-based 
society is an important government focus. The computers for 
schools program support this direction by giving students the 
tools they need to build the skills that will take them into the 
next century. 
 
This approach to providing computer equipment to schools has 
several benefits. First and most important is the addition of 
computers into the school classrooms. While these computers 
have been replaced in government offices, they are invaluable 
in classrooms. Second, this program allows good computers to 
be reused in a positive manner instead of having them taken to 
the nearest salvage. Mr. Speaker, this recycling of equipment 
also teaches a positive environmental lesson. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize and  



478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

commend the work being done by the SaskTel Pioneers. 
Because of their commitment to education, many students 
across the province will have greater access to computer 
technology. In Saskatchewan an advisory committee has been 
established to set priorities and criteria. This includes a ratio of 
students to computers in each school or school division to 
ensure a fair and equitable distribution to schools. To date, 185 
applications have been received in Saskatchewan and no 
applications will be processed until all schools have had an 
opportunity to apply. 
 
Finally, I would like to issue a challenge to other public sector 
organizations, private businesses, organizations, and individuals 
to grow the growing partnership of the computers for schools 
program. I urge them to donate computers to Saskatchewan 
school children through the SaskTel Pioneers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, firstly I would like to thank the 
minister for the advance copy of this statement. We appreciate 
it. 
 
I’m pleased that the Saskatchewan government is involved in a 
program to reuse government computers that may otherwise be 
part of our environmental problem in this province. We 
appreciate SaskTel’s commitment to the children of our 
province to ensure that they are part of the global economy. 
 
I was particularly delighted to see that rural Saskatchewan 
children will have an equal opportunity to apply for these 
computers. 
 
On behalf of the Liberal caucus and the students of this 
province, we salute this program and the government and we 
add our voice to the request for private companies to also work 
with this program. We trust SaskTel will help too in the 
gathering and placement of the computers that could be donated 
by private firms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
commend the minister, especially for the part on recycling. I 
think it’s good to see that equipment going into the school 
rather than, as was mentioned, being sold for pennies on the 
dollar. It will get some good use there. 
 
I think it’s also good to have this happen at the time when 
we’ve just had Education Week and we were talking about the 
wonder in learning. I hope that the kids that get to use these will 
be excited about what they’re learning and they’re doing with 
them. 
 
Two concerns I do have. I wonder how far a thousand 
computers go in the province. I know that’s probably all that 
there was, but I hope that all the students get a chance at that. 
And with what happens in our time of technology, I would hope 
that these computers, even though that they may still be 
working well, aren’t completely dated. But I like the idea of the 
recycling and commend you on that. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Loan Program Changes 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the 
Assembly of a significant change in the way student loans are 
financed in Saskatchewan. The Government of Saskatchewan 
has been closely examining the appropriate role of government. 
We have been more carefully defining those areas government 
should be involved and those that should be left to others. 
 
In examining the Saskatchewan student loan program, we have 
defined government’s role as determining which students are 
eligible for loans, how much money they need, and ensuring the 
money is available. That is the role the Government of 
Saskatchewan will continue to play in the student loan program. 
 
What is changing is that government will leave banking to the 
bankers. The province and the Royal Bank have signed an 
agreement for the Royal Bank to finance student loans. It begins 
August 1 of this year. 
 
Other lenders were approached but could not meet the 
government’s terms  terms that include a high level of service 
for students at a reasonable cost to the government. Other 
lenders will be given an opportunity to participate at a later 
date. 
 
Saskatchewan is not the first province to negotiate such a 
contract. Seven other provinces and the federal government 
have similar financing arrangements for student loans. We think 
that our contract is the best in the country. 
 
We consulted students through the scholarship bursary and loan 
committee and they told us that service was a major concern. 
With that in mind we negotiated monthly disbursements 
providing students with a regular cash flow throughout the year. 
One immediate benefit to the government is a significant cost 
saving  a saving of $6 million per year with no loss of jobs 
and no less money for students. The government will also 
continue to have loan forgiveness policies which are among the 
most generous in the country. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this 
contract because it increases the efficiency of government while 
fully maintaining an important service for students, the 
Saskatchewan student loans program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for releasing a copy of that document to us for a 
chance for me to take a quick look at it. As the minister knows, 
education is the most important topic for our children all across 
the province and we’re encouraged by the fact that there is a 
commitment by the government to provide financial assistance 
to students at a time when they face the greatest need. 
 
The largest number of calls that I have received in the last six 
months is from students with concerns around student loans, 
the availability of the finances, the service or lack of in the 
perception of students  and I’m very pleased to hear that the 
minister is looking at this as addressing that. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

What my concern might be is in the area around that the interest 
cost that the student will have to bear now is not controlled. 
And I see that the bank, in this case the Royal Bank, has the 
availability to change the interest rate depending upon the 
student that they’re dealing with. It’s prime plus a maximum of 
two and a half. Does that mean then that there is flexibility and 
that the assets of the particular individual then come into 
question? So I think that has to be addressed. 
 
When we look at the $6 million saving, my hope is that — of 
course we know that the education in the province of 
Saskatchewan has had serious cut-backs over the last four or 
five years — I would hope that that $6 million could be 
reallocated back into education to ensure that any student who 
wishes to get financial assistance, who is eligible under the 
government’s criteria, would still be able to qualify and get that 
assistance to ensure that everyone has the ability to be educated 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
effort to streamline that system of loans. I think it needed to be 
looked at, and it’s good to see it’s happening. I also rather 
appreciate the fact of all the compliments coming to the 
banking system from the members opposite  an interesting 
point of view coming from that side but it’s good to see. 
 
A couple of concerns and they were mentioned; I’d sort of like 
to underline those as well. In the matter of students being able 
to access the loans, people, students who come from families 
with lots of money, probably don’t need it. People at the bottom 
will probably get it. It’s the group in the middle that tends to 
fall in the cracks. We’ve sort of said that maybe we’d need to 
look at a situation where the personal property of the families 
could be used as security to open up loans for the people and 
students that come from middle class situations, because they 
often find that situation quite difficult, and I would hope that 
that’s being addressed as well. 
 
I too share some of the concern with the interest rates. On that 
I’m not quite as supportive of the banks and their history as the 
member opposite. I’m a little concerned that these interest rates 
will get quite high. 
 
I like the idea that  I hope it’s going to happen  and that is 
that these loans will be repaid, and there won’t be a lot of loans 
that get lost. This is taxpayers’ money that’s given to the 
students to give them an opportunity to become good, 
high-wage earners, and I’m concerned for that. You mentioned 
a term about loan forgiveness. I hope that doesn’t mean there’s 
too much taxpayers’ money that’s being forgiven on this one. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To move an adjournment motion to 
deal with the volunteer medals. 
 
Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 
 

House Recess 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by 
the Deputy Premier, the member for Regina Elphinstone, that 
by leave of the Assembly: 

 
That this Assembly do now recess to honour the 
distinguished volunteer medal recipients and reconvene at 
the call of the Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
(1615) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, 
Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 

911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 43 establishes 
The Emergency 911 System Act. This Bill lays the foundation 
for coordination in the development, implementation, and 
operation of an integrated, province-wide 911 system. 
 
The Bill is in response to the evolving needs of municipal 
governments, health districts, police, and other organizations 
for the emergency services that are delivered to the people of 
this province. A comprehensive 911 system will be a positive 
catalyst that brings our emergency service delivery into the 21st 
century. The development of new partnerships and the 
coordination achieved through the efforts of all the emergency 
service providers will enhance the services that local 
governments provide. 
 
The direction presented to you today for 911 is a result of the 
partnerships that have been created through a review of 
emergency and protective services. SUMA, (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) SARM, SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), 
emergency service organizations, SaskTel and the departments 
of Health, Justice, and Municipal Government started the 
review in 1995. 
 
This was the beginning point for the coordination of emergency 
and protective services. I would like to thank the numerous 
emergency service providers from across the province that have 
provided their time and expertise to this review process. 
 
This Bill is an important next step in the process. More work 
will be required on many aspects of the province-wide 911 
system and on the coordination and delivery of emergency 
services as this initiative is implemented over several years. 
 
I would like now to turn to the legislation and highlight some of  



480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

the details of this initiative. 
 
The Bill before the House sets out goals for the province-wide 
911 system. We will develop an enhanced service that connects 
a person dialling the telephone number, 911, to emergency 
service providers through public safety answering points. The 
service will automatically provide the public safety answering 
point with the address of the caller, even if the caller is unable 
to stay on the line or provide information. 
 
We plan to accomplish this over the next five years with the 
cooperation of all municipal, health and other emergency 
service organizations in the province. More specifically, 
provisions to implement the system include the ability for the 
minister to enter into agreements with emergency service 
providers and to coordinate standards, protocols, mapping, 
addressing, call-taking, and dispatching for the implementation 
of the system. 
 
A critical element of this legislation is the establishment of an 
advisory committee to guide the development of the 
province-wide system. This committee will include 
representation from those centres already providing enhanced 
911 service, including Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, and 
the south-west. Their expertise will be invaluable in developing 
the province-wide system. We need to build on their 
experience. 
 
The committee will also include representation from 
organizations such as SARM, SUMA, SAHO, FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), Health, Justice, and directly 
from emergency service providers. 
 
To establish an effective province-wide system, we will require 
the participation of all municipalities, health districts, 
telecommunications providers, government agencies, and 
emergency service providers. This is not going to be an easy 
task, but I am certain that all organizations will come together 
in the cooperative spirit that Saskatchewan is noted for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now summarize the main provisions of this 
Bill. The definitions in the Bill are intended to be inclusive of 
all organizations that deliver emergency services. The 911 
system means a province-wide emergency telephone service 
that connects a person dialling the telephone digits, 911, to 
emergency service providers through a public safety answering 
point. 
 
The purpose of this Act is to provide for the coordination 
needed to develop and implement a 911 system for 
Saskatchewan. The provision of a 911 system will require 
cooperation between numerous organizations. 
 
The powers of the minister are defined in section 5. The 
minister is responsible for the coordination of the 911 initiative 
and is provided authority to establish and implement a 
province-wide 911 system. This will involve developing 
technical standards for such things as communication 
equipment and training, mapping and addressing, signage, call-
taking and dispatching. It will also involve coordinating 
agencies or departments in such things as training, information  

collection, and addressing. 
 
The minister will recommend areas of coverage for the 911 
system and the locations of public safety answering points. 
 
Financial provisions are contained in section 7. The 911 system 
is not without costs. The proposal is to fund some of the costs 
through a monthly fee collected by SaskTel on telephone lines. 
These fees will be expended for the development, 
implementation, and operation of the 911 system. The 
department will, in each fiscal year, provide a report on 
revenues and expenditures to be tabled in the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Participation in the 911 system is required by the legislation as 
outlined in section 8. We cannot deliver a system that provides 
service to only part of the province. Gaps in 911 service 
delivery are not acceptable. 
 
Our volunteers are seen as a critical component in responding to 
911 calls and in the delivery of emergency service in many 
areas of the province. For this reason, section 9 provides 
liability protection to volunteers who may assist or respond to a 
911 call. 
 
Section 10 provides that it is an offence to place false calls on 
the 911 system or otherwise interfere with the operation of the 
system. 
 
Section 12 provides the authority for Lieutenant Governor in 
Council regulations. It provides for the confidentiality of 
information used to build the 911 database, such as SaskTel 
customer data, central survey and mapping, and health 
databases if required. There is also provision for excluding an 
organization from the system if there is a logical reason for this 
and the exclusion would not impact on 911 service to the 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of related amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. The related 
amendments provide authority for SaskTel to deliver the 911 
telecommunications service and to establish and collect fees on 
telephone bills to cover the 911 communication equipment and 
costs for the 911 system and public safety answering points. 
 
Section 14 provides similar legislative provisions to The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunication Holding Corporation Act. 
This extends the 911 provisions to SaskTel Mobility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe all of the provisions in this Bill can be 
supported by members of the legislature. They are essential to 
the achievement of a comprehensive 911 service for rural 
Saskatchewan. I beg to inform the Assembly that His Hon. the 
Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 
matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 
Assembly.  
 
And I move that Bill No. 43, An Act respecting the 
Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 
911 System and to make consequential amendments to other 
Acts be now read a second time. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to speak on this very important piece of legislation. 
Everyone in this province, be they rural or urban, northern or 
southern, rich or poor, deserve the right, the high sense of 
security that our society can provide. A province-wide 911 
system is only one small piece in that puzzle. Fundamentally of 
course, who can be opposed to a concept of comprehensive 
emergency services? 
 
However, my caucus colleagues and I are not completely clear 
on all of the in’s and out’s of the system proposed by the 
minister, so we will be asking for time to study it further. There 
are definitely some concerns we’ll want to raise in debate and 
in committee because this is a huge commitment of taxpayers’ 
dollars. We want to make sure that the system represents the 
best interest of the people and not merely the best interest of the 
NDP government. 
 
First of all, we do recognize that this Act will go some distance 
in providing a greater sense of security for our people, 
particularly in communities outside urban centres. For too long, 
access to health and emergency services in rural and northern 
areas has been severely lacking. We have problems with roads 
in very poor condition, and as well, many industries in logging 
and fishing has some problems in terms of responding to 
emergency needs when we see different communities 
fund-raising to make up for the lack of proper equipment, and 
the list goes on an on. 
 
Don’t get me wrong — I’m not attacking the health 
professionals in our province. On the contrary, I think they do 
an admirable job considering the financial and geographical 
limitations they are facing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Our dedicated volunteer fire, police, and ambulance 
departments face less than ideal conditions, yet they continue to 
help their communities. However, northern and rural areas need 
and deserve more, particularly now that so many of the health 
services in these areas have been gutted  a choice that this 
government made in their last term. 
 
Even if this system is implemented, it will take five years before 
it’s operating. Now that makes it close to 10 years since the 
government has reduced services and shut down hospitals. 
That’s a long time without decent access to health care. The 
Emergency 911 System Act proposed by the government will 
provide $5.6 million for the development, implementation and 
operation of the Sask 911 system. This apparently includes a 
$2.4 million contribution by the province on behalf of the 
municipal governments. And make no mistake, it is the 
municipal governments who will be paying. 
 
Who can forget that this necessary 911 system allowed the 
government to scrap their promise to return 10 per cent of VLT 
(video lottery terminal) revenues from our towns, villages and 
RMs (rural municipality)? The cost of Saskatchewan 911 also 
includes $3 million to upgrade the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) province-wide system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s sad that such a vital system doesn’t warrant a 
larger contribution by this government, especially after it has  

raked in a quarter of a billion dollars in VLT revenues since 
1993. Surely more can be done for everyone in this province 
with those funds. This is a meagre contribution by this 
government. It can  and it must do more. 
 
The proposed system, if the minister is to be believed, is a 
highly advanced one that hopefully will serve our people well. 
One of our major concerns is that this legislation seems to give 
the minister of SaskTel and her department bureaucrats a 
massive amount of power over the system. This in itself is odd 
since the emergency system is a Health issue, a Social Services 
issue, and a Justice issue as well. 
 
Should SaskTel really be completely 100 per cent in charge of 
something like this? That’s a question that has got to be 
answered before this Act is passed. Under the Act the SaskTel 
minister will be the one entering into agreements with 
emergency service providers, municipal councils, Indian bands, 
health boards, and anyone else that seems fit when establishing 
the system. 
 
Again, shouldn’t there be some accountability somewhere else? 
After all we’re not simply talking about a new phone system. 
We’re talking about a vital cog in our health care and justice 
systems. 
 
But in the Bill before us, the minister of SaskTel has the power 
to recommend how many and what locations answering points 
will be established. She is also the one responsible for 
coordinating a province-wide street address system and for 
developing a quality control manual. This is a vital aspect of the 
entire system because of the rural road system which is largely 
unmarked. 
 
According to the Act, the minister of SaskTel will appoint a 
committee to advise her on these matters. That’s all well and 
good and probably very necessary. But we really question 
whether she’s going to be able to oversee such a vital system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister in charge of SaskTel going to have 
the capacity to care about what is happening in my 
constituency? As you know, some of my constituents are over 
1,000 kilometres away from Regina. When the minister is trying 
to cope with strikes and rural amalgamations, how important 
are those people going to seem to her in her department? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not doubting the minister’s intentions 
because I am sure they are honourable. However, I am 
expressing some concern on behalf of the people I represent 
and I should also take a moment to express some of the 
concerns on behalf of the Saskatchewan taxpayers particularly, 
because the minister has control over these funds. 
 
I understand that she may direct money to developing Sask 911 
from the department she administers or SaskTel itself. How will 
she do that  especially when Crown corporate bureaucrats 
always seem to be the ones who will tell government what to 
do. 
 
I also wonder about section 8 which states that, when requested  



482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

by the minister, the municipalities, district health boards, 
emergency service providers, telecommunication providers, the 
phone companies, government departments or agencies, and 
Crown corporations shall participate in the development, 
implementation, and operation of the Sask 911 system. That’s a 
lot of people to order around. 
 
And what is she going to do if they refuse? It would be a shame 
if the minister had to come to the session every day carrying a 
big stick. On the recommendations of one appointed cabinet 
member, all these people will be forced to enter in agreements 
and develop standards, protocols, systems, and procedures. That 
again is a lot of power. 
 
(1630) 
 
I suppose the government thinks it is doing voluntary 
organizations a favour by not holding them liable for their work 
only if they act in good faith, taking part in the system. That’s 
very kind. 
 
She apparently would not only have the power to direct the 
proceedings, she’ll have the power to pass judgement and to 
decide on the sentence. Oh oh, it sounds like there’s going to be 
yet another lawyer in the NDP cabinet here. And this one will 
be running emergency services. That’s twice as bad, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What is particularly troubling is that this Act is supposed to 
give the government powers to make regulations on all sorts of 
things, including defining, enlarging, or restricting the meaning 
of words or expressions, prescribing standards, prescribing 
training and information, and prescribing any matter that the 
cabinet sees fit. As far as we are concerned, this is a very 
dangerous power. 
 
Before the Bill is even considered as legislation, we need to 
know why the power is unilaterally in the hands of the NDP 
government. Why are municipalities or any other participants 
not included in the development of the system? The government 
is happy to break out a promise and vacuum VLT money out of 
their communities, but they certainly don’t want municipal 
input. The whole process needs to be questioned and therefore 
the whole Bill needs to be questioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our caucus needs more input from the people who 
will benefit from the system. We like the idea behind a 
comprehensive 911 system and we’ve been proponents of such 
a system in the past. However, because we feel we need more 
input into the details and possible ramifications of this Bill, we 
ask the House to adjourn debate on this issue. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32  An Act to amend 
The Local Government Election Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 32, The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 1996. This legislation covers election 
procedures in all urban and northern municipalities, and all  

school divisions in the province. The Act is reviewed and 
renewed after each province-wide round of local elections, Mr. 
Speaker. This Bill makes mainly routine amendments to local 
election legislation. 
 
There are, however, several substantive amendments. These 
amendments, in general, were requested by local governments. 
They were then reviewed in detail by a working committee 
made up of representatives of SUMA, the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), the city clerks’ association, as 
well as municipal and school administrators. Representatives of 
these organizations worked closely with the officials of my 
department and the Department of Education to help prepare 
these amendments. 
 
The first amendment of some significance that I want to 
mention is the provision to permit disabled voters to vote at any 
poll in their polling area that is easily accessible, rather than the 
regular poll. 
 
This will permit disabled voters to avoid the inconvenience of 
being sent off to another poll if they show up at a poll in their 
neighbourhood that provides easy access. At the present time, 
the Act requires advance polls to be readily accessible, and it 
states that regular polling places should be accessible to 
disabled persons whenever possible. 
 
A second reform contained in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a new 
section that allows municipalities to make use of computerized 
voting or computerized vote counting if they choose to do so. 
Some cities have requested this amendment. They point out that 
this enabling provision is found in local election legislation in a 
number of other provinces. 
 
It does not mean, however, that city elections will necessarily 
make use of this new section immediately. Some city 
administrations have been studying the computerized 
vote-counting methods used by cities in other provinces to see 
if they make the local election process more efficient and cost 
effective. But they are still evaluating these methods. They told 
us that they want the necessary legislation in place to permit 
them to proceed when and if they are ready. 
 
A third reform, Mr. Speaker, allows school board employees to 
run for office for a school board that employs them if they first 
take a leave of absence during the campaign period and if they 
resign should they be elected. This right to participate in the 
democratic process is already available to municipal, provincial, 
and federal employees. This amendment responds to an SSTA 
request that this House extend similar rights to school board 
employees. 
 
A fourth reform of note I want to mention is the provision to 
permit voters to mark their ballots with any colour and with 
writing instruments other than the traditional lead pencil. This 
flexibility is found in various forms in election legislation for 
federal and provincial elections. This change was requested by 
city clerks and supported generally by other local government 
groups. It will help to ensure that each voter’s intention when 
he or she marks the ballot is taken into account. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

In addition to these four highlights, the Bill contains a number 
of administrative amendments that will streamline procedures 
and potentially save local tax dollars for cities, towns, villages, 
and school boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to thank the local government organizations and their 
representatives who served on the working committee that 
helped prepared the amendments reflected in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 32, An Act 
to amend The Local Government Election Act. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak on this piece of 
legislation, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 
1996. 
 
First of all, I want to commend the Minister of Municipal 
Government on the effort that she and her department have put 
into this Bill. I do however have some very real reservations 
about parts of it. 
 
I want to speak first on the issue of school division elections. I 
note that sections 5, 6 and 7 of the government’s Bill all 
provide for school division elections to be held using a mixed 
formula  a formula where some parts of the school division 
are divided into wards and other parts have candidates running 
at large. 
 
I have to say that this type of solution may appear to make sense 
in many cases. For example, some school divisions contain a 
rural area where it makes sense to divide the territory up into 
wards, and also an urban area where it may be best to have 
candidates run at large, that is, without a ward system. This 
change brings the legislation into line with The Education Act 
which already provides for this type of election. 
 
I worry about the relevance of this change to the law in view of 
the government’s stated intention to completely reorganize 
school divisions in many cases. We have heard that the Minister 
of Education has attended closed-door meetings of school 
division members and administrators and told them, in so many 
words, pick a buddy or else we’ll choose one for you. 
 
One has to ask, is it really worthwhile spending the time and 
effort cleaning up minor inconsistencies in the legislation 
governing the election of school division board members when 
the whole school system is under such a threat from the 
Minister of Education? 
 
The next point which gives me some concern is section 8 of the 
Bill which changes the rules regarding who can vote in the 
election of councils for resort villages. The change that is 
proposed by the Bill would give residents of other provinces 
who own or lease land in one of our resort villages the right to 
vote in the local elections. At present, the requirement is that a 
person must have resided in Saskatchewan for at least six 
months before acquiring the right to vote in resort village 
elections. 
 
Now I want to emphasize that I value the contributions, both  

economic and community wise, of the cottage owners of this 
province, including those who reside in other provinces of 
Canada. Saskatchewan is a beautiful and clean province with 
clear lakes, pristine forests, and an abundance of wildlife. It’s 
not surprising that we find people from other provinces coming 
here to build cottages and homes in our resort villages. 
 
On the face of it, there would seem to be no reason why such 
people should have any restrictions on their right to vote. But 
before we pass this legislation however, I will have a number of 
questions to ask the minister in the committee. Whether she has 
any figures on how many new voters this change will entail. 
Will it mean that non-residents will be in the majority in some 
municipalities? If that’s the case, we will want to be careful to 
ensure that year-round residents continue to receive the full 
range of services that Saskatchewan residents have come to 
expect from their municipal governments. 
 
I find myself with the same concern when it comes to section 9 
of the Bill. That section permits a non-resident who leases a 
property in a resort village . . . may vote in school division ward 
elections. We will want a legal assurance from the minister that 
education in resort villages will not be sacrificed by under-
funding resulting from allowing non-resident lessees to vote 
and perhaps dominate school division elections. 
 
These are just some of the concerns that come to mind upon a 
careful reading of Bill No. 32. And so I hereby move 
adjournment of second reading of this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous 
Statutes concerning Municipal Government 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 36, The Municipal Government 
Miscellaneous Statutes Amendment and Repeal Act, 1996. 
 
This legislation is a housekeeping Bill. It is a Bill that will 
change a number of Acts but will not effect any changes in 
government policy. For example, sections 2 and 4 simply 
propose changes to The Agricultural Development and 
Adjustment Act and The Community Bonds Act, respectively. 
In each case we are replacing former department names with the 
current names. 
 
Section 3 proposes a change to The Assessment Management 
Agency Act so that when the agency’s new multivolume 
assessment manual is completed, it won’t have to be 
reproduced at significant cost in the Saskatchewan Gazette but 
it will still be available for those wishing to review it. 
 
Section 5 incorporates some gender neutral language and 
extends the deadline for the posting of appeal hearing dates 
under The Conservation and Development Act to provide 
people with sufficient time to arrange their affairs prior to an 
appeal hearing. 
 
Section 6 removes a reference to local improvement districts in 
The Grain Charges Limitation Act as the last local improvement  



484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

district was disbanded back in 1976. 
 
Other sections incorporate some gender neutral language and 
also the correction of what may be considered clerical errors. 
 
Section 7 of the Bill corrects the phrase “Conservation District 
notice” where it previously incorrectly said “District 
Conservation notice” in The Heritage Property Act. 
 
Section 8 will amend The Hospital Revenue Act to reference 
the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency which was 
given responsibility several years ago for determining equalized 
assessment, formerly a responsibility of the Minister of Urban 
Affairs. 
 
Section 9 will repeal The House Building Assistance Act. The 
house building assistance grant program was cancelled back in 
the 1979 budget, so this Act hasn’t been required for some 
time. 
 
Section 10 will update some names of government departments 
in The Industrial Towns Act. 
 
Section 11 will clarify some wording respecting petitioning 
procedures in The Local Improvements Act, 1993. The current 
legislation is unclear as to when certain deadlines for petitions 
will apply. The amendment will fix that problem. 
 
Section 12 will repeal The Senior Citizens Home Repair 
Assistance Act. The grant program administered under that Act 
was cancelled in the 1988 budget so the legislation is no longer 
required. 
 
Section 13 and 14 update department name references in The 
Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 and The Time Act, 
respectively. 
 
Section 15 will amend The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act to 
confirm in legislation that employees of the park come within 
the public service superannuation plan. The employees have 
always paid into the plan but no acknowledgement of that 
contribution or of their participation in the plan has ever been 
recognized in the legislation. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, this is a package of housekeeping items 
and I urge all member to join me in supporting this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 36, An Act 
to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes Concerning 
Municipal Government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to speak on this Bill, Bill No. 36, entitled The 
Municipal Government Miscellaneous Statutes Amendment and 
Repeal Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the Bill is largely a housekeeping Act, even  

housekeeping Acts deserve the careful scrutiny of this House. 
When one carefully scrutinizes this legislation, one does indeed 
find more than a few points which deserve mention. 
 
One change is long overdue. Section 16 of the Bill provides for 
amendments to The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act. The 
employees are participants in the provincial government 
employees superannuation plan. These men and women have 
been making contributions to the plan since the park opened in 
January 1991 even though there has been no legal foundation to 
the deductions and no corresponding legal entitlement to the 
benefits. 
 
This is an astounding situation. Here we have dedicated 
employees regularly making contributions to the superannuation 
plan, actually having these monies being deducted from their 
pay cheques each month, and all the while there has been 
nothing legal in place to guarantee that these employees would 
be entitled to benefits under the plan. 
 
In summary, I congratulate the Minister of Municipal 
Government for bringing forward this change to the legislation. 
But I point out that this should have been done over five years 
ago. In fact it should have been done by the previous Tory 
administration before they were voted out of office in the fall of 
1991. When this NDP government came into power in late 
1991, I would have hoped they would have moved faster on this 
issue. Evidently it was not a matter that was of great concern to 
them. 
 
It’s also interesting to note that the Bill contains a section, 
section 9, which entirely repeals The House Building 
Assistance Act. This was a program which went out of favour 
with the previous NDP government lead by Mr. Blakeney after 
the 1979 budget. It permitted grants to be paid under a program 
called the house building assistance grant program. It’s a fair 
question now to ask the government, if your old Blakeney era 
program is no longer any good, what have you got to replace it? 
Or have you finally decided that this is one area where 
government really has no useful role to play after all? It would 
be interesting to hear what Mr. Blakeney would say if he could 
see you now. 
 
Another interesting point that I notice in the Bill is the change 
to The Local Improvements Act, 1993. I notice that section 11 
of the Bill attempts to clear up the confusion over time frames 
for the certification of petitions for or against local 
improvements. Whenever local improvements, such as new 
sidewalks or ditches or publicly funded landscaping are 
proposed, there are always levies that go along with the 
improvement. When the improvements and the corresponding 
levies become the subject of opposition by petitions, it’s 
important to be able to understand the time frames involved. 
When do the petitions have to be submitted? When do they 
have to be certified by the assessor? It would be nice to clear up 
these points. Unfortunately, it’s impossible to see how the 
amendments put forward in this Bill will clarify those time 
frames. 
 
But one of the most serious difficulties I find in the Bill is the 
decision by the government to exempt the Saskatchewan  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

Assessment Management Agency from the requirement to print 
its new assessment manual in the Saskatchewan Gazette. I 
realize that the new assessment manual will be published in 
several volumes and that some measures to control the cost of 
publication may be desirable, but the Gazette is the traditional 
method by which the government publishes its new regulations. 
 
If there is going to be an exemption granted, then I think that 
some very clear and unambiguous new sections also have to be 
passed making sure that the new assessment manual is readily 
available and widely accessible to the public. 
 
The government knows perfectly well that SAMA’s 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) new 
assessment manual will be dynamite and that it is bound to 
cause controversy. It’s disturbing to see that the government 
already seems to be trying to sweep the controversy under the 
rug by limiting the publication of the assessment manual. 
 
These are some of the concerns of our caucus with this Act. In 
view of these concerns, I hereby move adjournment of second 
reading of the Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 40  An Act respecting 
Pharmacists and Pharmacies 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Pharmacy Act, 1996. 
 
Over the past several years, our government has been working 
closely with the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association to 
arrive at a new, updated statute to regulate pharmacists and 
retail pharmacies in Saskatchewan. This Act is the culmination 
of that work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a key component of this Act is its public 
accountability provisions. For example, public representatives 
will now be included on the association’s council and discipline 
committee. Discipline hearings will now be open to the public. 
 
The association will file an annual report and its activities with 
the Minister of Health. And, as is the case with other health 
professions, by-laws which potentially impact the public will 
require ministerial approval. This approval process will allow 
for consultations with key stakeholders such as physicians, 
dentists, and health employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a feature of this Act is the ability of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, in other words cabinet, to make 
regulations with respect to drug schedules and who may 
prescribe drugs. This flexibility does not exist in the current 
Act. Of course, activity of this kind would require consultation 
with the pharmaceutical association. At the present time, only 
physicians, dentists, and veterinarians may prescribe drugs. 
Other trained health practitioners, however, are being permitted 
across Canada to prescribe a selected range of drugs. An 
example of this is optometrists. 
 
With these regulation-making powers, the Act can respond to  

future changes. With respect to drug schedules, these are 
measures which determine who can sell drugs, where they can 
be sold, and under what conditions they may be sold. 
 
The previous method of amending drug schedules was quite 
complex. As new drugs are continually coming on the market, a 
flexible method of listing these drugs in the appropriate 
schedule is required. The new Act has taken this requirement 
into account. 
 
While the regulations will specify broad categories of drugs, 
such as prescription drug pharmacy only, the specific drugs will 
be listed in by-laws. Amendments to the by-laws can be made 
more easily to accommodate changes in drugs on the market. 
For some categories of drugs, the association will simply file 
the by-laws with the Saskatchewan Justice. For other categories 
of drugs, the approval of the by-laws by the Minister of Health 
will be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important feature of the new Act is that it 
clarifies and expands the authority of the association to set 
standards for the operation of retail pharmacies and to monitor 
or audit their operation. Should the proprietor of a pharmacy 
fail to ensure that appropriate standards are met, disciplinary 
action may be taken against the proprietor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regulation of pharmacies by the association 
will not extend to hospitals or such other pharmacies operated 
by district health boards. The standards for these pharmacies are 
often quite different, given that they primarily serve clients of a 
facility or institution. The standards for these pharmacies are set 
by the Canadian society of hospital pharmacists and are 
included as part of the hospital accreditation process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this new Act will serve the profession 
and the province well into the future. It contains all the newer 
features of professional legislation. It also contains features that 
are unique to the pharmacy sector. And it is more responsive to 
our changing health system and the needs of the public. 
 
Accordingly I hereby move second reading of The Pharmacy 
Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address 
the issue of pending debate on The Pharmacy Act, 1996. New 
legislation in this area has long been overdue as it has been 18 
years since the last Act with regards to pharmacies and the 
regulation thereof was introduced and consequently enacted in 
this House. 
 
The Bill before us today will, if passed, replace the outdated 
pharmacies Act, 1978 that no longer addresses and is not able 
to meet the needs and issues contained in the new professional 
legislation that affects all pharmacists and pharmacies across 
our province. The Act before us today does address many of the 
shortcomings of the current legislation, but it also makes leave 
of a series of questions and concerns that beg answers. 
 
The Pharmacy Act, 1996 will require the Saskatchewan  



486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Pharmaceutical Association to file an annual report to the 
Minister of Health each year, and we as a caucus see that as a 
positive step in the right direction as it highlights 
accountability. 
 
A large part of this Act deals with professional and criminal 
misconduct and the consequent charges and penalties that may 
be imposed. The penalties for professional misconduct range 
from suspension of a pharmaceutical licence to criminal 
charges. Penalties for summary offences will increase 
drastically by this new legislation, and this is seen as a step 
towards more responsible administration of drugs and 
pharmaceutical products. When dealing with the dispensing of 
drugs to the public, penalties for betraying the trust and 
endangering the health of the general public cannot go 
unnoticed and without sufficient punishment. The safety of the 
public must always come first. 
 
This Bill brings the pharmacy profession into the 1990s in 
many ways, but there are still some current concerns on the part 
of our caucus and on the part of pharmacists who will be 
affected by this new legislation. There are areas that we, as a 
caucus, feel need more clarification. These areas are with 
regards to the possibility of pharmacy ownership by 
government or district health boards. It is not fair that yet 
another area of our economy should face the fear that they may 
have to compete with governments for profits. 
 
Section 19 deals with the issue of a permit to run a propriety 
pharmacy to anyone who meets the predisposed conditions. 
There is concern on the part of pharmacists that the door may 
be open for district health boards to own and run pharmacies in 
an attempt to make money and meet their bottom line. 
 
Many smaller, local pharmacies and pharmacists see this as a 
threat to their economic well-being. Competition is welcome, 
but competition with government is often difficult to win. With 
these concerns on our part and on the part of many 
professionals involved in the pharmaceutical field across our 
province, and many other concerns still requiring considerable 
consultation, I respectfully request that the debate on this Bill 
be adjourned. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

The Chair:  It now being near 5 p.m., this House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................469 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................469 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................470 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................470 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Agriculture Week 
  Flavel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................471 
 Provincial Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
 Condolences 
 Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................................471 
 Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Indian Child and Family Service Agency Agreement 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Oscar Night 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................472 
ORAL QUESTIONS .............................................................................................................................................................................. 
High-risk Offender Identification 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................473 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................473 
 Wildlife Damage Compensation 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
 High-risk Offender Identification 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................475 
 Five-year Budget Plan 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................476 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................476 
 Job Creation 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................477 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................477 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Computers for Schools Program 
  Atkinson .....................................................................................................................................................................................477 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................478 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................478 
 Student Loan Program Changes 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................478 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................478 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................479 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS 
 House Recess 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................479 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................479 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................481 
 Bill No. 32  An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act 
  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................482 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................483 
 Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government 
  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................483 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................484 
 Bill No. 40  An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................485 
 


