













































March 20, 1996 Hansard


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 377 

   March 20, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf 

of many concerned citizens about the Plains Health Centre: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly might be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures come from Regina, come from Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker, from Weyburn, from Trossachs, Yellow Grass, and 

many small communities in southern Saskatchewan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains Health 

Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Numerous people from throughout southern Saskatchewan, 

Regina, have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Hon. Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan assembled, I have a petition of the 

undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan that 

humbly showeth that the government has failed to address the 

serious concerns of the landlords who provide rental 

accommodation to Saskatchewan renters: 

 

Wherefore our petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 

rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent, and 

that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies available to 

the landlords who are not given sufficient notice by social 

assistance tenants who vacate properties and whose rent in 

their new accommodation is paid by social assistance 

without regard for outstanding obligations in previous 

rental agreements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners we ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

The people that have signed the petition are primarily from 

Manor, but they also are from Redvers, Weyburn, Glenavon, 

Vanguard, and others. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well in 

regard to presenting a petition for the save the Plains centre in 

Regina. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The petition is signed by people primarily from the community 

in and around Rouleau, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

These people are from Moose Jaw, from Regina, from 

Vanguard, from all over southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would rise again 

today as well to present a petition of names from dozens of 

people from throughout southern Saskatchewan regarding the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from people from Odessa, 

Edenwold, Balgonie, Kendal, Vibank — southern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Holdfast, Redvers, Caron, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 378 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Regina. They’re from Weyburn. They’re from Colgate, 

Saskatchewan. They’re from Yellow Grass, brown grass, pink 

grass, blue grass, quack grass, from all throughout 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition regarding saving the Plains Health Centre, but not only 

from Saskatchewan residents but throughout western Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, many of these are from Regina, 

Redvers, Balgonie, all throughout southern Saskatchewan. But I 

think what’s important is the high standing that the Plains has 

throughout western Canada because . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. The hon. member knows 

that presenting petitions is not debatable and is limited to 

presenting the petition and describing where they’re from. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions on behalf of people from Martensville, Saskatoon, 

Biggar  no grass involved in any of these. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause your government to 

take action to allow an increase in security deposits on 

rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent, and 

that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies available to 

landlords who are not given sufficient notice by social 

assistance tenants who vacate properties and whose rent in 

their new accommodation is paid by social assistance 

without regard for outstanding obligations in previous 

rental agreements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 

no. 21 ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding the number of employees of the Government of 

Saskatchewan: (1) how many people are currently  

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) how 

many of these employees are full time or part time; (3) how 

many of these employees are permanent, temporary, or 

casual; (4) how many of these employees are in scope and 

out of scope; (5) how many positions are currently vacant; 

(6) what is the average salary in each of the departments; 

and (7) what is the manager-to-staff ratio in each 

department? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

distinct pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly a group of nine 

individuals who are in your gallery who are currently residing at 

the cancer patient lodge located in my constituency of Regina 

Centre. And I appreciate that in the midst of your many serious 

personal and family concerns that you’ve taken time to come to 

the legislature and join us in the proceedings. So I ask that all 

members of the legislature join me in welcoming them here 

today and extending to each our best wishes. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we have in 

the east gallery the president of the landlords association of 

Saskatchewan, and with her other members of the association 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Speaker’s gallery. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Speaker’s gallery, pardon me. I would just like to 

welcome once again Ms. Moncrief and other members and ask 

the Assembly to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, to my 

colleagues in the legislature, a two-person delegation from 

Zimbabwe. Mr. Simon Chikwavaire is the past president of 

Urban Councils in Zimbabwe, UCAZ, and currently a council 

member in the city of Harare, population 1.8 million, which is 

the capital of Zimbabwe. 

 

Mr. Chikwavaire is joined by Mr. Walter Matikiti, the office 

manager of Urban Councils. They are guests of SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and are 

taking part in an international partnership program, sponsored 

by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities and funded by 

CIDA (Canadian International Development Agency). Under 

the program, SUMA has been partnered with UCAZ. The 

purpose of the partnership is to strengthen local government 

organizations in both countries. 

 

They are accompanied by Keith Schneider, executive director of 

SUMA, and will be staying in Saskatchewan for seven days to 

learn more about our system of local government and the 

operations of their partner, SUMA. 

 

Our Zimbabwean friends visited the Department of Municipal  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

Government this morning and will be travelling later during 

their stay to Watrous and Strongfield to see a bit of rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They will spend a day or two in 

Saskatoon as well. 

 

We wish them well and note that last year three of their 

colleagues visited Saskatchewan in the middle of winter and 

attended SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency) 90th convention. So I would ask all of my colleagues, 

Mr. Speaker, to join with me in welcoming our Zimbabwean 

friends and Mr. Schneider to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Sports 

Hall of Fame will hold its annual induction ceremony this 

spring and one of those who will be honoured is a friend of 

mine, Gord Kluzak. Besides being the grandson of a former 

member of this House, Art Kluzak, Gord was also a pretty fair 

hockey player. I might add for those of you that have watched 

Happy Gilmore, it’s quite evident to Gord that I’ve proven 

superior on the golf course. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Gord played all of his minor hockey in the Climax 

area before attending Notre Dame in Wilcox where he led the 

team to the Canadian midget championship. 

 

At the age of 16, he joined the Billings Bighorns of the Western 

Hockey League. There he became the youngest player ever to 

be named to a WHL (Western Hockey League) all-star team. In 

1982 Gord helped lead Canada to the world junior cup hockey 

championship. He was also named the tournament’s best 

defenceman. Later in ’82, the Boston Bruins selected Gord as 

the number one overall pick in the NHL (National Hockey 

League) draft. He went on to play eight seasons with Boston 

before chronic knee problems forced him to retire from hockey 

in 1990. 

 

After his retirement, Gord was named winner of the Bill 

Masterton trophy for perseverance, dedication, and 

sportsmanship. 

 

Gord has made his home in Boston where he hosts a 

fund-raising golf tournament each year, and also a volunteer 

speaker in the field of alcohol and drug awareness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like members of this House to join me in 

congratulating Gord Kluzak for his upcoming induction into the 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  M. le Président, je voudrais vous 

presentez plusieurs personnes qui sont dans le chambre 

adjourd’hui pour fêter la semaine nationale de la francophonie. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, who as I said are here to celebrate 

National Francophone Week, represent a variety of 

associations. 

 

Ils écoutent à la député de Regina-Sherwood ce matin dans le  

rotunde, et nous nous rencontre à la institute dix-sept heure 

trente aujourd’hui pour continuer la celebration. 

 

I will introduce the members. I am told they are here. Mme. 

Josée Lévesque, M. Bruno Sahut, association 

canadienne-française de Regina. But perhaps I could have the 

members stand, yes, as they are introduced. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Michel Vézina and Ronald 

Labrecque, de l’ association culturelle franco-canadienne de la 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  M. Pierre l’Héritier, association des 

artistes de la Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mme. Suzanne Bugeaud Stradecki, l’ 

association des juristes d’expression française de la 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  M. Robert Therrien, conseil de la 

coopération de la Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  M. Gilbert Hautcoeur, conseil 

général des écoles fransaskoises. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mme. Suzanne Leduc, conseil 

scolaire fransaskois de Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Albert Dubé, et Etienne Alary, 

coopérative des publications fransaskoises. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Finalement, Claude Shink, service 

fransaskois d’éducation des adultes. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And while I’m on my feet, I have 

also in attendance today, 25 students from Robert Usher 

School, who are here with their teacher, Todd Miller, to observe 

the proceedings and to generally gain whatever wisdom may be 

available from the Chamber today. So let’s hope it’s in plentiful 

supply for a change. I’d ask you to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 380 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also 

welcome in your gallery Bonnye and Brian Moncrief from the 

landlords association. They have many good ideas dealing with 

rental. In fact there’s even the furniture and possibly the 

Premier may want to go ahead and talk to them about some 

furniture concerns that he has. 

 

Also like to introduce to this House, Fred Heron from the STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) sitting in the top left-hand 

corner. Welcome to our House today as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I with great pleasure 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

legislature, individuals seated in your gallery who are here 

today to witness second reading in just a short while of The 

Libraries Co-operation Act. I’ve asked our guests to stand as I 

mention their name and remain standing: Merrilee Rasmussen 

is the Chair of the Regina Public Library Board, and also 

chaired the Public Libraries Act Review Committee and the 

Multitype Library Development Advisory Committee. 

 

Mr. George Bothwell, as many of you will know, is a 

long-standing supporter of the public library system. He is a 

member of the Regina Public Library Board and past president 

of both the Canadian Library Trustees’ Association and the 

Saskatchewan Library Trustees’ Association. 

 

Mr. Ken Jensen also joins us today. He is the chief librarian at 

the Regina Public Library. Jeffrey Barber is the president of the 

Saskatchewan Library Association; Allan Johnson is the 

regional librarian for Southeast Regional Library, and these 

gentlemen have travelled from Weyburn to be with us here 

today. Marilyn Jenkins and Marie Sakon from the Provincial 

Library are also seated in your gallery. 

 

And I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not mention a 

person who has spent countless hours working on the 

development of the multitype concept, the Provincial Librarian, 

Maureen Woods. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming our guests here 

today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would also like to welcome the general secretary of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Fred Herron. Fred, I look 

forward to the meetings with you in the coming days. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now with the permission of the members, 

the Speaker would like to introduce two very special guests 

who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery today. 

 

Visiting here in Saskatchewan from their home community of 

Beiseker, Alberta, is a couple who have retired some time ago  

from the hardware store that is listed in the phone book by the 

name of Hagel’s Hardware, where your Speaker learned the 

first rule of democracy  that basically, before you start 

anything else, the customer is always right. 

 

The people in my gallery that I’d like to introduce to you are my 

parents, Joe and Doreen Hagel. And I’d welcome all members 

to join me in expressing a warm Saskatchewan welcome to 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member:  Mr. Speaker, they don’t look old 

enough. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The Speaker would like to assure all 

members of the Assembly that his parents are older than him. 

 

And while acknowledging that members generally treat the 

Speaker very kindly, you may want to treat the Speaker 

especially kindly today. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to announce to you 

and to members of the Legislative Assembly, and to the people 

of Saskatchewan, that the Premier has officially designated 

March 20 to March 26 as National Francophone Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

M. le Président, la Semaine nationale de la francophonie fut 

célébrée pour la première fois en 1993. L’Association 

canadienne d’éducation de langue française est à l’origine de 

cette célébration. Cette association est une organisation 

nationale qui promeut l’usage de la langue française en 

éducation et dans les activités journalières. Cette semaine a 

pour but de donner aux Francophones de tout le pays un 

sentiment d’appartenance à une communauté nationale et à les 

rendre fiers de leur langue. Il s’agit aussi d’un projet éducatif 

public conçu pour appuyer les initiatives éducatives des 

communautés francophones. 

 

(Translation: National Francophone Week was first celebrated 

in 1993. It was begun by the Association canadiene d’éducation 

de langue française, a national organization dedicated to 

promoting the use of the French language in education and 

day-to-day activities. The purpose of this week is to give 

Francophones across the country a sense of belonging to a 

national community and renewed pride in their language. It is 

also a public education project designed to support francophone 

communities’ educational initiatives.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the privilege of officially 

launching Francophone Week on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan during a ceremony here in the rotunda. 

 

M. le Président, pendant cette semaine, partout dans la 

province, les Fransaskois célébreront leur fier héritage et leurs 

nombreux exploits accomplis tout au long de l’histoire de la  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

province. 

 

Le thème de cette année, qui est l’identité cuturelle 

francophonie, nous rappelle leur détermination de préserver leur 

langue et leur culture qu’on retrouve dans les communautés de 

la province. 

 

(Translation: During this week, Fransaskois from all over the 

province will celebrate their proud heritage and their many 

achievements throughout the history of our province. 

 

This year’s theme, Francophone Communities and Cultural 

Identity, reminds us of the determination to maintain their 

language and culture shown by communities around the 

province.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this determination has made the Fransaskois 

community important contributors to our province’s heritage. 

We look forward to the continued strength of the Fransaskois 

community and a strong Francophone presence in a united 

Canada. 

 

Merci, M. Président. 

 

(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Liberal caucus, I 

would too like to recognize National Francophone Week. 

 

La semaine nationale de la francophonie nous donne l’occasion 

de souligner l’importance de la langue et de la culture française 

dans notre province. 

 

Les fransaskois contributent beaucoup à la promotion du 

français au notre province, et à la promotion de Saskatchewan 

aux autres francophones du Canada. 

 

Aujourd’hui, nous reconnaisons tous les services, les 

organisations et les personnes ici à Saskatchewan pour leurs 

contributions importantes de notre culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Francophone Week is an appropriate 

time to underline the importance of the French language and 

culture in our province. Fransaskois people contribute greatly to 

the promotion of French in our province and in promoting 

Saskatchewan to francophones throughout Canada. 

 

Today we recognize all of the services, organizations, and 

people here in Saskatchewan for their important contribution to 

our provincial culture. Merci bien. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sister Eliza of Mary 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, this is Education Week. Today 

begins the Francophone Week in Saskatchewan. In Prince 

Albert, in my constituency, and throughout the province we can 

pay special attention to both weeks by rejoicing in the life of  

Sister Eliza of Mary, Alice Gervais, a life of 98 years devoted to 

Christian education, culture and bilingualism. 

 

Sister Eliza was born in Quebec in 1897 and came with her 

parents to Duck Lake in 1905, the year Saskatchewan became a 

province. She taught for nearly 50 years at bilingual centres in 

Marcelin, Duck Lake, Bellevue, Debden, and Prince Albert. 

 

After she retired from teaching, she worked for another 20 years 

 a librarian, a receptionist at the Provincial House in Prince 

Albert. She received the Governor General’s Medal in 1973 and 

a Centennial Medal in 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sister Eliza was a pioneer in bringing education, 

bilingual understanding, to culture enrichment in our province. 

Hers is a life truly worth celebrating. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

St. Joseph’s School Grand Opening 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not every day, 

let alone every month, that a new high school is opened in our 

province of Saskatchewan but that’s exactly what happened last 

night in Saskatoon in the communities of Sutherland and Forest 

Grove and Erindale at a wonderful celebration of community 

where students and parents and staff gathered together for the 

official opening of St. Joseph’s high school in Saskatoon. 

 

As we celebrate Education Week in Saskatchewan, this school 

is a facility to be proud of. It’s beautiful, it’s modern as you 

might expect, and it’s also a unique architectural design that 

was done here in Saskatchewan. The design creates a kind of 

mall-type architecture for students with a large open space 

characteristic of many malls, commercial malls, where students 

can congregate, and it really makes a departure from the 

conventional maze or warren of hallways that you find in many 

high schools. 

 

St. Joseph’s is also unique in that it’s very future oriented in 

terms of having computer pods spread strategically throughout 

the school in various locations so that students can use these 

pods on assignments and to connect with the Internet. It’s a 

wonderful facility, a place where young people in our province 

can grow physically, intellectually, and spiritually. And I extend 

congratulations to St. Joseph’s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Week Tribute to NORTEP and SIFC 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, as part of Education Week I 

want to take time to pay special tribute to 20 years of invaluable 

service by two unique Saskatchewan educational institutions, 

the NORTEP (northern teacher education program) and the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 

 

In March 1976 I was hired as a program developer by northern 

school board to start up a teacher education program in northern  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 382 

Saskatchewan. In the fall of 1976 I taught the first accredited 

class to begin the NORTEP teacher education program. And I 

was especially proud, Mr. Speaker, because it was the first 

educational partnership between the province and the university 

under northern Saskatchewan people’s control. 

 

The elected northern school board became the first governing 

authority of the program. It is now governed by a special 

NORTEP council which includes a tribal council representation 

and Creighton, Ile-a-la-Crosse boards. In its 20 years, Mr. 

Speaker, NORTEP has graduated 192 students, 155 of which 

are working in education related fields and 133 are teaching. 

 

I am proud to be associated with this unique Saskatchewan 

program and I honour all those past and present staff as well as 

the university personnel, the cooperating teachers, the board 

members, and especially all the students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very pleased to announce that the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College in its 20 years is the 

only Indian run and controlled college of its type in Canada. It 

also adds . . . in addition to its Regina campus it has its P.A. 

(Prince Albert) campus. Mr. Speaker, SIFC’s (Saskatchewan 

Indian Federated College) educational impact, its cultural 

impact, its legal and linguistic and spiritual life is widely 

recognized. I ask all members to join me to celebrate 20 years 

of service on these two valuable institutions. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Service Branches 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to raise 

concerns of the residents of Morse. Mr. Speaker, recently we 

heard that the chartered banks are once again on pace for 

another year of billion-dollar-plus profits. Some bank earnings 

are already 12 per cent ahead of those last year. 

 

Despite whopping profits many banks are removing branches 

out of rural Saskatchewan. Morse is one of the many 

communities that’s been recently affected. While the banks still 

tried to serve the public with scheduled days in certain 

communities, the face-to-face service has been replaced by the 

debit card and automated teller machine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural communities like Morse often have seniors 

who chose to stay in the community for their retirement. 

They’re not always comfortable with this impersonal service. 

Other people are concerned that lending decisions will be made 

without a thorough knowledge of the community. 

 

The bank branch closure and announced closure of rural 

SaskPower offices and Crop Insurance offices in other areas is 

generating fear. Last December Canada Post announced a 

mandate review. Members of the local community are now 

concerned that this review may threaten their post office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I congratulate the people of Morse for 

working hard to keep the services that they do have and I 

sincerely hope that both government and business will make 

sure rural people, jobs, and service are a higher priority than  

simply making the bottom line. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Newspaper Awards 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, today is the first day of 

spring, signalling the end of winter and, evidence to the 

contrary, what we hope is the start of warmer weather. 

 

This time of year also marks the publication of the nominations 

for the national newspaper awards. Of course The Globe and 

Mail has been nominated for awards, along with The Toronto 

Star, The Ottawa Citizen, and also some reputable small-city 

newspapers. But nowhere did I see mention of the Regina 

Leader-Post and Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not even one little nomination. I almost feel sorry 

for Murray Mandryk and Dale Eisler. Surely their fair, 

balanced, accurate, and accountable reporting should have 

netted them something. To accommodate them perhaps the 

organization that determines the categories could come up with 

something they could be eligible for  perhaps an award to the 

company which slashes the most staff at one moment; maybe an 

award for most innovative way of giving their employees the 

pink slip; perhaps an award for a catchy phrase — something 

like, if it happened in Saskatchewan, it’s news to us. 

 

There’s still time to create a new category as these awards will 

be handed out on May 3 in Toronto. Spring is here, Mr. 

Speaker. Isn’t it wonderful? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Administration 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when this government began restructuring our health care 

system, they also introduced a district support branch. This 

branch is made up of an executive director, administrative 

coordinator, five district directors, five administrative 

assistants, and 17 district consultants. 

 

Will the Minister of Health explain why his government is 

funding yet another level of bureaucracy in the Health 

department when each district already has a CEO (chief 

executive officer) and the department already has a program 

branch? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I thank the member for the question, 

Mr. Speaker. I want to tell the House and tell the member, Mr. 

Speaker, that the process of health reform has meant the 

creation of district health boards which are accountable to the 

people within the districts. The establishment of those boards 

has meant that the number of people in administrative functions 

has actually decreased, not increased, which is quite a good 

improvement to our health care system, Mr. Speaker. 



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

I want to tell the member also that we are in the process of 

reorganizing the Department of Health to take into account the 

fact that we have devolved a lot of people to the local level and 

the district boards. And we are right-sizing the department. But 

at the same time, we are going to retain sufficient personnel to 

work with the districts to make sure that people get the health 

care services they need at the appropriate place, in the 

appropriate time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 

minister should tell us then why in fact all the newspaper ads 

are for directors instead of nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may interest the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to 

know that the total salaries for these positions that I referred to, 

according to your own spending records, totalled more than 

$1.2 million. It may also interest the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

to know that these same people received an average wage 

increase of 9 per cent over a one-year period, to bring their 

average annual salary to more than $55,000. And this doesn’t 

include what raises they’ve had in this given year. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 

roll back these shameful wage increases and assure the people 

of Saskatchewan that this government’s friends and consultant 

cronies will stop getting wealthy off of wellness? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to tell the member, Mr. Speaker, 

that this government hires people for the professional civil 

service that does good work on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan through an independent, non-partisan, Public 

Service Commission. I want to tell the member that. 

 

I also want to tell the member, Mr. Speaker, that the terms and 

conditions of employment for people that work within the 

Department of Health are commensurate with the terms and 

conditions of employment for civil servants in other branches of 

government and across the country. But if they are in scope, 

they are arrived at through the process of free collective 

bargaining. There’s an independent, non-partisan Public Service 

Commission that does the hiring, not the politicians  not like 

the Liberals do it, not like the Conservatives do it. There’s a 

free collective bargaining process. That determines how the 

people are paid in the Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 

minister fails to realize is that you’ve added an entire level of 

bureaucracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is even more shocking than hearing about 

the average salary increase is to actually hear what was some of 

the specific raises total. And I would like to read a few into the 

record right now. 

 

We have some in the Northwest district. Here’s one, consultant, 

getting a cheque of 63,500 a year; her raise was $17,500 in one  

year. Here’s one in the Southeast, 83,000; one in the Southwest, 

a $10,146 raise bringing that to 69,000. Here’s one in Regina, 

67,000. 

 

The list goes on and on and I would like to send across some of 

these lists for the other members, perhaps the cabinet members, 

to have a look at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is shameful and disgraceful at a time when 

everyone else is enduring cut-backs, job losses, and less service. 

 

Will the minister do what the people want by abolishing the 

district support branch and rehiring medical professionals to 

treat our sick and elderly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to tell the member, Mr. Speaker, 

that since health reform and since the abolition of a lot of 

separate boards and the creation of districts, the number of 

people in administrative positions delivering health care in the 

province of Saskatchewan has been decreased by a figure 

between 15 and 20 per cent. 

 

The number of people who have been laid off, many of whom 

have been recalled, that deliver front-line services to the people 

of the province, has been cut by less than 5 per cent. In other 

words, the number of people in management and administration 

has been cut at a rate of three times that of people who deliver 

services to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. This 

government is the most efficient government in Canada in terms 

of the number of people we employ to deliver the services that 

our people need, Mr. Speaker  a far cry from what’s going on 

in Ottawa; a far cry from what the Conservatives do in office. I 

thank the member for the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, thank you. That’s most interesting, 

that answer. But perhaps the minister would enjoy to come out 

to rural Saskatchewan  Climax, Coronach, Mankota  and 

debate me in a public hall and see if you can get away with 

statements like that. You haven’t laid off nurses and you’ve . . . 

oh, come on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hospitals are closing, nurses and other health care 

professionals are being fired, and our health care system is a 

shadow of what it used to be before the choices of the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government. All the while this 

government continues to cry “poor” and points fingers at 

everyone else. Yet it was their choice and theirs alone to add 

another expensive level of bureaucracy to our health system, 

one which paid consultants and others at least $1.2 million in 

one year and only the minister knows how much they’ve 

received in this given year. 

 

Will the minister explain how he and his government can justify 

the spending of these tax dollars at the same time he’s closing 

down hospitals, firing nurses, and taking away health care in 

rural communities. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 384 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to answer the 

member’s questions. All I can say is I’m glad that he’s managed 

to take some time out from contemplating his race for the 

Liberal leadership. I’m glad that he’s taken time out from 

contemplating his ultimate Senate appointment for joining the 

Liberal Party. I thank the member for the questions. We’re 

going to continue to build the best health care system in the 

world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the sick 

and the elderly will find those comments real funny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people across this province are not receiving the 

level of health care they need or deserve because of the 

cost-cutting measures of your government. People across 

Saskatchewan are looking to this government to cut waste 

before cutting more services in health. 

 

Will the minister commit in this House today to eliminating 

waste in his own department such as that which is contained in 

the district support branch before firing another nurse or closing 

another hospital? Can you not give them that assurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if the member wants to talk about 

cuts, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in this province we have 

not cut health care spending since 1991, we’ve increased it. 

Which is a far cry from what the Liberals are doing in Ottawa 

because they have cut health care spending this year by $57 

million to our province, and by 1998 they’re going to cut their 

spending on health care by 35 per cent. So I say, why does the 

member get up and tell us that we shouldn’t cut health care or 

that we should put more money into health care. Why doesn’t 

he address those concerns to the Liberal Party which is in power 

in Ottawa and is the party that’s implementing these cuts that 

that member’s complaining about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Service Districts Act 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I’m glad 

the Liberal member is concerned about pay hikes. We’re 

looking forward to his signed letter saying he’ll pay back his 

$4,400 one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Municipal 

Government. After a lot of consultation and probably not that 

much listening, we do have your master plan for municipalities. 

It shows that there’s another level of government and another 

level of bureaucracy. This one has the power to impose taxes. 

 

Madam Minister, we like the idea of municipalities cooperating 

with one another. In fact it’s throughout Saskatchewan this is 

already happening at present. Municipalities are cooperating in 

the areas of fire, administration, recreation, and all sorts of  

things basically as long as the list that you have in your 

legislation. 

 

Madam Minister, why is it necessary to create another level of 

government to provide shared services when municipalities are 

already doing this on their own? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

would know, having been a mayor and in local government 

himself, that there is a great deal of inter-municipal cooperation 

on many fronts. There are many municipalities who do 

cooperate. There are others, however, who have yet to make 

that move, who are not involved with their neighbouring 

communities in collaborating to provide services. We get 

requests from people who have never had that experience, who 

think it’s very difficult, who think they have to retain lawyers 

and that sort of thing. 

 

And so this is an effort simply to simplify the process. It is 

entirely voluntary. It does not lead to a second layer of 

government. Municipal governments out there, Mr. Speaker, 

know; they know what’s best for them. They know what the 

needs of their communities are. They’re elected to serve those 

needs and they do it diligently. 

 

This Act is voluntary. If people at the local level feel that it will 

not assist them, they will not use it. If they feel it will assist 

them, it’s there for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regardless of the 

rhetoric, there is another level of government, a level of 

government that also has the power to tax. That is the additional 

power that’s given. They also have an additional power to 

borrow money, of going into debt  something which 

municipalities were prohibited from doing and they lived within 

that very well. It looks like you’re cutting funding to 

municipalities and replacing it with a credit card. 

 

Madam Minister, why is that provision there when it hasn’t 

been there in the past and wasn’t needed? Isn’t this just another 

way for you to download your responsibilities by downloading 

debt onto the municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would commend the 

member opposite for his fertile imagination. I think that you can 

read whatever you want into the Act; you can talk about another 

level of the government. 

 

What is contemplated is when municipalities want to take 

collective action  just as an example, let’s say a waste 

management project  they might appoint one member from 

each respective council to be that council’s representative for 

the purposes of this project. They may agree, if funds needed to 

be raised, to requisition their respective municipalities to cover 

the costs. They may need to engage someone to work on this  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

specific project. That would be the hiring authorities. They may 

need to rent a building to do recycling in. That would be the 

authority to enter into leases. It’s that simple. It’s that simple, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re making it easier for them to cooperate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Democratic Party Fund-raiser 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the Premier was telling us how, even with a $4,400 

pay increase, some of the NDP MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) are having a tough time making ends 

meet. One of the members had to take a second job as a school 

teacher. 

 

And now even the Government House Leader is earning a 

second income. He is selling perogies out of his cabinet office. 

We recently received this flyer in the mail, advertising a big 

perogy and antipasto sale for the Regina Northeast NDP 

Association. Contact the minister’s office for more information 

is what the flyer says. 

 

My question to the minister is: how many perogies have you 

sold; how much money have you raised; and do you think this 

is an appropriate use of your cabinet office and staff, selling 

perogies for the NDP? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, the ladies of Regina 

Northeast have in fact sold several hundred dozen perogies. I’m 

told by those who’ve got them they are the best in town, and I 

make the offer available. So far as I know, they’re being sold 

out of our house, out of my residence. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 

minister would care to read the bottom of it, it says contact 

Dolores, and it’s his cabinet office phone number. So, Mr. 

Premier, clearly some of your ministers don’t have enough to 

do. I think the perogy king from Regina Northeast would fall 

into this category. 

 

Mr. Premier, you recently promised to cut the size of your 

cabinet. Will you live up to that commitment today and get rid 

of the minister from Regina Northeast, so he can dedicate more 

time to building his perogy empire? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It may have been that someone may 

have preferred to leave off an offer in the office here. That’s 

possible. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this strikes me as the pettiest of 

muckraking when the time of this Assembly is taken up with 

the question of whether or not people may have preferred to 

leave offers to these excellent perogies. I really have to 

recommend them to the members opposite. I really think, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the pettiest of muckraking. But they are the best 

of perogies, I assure the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Providence Place Geriatric Unit 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 

the past several years, volunteers from the Moose Jaw district 

worked very hard to build a geriatric assessment and 

rehabilitation unit at Providence Place. Mr. Speaker, this facility 

was designed to help seniors support themselves. 

 

The NDP government approved design plans for the facility in 

1993, guaranteeing in writing that they would fund this unit 

over and above the normal needs-based funding available to 

districts. However last fall this government reneged on this 

promise, and they now insist that the district must fund the 

program itself. Will the Minister of Health tell the volunteers 

who worked so hard to raise money for this facility why he and 

his government is breaking this promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, we’re not breaking any 

promise we made to the people of Moose Jaw. This is a matter 

which is within the jurisdiction of the district health board and 

the department is working with the district health board with 

respect to the issue and will continue to do so. And the district 

health board, as a local board with elected people and appointed 

people, will make the appropriate decision to meet the health 

care needs of the people in Moose Jaw, including those needs 

that have been met through Providence Place. Those needs will 

continue to be met as they have been before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, there appears to be one 

standard for the average person in this province and quite 

another one for this government. On one hand, the Health 

minister says there’s simply not enough funding in health care. 

On the other hand, a contract dated last November 18 indicates 

three consultants were paid as much as $950 a day to study 

Providence Place. 

 

The total bill, including expenses, may total more than $16,000. 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that so many front-line care-givers 

have been eliminated because of that government, will the 

minister explain how he can justify paying consultants so much 

money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I think implicit in the question, Mr. 

Speaker, was, I think, the assertion that the district health board 

was paying the consultants the money. Then the member says, 

how do I justify paying the consultants the money? 

 

Well if I’m not paying the consultants the money, obviously it 

isn’t my place to justify paying the money because that is a 

decision of the local district health board. That’s what the 

member can’t understand. 

 

But I want to say to the member that in the last House what his 

party said was, don’t rush into health reform, don’t make any 

decisions about health reform. You have to take your time, you  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 386 

have to do appropriate consultation, you have to do appropriate 

planning. Study, study, study. So the Moose Jaw District Health 

Board goes and does a study with respect to their needs, and the 

member complains. 

 

And I say that the member is being unfair to the local district 

health board. I say that they have every right to contract the aid 

of consultants, if they deem it appropriate, to decide on an 

appropriate configuration of services in their district. That’s 

what they did. It wasn’t the decision of the Department of 

Health. I don’t know what the member’s problem is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge: Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Department of 

Health had a lot to do with suggesting to bring in consultants 

from British Columbia rather than to consult the grass roots 

level in Thunder Creek. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as if a consulting price tag of $16,000 wasn’t 

shameful enough, another contract dated last November 21 

indicated that a second group of consultants studied Providence 

Place. This pair was paid as much as $1,000 per day plus air 

fare, hotels, meals, and car rental for a total figure of $11,300. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Wood River noted only 

minutes ago the number of consultants in the Health 

department’s district support branch and the hefty raises those 

people have received. Will the minister explain to the people of 

Moose Jaw why he’s wasting even more money on more 

consultants instead of directing these funds to patient care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well what perplexes me here, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the consulting services were requested by people who 

live in Moose Jaw, who live in the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek 

Health District which that member attempts to represent. And 

both the health district and Providence Place requested that 

consultants be retained. Consultants have been retained. They’ll 

be paid by the district. These are decisions that were made 

locally. Now the member comes here and asks me why 

decisions that were made in his community were made in his 

community. 

 

That is not only inappropriate with respect to me but it’s 

inappropriate with respect to the people that live in the 

community that that member tries to represent, Mr. Speaker. 

Because that is a decision that has been made by the people in 

his community that are mandated to make that decision. If the 

member believes that those people don’t have the right to make 

those decisions then let the member say so and let the member 

advise the people in his community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, what the minister fails to 

recognize time and time again, he controls the purse-strings 

therefore he controls the local board people and they bully them 

into making the decisions that they need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring to the attention 

of this House yet another contract for consulting services 

regarding Providence Place. In this case, two Vancouver 

consultants were paid as much as $950 per day plus expenses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to the people across this 

province why there seems to be a shortage of money for health 

care but the government vault appears to be wide open for 

expensive consultants to study a project already studied on two 

previous occasions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’ll tell the member why there’s a shortage 

of money, Mr. Speaker, and it has nothing to do with this 

government. There’s a shortage of money because the Liberals 

are taking $57 million out of health care this year and $100 

million next year. That’s why there’s a shortage of money. 

 

And the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District has written 

a letter to Paul Martin, Mr. Speaker,  which I have a copy of, 

which the member should have a copy of, and which the 

Minister of Finance has a copy of  in which the people from 

the member’s . . . from the community which the member tries 

to represent make the point that what the federal Liberals are 

doing with the support of that member is undermining the 

ability of every province in Canada, not just Saskatchewan, to 

deliver health care. 

 

So if the member wants to know where the problem is, the 

problem is in the Liberal Party. That’s where the problem is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the letter that’s referred to is no 

doubt one that was written with a lot of economic blackmail 

insinuated. But, Mr. Speaker, the terms of reference for one of 

these consulting contracts states, and I quote: 

 

The district must be prepared to financially support the 

geriatric unit’s programs which are serving district 

residents. 

 

I have another letter signed by the deputy Health minister 

before volunteers went out to raise money, which stated, and I 

quote: 

 

I can guarantee that the department will fund the district 

for geriatric assessment. 

 

This letter went on to promise funding which is apart from the 

regular needs-based funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the department promises one thing, breaks its 

word, and then wastes taxpayers’ money hiring consultants to 

figure out how to get out of this messy situation. Will the 

minister explain how he can justify wasting valuable health 

dollars to solve his political problems? 

 



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 

breaking promises. I want to refer the member to the red book 

that the Liberals ran on in the last federal election. 

 

And if the member wants to do a study on broken promises, the 

member should look at the promises made by the Liberals in the 

last election. And the member should look at the record of the 

Liberal Party in office. Liberals say one thing in opposition, 

something else in government. 

 

And the reality is, Mr. Speaker, whereas we haven’t cut health 

care spending in Saskatchewan by one dime, the Liberals are 

cutting health care spending. 

 

And not only that, in the last election the Liberals said that they 

were going to cut government spending, and if they cut 

government spending they would be cutting it in health care and 

education, Mr. Speaker, and that approach was rejected by the 

people of the province in the election. 

 

And that member has got to decide whether he is a 

representative of the people of Saskatchewan in his 

constituency or whether he is an apologist for the Liberals in 

Ottawa who are cutting back on health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid again that the 

minister fails to recognize that it’s his department that’s holding 

the purse-strings on these people, he’s the one. Whether he is 

spending the same amount of money, he is not spending it 

appropriately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reviewing the various consulting contracts, it 

appears that the job of one of the consultants referred to earlier 

by my colleague from Wood River was to pay the other 

consultants. The individual in question, by the way, was making 

$83,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why this government 

expanded the number of consultants so they can hire and pay 

for even more consultants? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that what 

this government has done in the last few years is to replace 410 

boards, each with its own administration and own management, 

with 30 district boards which overall have a much smaller 

administrative structure and much smaller management. 

 

And we know and the people of Saskatchewan know that if we 

are going to maintain our publicly funded medicare system, 

without any assistance from the Liberals, we are going to have 

to spend our money very smartly and very efficiently. That’s 

what we’re doing. That’s what we will continue to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal 

Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal 

Government be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Water Corporation Act be now introduced and read 

for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Power Corporation Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, 

Develop and Sustain Irrigation 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 40 - An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

Pharmacists and Pharmacies be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 41  An Act to amend 

The Mental Health Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Mental Health Services Act be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 388 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Written Question 

 

The Speaker:  Before calling written questions, I draw to the 

attention of the Assembly that the fourth part of question 15 

standing on today’s order paper is out of order on account that 

it seeks information pertaining to more than one year. 

 

Members are again reminded of the long-standing practice of 

this Assembly that a written question may not ask for 

information related to more than a one-year period. Accordingly 

the government is not required to provide an answer to this part. 

The first three parts to question 15 are in order and may be 

answered by the government. The content of the fourth part of 

question 15 could be resubmitted as a notice of motion for 

return or rewritten as two separate questions. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, Mr. Speaker, table the answer 

to question no. 16 in keeping with our policy of being open and 

accessible. 

 

The Speaker:  Question 16  the answer is provided. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act and to enact 

consequential amendments 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

The amendments I am proposing are aimed directly at those 

individuals who actively try to avoid making maintenance 

payments. These amendments strengthen the ability of the 

maintenance enforcement office to ensure that people comply 

with their court orders and agreements to pay child 

maintenance. 

 

Since the office was opened 10 years ago this month, the 

default rate for maintenance payments has fallen from 

approximately 85 per cent to 25 per cent. This means that the 

majority of parents who have the financial capacity to pay are 

paying maintenance as ordered or agreed. 

 

These amendments provide the director of maintenance 

enforcement with new tools to use, particularly with respect to 

people who are deliberately organizing their financial affairs to 

avoid paying maintenance. 

 

The first major change proposed in this Bill is to allow the 

director of maintenance enforcement to direct SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) to suspend the driver’s  

licence of a person who is in default of his or her maintenance 

payments. 

 

This is a serious remedy which will be used only as a last resort. 

The Act sets out detailed limitations on the use of the remedy. 

The defaulter must be at least three months in arrears. The 

defaulter will receive at least two notices of the director’s 

intention to use this remedy. And the director must have used 

all other reasonable steps to try to enforce the maintenance 

order. This new remedy has been introduced in Alberta, Nova 

Scotia, Manitoba, and the Yukon with positive results. 

 

The second major change will allow the director to access 

deferred pension funds in limited cases. This remedy will be 

available only where the defaulter is currently neither paying 

money into nor receiving payments out of the pension fund. 

 

In both of those situations, the defaulter has a current source of 

income that can be attacked by the director. 

 

The amendment was drafted in this narrow manner to achieve 

the fairest balance between protecting pension funds for the 

defaulter’s future and ensuring that the defaulter’s children 

have the support they need today. This remedy is again seen as 

a last resort. It will be available only where the defaulter is at 

least three months in arrears, the director has used all other 

reasonable steps to enforce the maintenance order, and the 

defaulter has received prior notice of the director’s intention to 

use this remedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of minor changes are also made in this 

Bill. The 10-year limitation period for the enforcement of 

arrears will be eliminated. Instead, the appropriate length of 

time over which arrears can be enforced will be determined by 

the court. This makes our legislation consistent with that in 

British Columbia, Alberta, and Manitoba. This will improve the 

operation of the Act in situations where interprovincial 

cooperation is a factor. 

 

This Bill confirms the discretion of the director to determine the 

appropriate enforcement mechanisms in each case and the 

ability of the director to make arrangements with the defaulter 

that realistically can be met. The director is also given the 

discretion to decline to enforce orders that do not clearly 

specify the amount to be paid. In those cases, the parties are 

also given the option of returning to the court to have the order 

clarified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan maintenance enforcement 

program is one of the most effective in Canada for ensuring 

parents and children obtain the support to which they are 

entitled. Since the office opened its doors on March 1, 1986 it 

has received more than 19,000 applications for enforcement, 

collected more than $122 million on behalf of Saskatchewan 

families, and reduced the default rate on child support payments 

from 85 per cent to 25 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Even with this high degree of success, 

Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to improve and refine the  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

current program. The amendments before us today will ensure 

that the necessary tools are available to the office to continue its 

effective and efficient service for the children of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The intent of the 

Bill  I appreciate your comments, Mr. Justice Minister — but 

the intent of the Bill and the desired outcome, I think we would 

agree with. However there are some problems I think with the 

Bill that we’re getting a few calls coming in. And we’re going 

to ask for a little more time to have a little bit better look at the 

Bill. So at this time I’d like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned 

 

Bill No. 28  An Act to provide for the Establishment, 

Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 28, The Public 

Libraries Act, 1996 lays out the framework for a public library 

system to carry us into the new century. This Bill is the result of 

broad consultations conducted by a ministerial advisory 

committee appointed to review the Act and provide 

recommendations for changes to the Act and regulations. 

 

Library board Chairs and directors and other members of the 

library community told us a review of The Public Libraries Act 

was needed, and we listened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The four-person minister’s advisory committee included 

representatives from the North, regional libraries and urban 

libraries, and government. The advisory committee invited our 

10 public library systems, SUMA, SARM, (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) the Saskatchewan Library 

Trustees’ Association, the Saskatchewan Library Association, 

unions, and groups representing educational interests to provide 

their concerns, thoughts, and recommendations regarding the 

Act and regulations. 

 

My personal thanks to the members of the advisory committee 

for their many hours of deliberations and for their thoughtful 

recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the advisory committee 

heard that regional libraries believed a lack of boundaries had 

the potential to destabilize the regional library system. Regional 

libraries and municipalities said a process was needed in the 

event there was a need for a municipality to move from one 

region to another, a process which would allow input from 

affected parties respecting any decision to revise boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 10 library systems unanimously requested that 

the legislation reflect the need for a whole-province or 

one-province library system. The committee also heard that 

municipalities should be required to participate in regional  

library systems. Withdrawal of municipalities affects the ability 

of regional libraries to provide the best possible services to rural 

clients. 

 

The Pahkisimon Nuye-àh Library System Board asked for 

consistency between the North and the South in the provisions 

for the Northern Library System Board and the northern 

community public library boards. They also recommended more 

local control and requested that the grant process in the 

regulations provide greater recognition for local contributions. 

 

Consultations revealed a wide diversity of views on regional 

library funding. The advisory committee recommended to me 

that a full review of regional library services and funding 

commence as soon as possible. I have asked the Provincial 

Librarian to make this project a priority for 1996-97 year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Public Libraries Act, 1996 responds to what 

we heard from the public library systems  the whole is greater 

than the sum of its parts. The Bill reflects this belief and 

establishes a structure for the provincial public library system. 

 

This Bill sets out the purpose of a provincial public library 

system — to ensure equitable access to basic library services by 

all residents of Saskatchewan. It recognizes that the 

components of the provincial library system include a database 

of the records of public, academic, special, and school libraries; 

an inter-library loan system; the ability to use your local public 

library card at any other public library in the province; and 

autonomous library boards. 

 

The Act requires that municipalities participate in regional 

library systems. Mr. Speaker, 95 per cent of municipalities 

participate in regional libraries. This figure has remained 

constant since 1982. Full participation is necessary if all 

citizens are to enjoy access to library services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Public Libraries Act, 1996 provides a dispute 

resolution process in several areas. It provides a dispute 

resolution process in the matter of boundaries, and building on 

the foundation of the existing Act, provides a dispute resolution 

process to assist in the resolution of any disputes within the 

provincial public library system. 

 

The Act provides for the establishment of boundaries for library 

systems and outlines a process for municipalities to move from 

one library system to another. Combining library facilities is a 

local decision, Mr. Speaker. The creation of joint-venture 

libraries will require a written agreement between the partners. 

Written agreements are a tool for identifying and addressing 

potential problems before they become a crisis. 

 

This Bill lays a foundation for the future province-wide, 

organizational and electronic networks and strengthens the 

provincial public library system to ensure that all our citizens 

have access to library services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 28, 

The Public Libraries Act, 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 390 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

library boundaries are set out in regulations, but if boundaries 

are to be changed, there will be a meeting among the affected 

parties to discuss proposed changes. If there is no agreement, it 

will go to arbitration. That I feel is a good thing. 

 

The new Act is supposed to address some of the changes that 

information services have made over the past years. Now most 

larger libraries are hooked into the information highway and 

frankly it is easier to share resources. Articles can be faxed via 

. . . sent via computer and books can be scanned and sent 

electronically. 

 

In April of ’95 the federal and provincial governments 

announced they are spending one and a half million dollars in 

an infrastructure agreement, and that the provincial government 

provided $570,000 while Ottawa provided $249,000. About 

300 communities are taking part in this program. 

 

I also think, most importantly . . . and I’m pleased to see that 

this Bill maintains that all residents in Saskatchewan will be 

able to get printed material from libraries in their areas free. 

And I think the key here is accessibility to all. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I feel that most of my questions or 

concerns can be answered in committee and will not hold this 

Bill up. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 29  An Act to enable Co-operation among all 

Types of Autonomous Libraries for the 

Provision of Library Services 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 29, The 

Libraries Co-operation Act, 1996, will lay the groundwork for 

developing a multitype library system in Saskatchewan. The 

multitype library system will establish a network of autonomous 

libraries and information providers, including universities, 

schools, public and special libraries, to share services and 

resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Libraries Co-operation Act will establish a 

multitype library board to bring together decision makers, 

including trustees, administrators, and senior staff from the four 

library sectors. The Libraries Co-operation Act, 1996, will also 

define how libraries from each sector may voluntarily enter into 

multitype agreements. Formal agreements will be required to 

allow libraries from each sector to share their resources across 

jurisdictional boundaries. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, The Libraries Co-operation Act will 

define the role of the Saskatchewan Provincial Library in 

ensuring the development of the multitype library system. No 

other agency has a mandate to encourage greater cooperation 

and resource sharing among libraries. The staff and resources 

provided by the Government of Saskatchewan will help ensure 

the establishment of this system. 

Mr. Speaker, The Libraries Co-operation Act is being brought 

forward by my government at the recommendation of the 

Multitype Library Development Advisory Committee. 

Extensive work was done by the library community to develop a 

vision for a province-wide multitype library system which 

would extend the principles of cooperation which already exist. 

 

In 1994, in response to a recommendation from the library 

community, the Multitype Library Advisory Committee was 

appointed. This government, Mr. Speaker, was pleased to 

respond to the library community on such a positive initiative. 

 

The Multitype Library Development Advisory Committee was 

asked to develop a detailed strategic plan for the 

implementation of a multitype library system for the province of 

Saskatchewan. The committee included representation from 

each library sector: public libraries, school libraries, special 

libraries, and post-secondary libraries; and other decision 

makers, including library trustees, school trustees, SUMA, 

SARM, and the provincial government. 

 

The committee consulted widely with the library community in 

Saskatchewan. Representatives of the Multitype Library 

Development Advisory Committee have kept in close 

communication with their constituents throughout the process 

of developing the strategic plan. As a result of this commitment 

to consultation, there is widespread support for the multitype 

library system initiative within the library community in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other jurisdictions across Canada are watching 

Saskatchewan in its development of the model for a multitype 

library system. All across North America, libraries are 

recognizing that greater cooperation brings great benefits. 

Taxpayers are better served by ensuring maximum use of local 

library resources across all sectors within communities. Library 

users, especially those in rural areas, will benefit from faster 

access to information and increased access to the most accurate, 

up-to-date resources. 

 

The multitype library system will affect all geographical areas 

of the province. However, Mr. Speaker, it will be particularly 

beneficial to rural and remote areas because of the potential to 

access resources from the library closest to the user. 

 

Promoting cooperation, partnerships, and sharing of resources 

to maximize resource utilization and minimize duplication are 

key directions for my government, Mr. Speaker. I am confident 

that release of the committee’s final report, Think Globally, 

Search Locally: A Strategic Plan for the Implementation of a 

Multitype Library System in Saskatchewan, and passage of The 

Libraries Co-operation Act will lead to immediate and specific 

action to begin developing the multitype library system for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 29, 

The Libraries Co-operation Act, 1996. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

Act is part of the recommendations provided by the Multitype 

Library Development Advisory Committee in April of ’94. And 

the municipalities I have contacted are also in agreeance with 

this Bill. 

 

Basically we will support this Bill because the new Multitype 

Library Board should help to make services more accessible to 

clients. A couple of questions I believe I do have concerning 

this Bill is how much money the new Multitype Library Board 

will cost, but I feel we can get these answers in committees. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 

second reading of The Hotel Keepers Amendment Act, 1996. 

The sole purpose of this Bill is to increase the applicable fine 

level for offenders under the Act from $25 to $250. 

 

The provincial offences under the Act to which this increase 

would apply are the following: a guest who continues to create 

a disturbance after having been requested to stop by the hotel 

keeper; a guest who, having made such a disturbance, fails to 

leave the hotel premises forthwith after being requested to do so 

by the hotel keeper; or a hotel keeper who either fails to request 

a disturber to stop, or having made such a request, fails to 

require the disturber to leave where the disturber persists in the 

disturbance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fine levels for these offences have not been 

amended since 1965. The hotel keepers association has 

requested these amendments to ensure that the applicable fines 

will have their desired deterrent effect. It is worth noting that, to 

their credit, the hotel keepers association have indicated their 

support for an increased fine level both for the disturber and for 

the hotel keeper who fails to perform his or her duties with 

respect to a disturber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also note that the previous reference to 

default imprisonment for failing to pay a fine is no longer 

required in The Hotel Keepers Act. This is because The 

Summary Offences Procedure Act now addresses the issue of 

default imprisonment for all general provincial offences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Hotel Keepers Act. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s 

commendable to see that statutes that have been in place for 

years and years and years . . . and the mothballs are being 

cleaned up and attended to. 

 

And one reference that’s made to this particular change, which 

again is very important, is the fact that it deals with 

responsibility and deterrence  responsibility on the part of the 

keeper of a hotel to ensure that customers of that hotel are well 

looked after and get the services that they should be provided 

with. The other is for perpetrators of offences, if you wish, 

within the confines of that facility to be dealt with adequately.  

And perhaps there might be a lesson here in other aspects and 

concerns dealing with such things as the landlords and tenants 

Act which might also fall into line with something similar to 

what is being addressed in The Hotel Keepers Act. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, it is not our intention to longer hold 

back this Bill, and refer it to the committee for review there. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33  An Act respecting Service Districts and to 

make consequential amendments to certain other Acts 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be 

able to introduce The Service Districts Act to this House. 

 

This important initiative will provide a new legislative 

framework for voluntary cooperation among municipalities to 

deliver services to their residents. This new Act is enabling 

legislation. It offers a new tool for municipalities to achieve 

economies of scale in service delivery where they are possible 

and to pursue opportunities to meet the service needs of 

residents that may otherwise be beyond their capacity as 

individual municipalities. 

 

Current Saskatchewan municipal Acts include authority for 

municipalities to enter into agreements with a list of various 

parties to provide services jointly. In fact in its first term, this 

government expanded the list to encourage more inter-

municipal cooperation. Under such agreements, municipalities 

may establish inter-municipal boards or joint committees, and 

there are many of these bodies in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

However there are shortcomings in the present ad hoc approach 

to inter-municipal cooperation. These have been identified to us 

in surveys of urban and rural municipalities themselves. I 

experienced these obstacles myself during my years as reeve of 

the rural municipality of Corman Park. At present, cooperative 

arrangements have to be worked out over and over. There is 

uncertainty about the continuation of individual agreements. 

There is in fact a proliferation of boards and committees which 

strain community volunteers. There are limited opportunities for 

coordination among services and obstacles to achieving 

efficiencies. 

 

The new Act will supplement the existing legislation. Those 

communities that prefer to continue to use the present approach 

to inter-municipal agreements will retain the option to do so, 

although the government will encourage municipalities to look 

carefully at using the new provisions. 

 

Parallel legislative provisions are already available, with some 

differences, in British Columbia and Alberta. These have been 

in place for some years with extensive municipal participation 

already evolving over time. Legislation for Saskatchewan has 

been developed with reference to these two examples. 

 

The idea for adopting this new approach was originally 

identified in the work of the Minister’s Advisory Committee on  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 392 

Inter-community Cooperation and Community Quality of Life 

in 1993. This committee included among its members, 

representatives from various municipalities, the past president 

of SARM, the current president of SUMA, and a professor from 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The committee’s report focused on new strategies to manage 

change in the municipal sector. It identified service delivery as 

a key consideration. The committee recommended permissive 

legislation to allow municipalities to implement expanded 

regional service delivery on a voluntary basis. Subsequently, at 

the invitation of SUMA’s task force on urban government 

renewal, the Department of Municipal Government prepared a 

concept paper on the approach. This was considered by the task 

force and reflected in its final recommendations. 

 

(1500) 

 

The idea of creating service districts to coordinate or deliver 

emergency services such as fire protection was also an integral 

part of a review of emergency and protective services 

undertaken over the past year and a half. SUMA, SARM, and 

other organizations participated in this review as members of 

the steering committee. A summary report which resulted from 

this review was distributed to municipalities. 

 

There has been some discussion of this new Act in the media 

prior to its being tabled in the legislature. Some confusion has 

inadvertently arisen, it seems, as to what the new Act is and 

what it isn’t. I want to clarify this, Mr. Speaker. In doing so, I 

particularly want to direct my comments to members of 

municipal councils. I have also written to mayors, reeves, and 

councils with the same objective. 

 

This Act is not about mandatory municipal amalgamation. This 

Act is not a municipal amalgamation Act nor has any such Act 

been prepared. The Act focuses on making improvements in the 

delivery of services and does not restrict or reduce municipal 

autonomy or powers of governance. The new Act does not 

include provisions relating to amalgamation of municipalities. 

 

Under this Act, service districts will be established by order of 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council either with the concurrence 

of municipalities or at their request. 

 

A service district will be managed by a board of directors 

composed of representatives of the councils of member 

municipalities. It will offer a flexible menu of services within or 

to member municipalities as decided at the local level. These 

services can be delivered under various financing arrangements, 

including fees for services and charges back to municipalities 

 again as decided at the local level. 

 

The board of directors will consist of representatives appointed 

from participating municipalities’ municipal councils by those 

councils. This is to ensure direct accountability to participating 

municipalities. 

 

An option is included for board members to represent more 

than one municipality. A chairperson will be selected by the 

board of directors from among its members. A person’s term of  

office on the board will coincide with his or her term as a 

municipal council member. 

 

A service district will have a range of powers available to it 

related to the municipal services that it may deliver. Some 

consequential amendments to other Acts will also be made for 

this purpose. The Act includes a number of other administrative 

and legal provisions as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, based on my own experience in local government, 

I believe that this new Act opens doors for municipalities that 

are very much in the Saskatchewan tradition of cooperation and 

collaboration. Some may see new legislation that gives our 

communities new tools as a threat. I see it as providing new 

opportunities. 

 

This Act leaves decisions very much at the local level  

whether to use the provisions, what services to provide, what 

municipalities are included, financing arrangements, and so on 

.We cannot and must not be confined by the past. The Service 

Districts Act will help sustain services for the new century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of this House to support 

this step. I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 

matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly. And I move that Bill No. 33, An Act respecting 

Service Districts and to make consequential amendments to 

certain other Acts be now read a second time. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think it is 

only fitting that we take the time this afternoon to make a few 

comments before we would move to adjourn, so we can have a 

greater review of this Bill and piece of legislation that is set 

before us. 

 

One of the concerns we have in our caucus, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that while the minister says that this Bill really is a nothing 

Bill and really doesn’t interfere with the workings of 

municipalities and local governments, the fact is, Mr. Speaker 

. . . and we’ve seen this in the past, and our caucus on many 

occasions, Mr. Speaker, has warned the public of Saskatchewan 

of the problems that can be faced if they just listen to the 

rhetoric that has come from the government side of the House. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, if we go back to the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) question in 1991, and we warned 

the public of what the government would do with the GRIP 

Bill. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, the government said no, we 

will do nothing to GRIP; in fact we will enhance the program. 

Well what happened as a result of the 1991 election? The GRIP 

Bill and the GRIP legislation was destroyed, and farmers were 

left without a security program that they could build their 

operations on and certainly take to the bank. 

 

In this past election, Mr. Speaker, we warned the farmers of 

Saskatchewan that the government was going to send out bills. 

And the Premier . . . the former minister of Agriculture said that 

no, that would not happen. Elect us; I promise you; I assure you  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

that will not happen. However since the election has taken 

place, Mr. Speaker, what have we found? They indeed sent the 

bills out. I guess it’s a matter of déjà vu all over again. I told 

you so has come to roost. 

 

The problem we have with this Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . and while 

it doesn’t necessarily or specifically say that amalgamations are 

in the works, this piece of legislation opens the door for the 

government through orders in council  it may not happen 

today, but opens the doors certainly in the future and even in 

the near future  for the government through orders in council 

and through regulations to now say to RMs (rural municipality) 

and local governments that we will enforce larger districts on 

you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our caucus has to ask the question: why is it 

necessary for this Bill? The minister tells us that it is 

appropriate for the Bill to come forward, that the Bill is needed 

to allow municipalities to cooperate in providing services. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I was on council in my community in my 

area for a number of years before coming to this Assembly. And 

I can assure you that on many occasions our RM worked at the 

local RM and communities in providing services. And that is 

available to individuals today. In fact the towns of Glenavon 

and the RM of Chester have already amalgamated their 

administrative services. The town of Windthorst, the village of 

Windthorst, is looking at, as soon as their administrator retires, 

the council is also already pursuing the matter of amalgamating 

their administrative services. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, tells me that that service is already out there 

and available to any RM, any council that would like to work 

together. 

 

The minister says that it’s difficult for RMs and municipal 

governments to provide economic development or to even look 

at the problem of garbage disposal. Well the Mainline Rural 

Development Corporation out of Grenfell, Mr. Speaker, is 

already working on a project with a number of communities in 

developing garbage management and that provision is already 

there. 

 

So one has to ask, Mr. Speaker, with all the opportunities and 

rural governments already taking the initiative on their own to 

establish and cooperate and work together — all the things that 

the minister has talked about — one has to wonder why we 

specifically need a Bill to say we’re going to make it easier, 

when governments are already working towards that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many unanswered questions, while 

the minister would lead us to believe that even His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor is in support of this Bill, there are so many 

questions that need to be addressed and raised that we . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I think the member has 

been in the Assembly long enough to know that it is 

inappropriate to attempt to involve His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor in debate in the Assembly. Order, order, order. Order. 

Order. The Speaker is not seeking advice from the members of 

the Assembly and I’ll simply — order — I’ll simply ask the  

member to just withdraw the unparliamentary reference and 

continue with his remarks. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw those remarks and 

talk later. However, Mr. Speaker, in regard to that . . . in regard 

to the minister’s . . . and I guess I’ll have to tomorrow or when 

we get into further readings regarding this piece of legislation, I 

will quote from the minister’s statement to the House regarding 

this Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that we take the time 

to sit back and review a little more carefully all the details of 

this Bill so that the people of this province and all the local 

governments have a better understanding of what is intended 

through this legislation. And therefore I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 34  An Act to amend 

The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure on behalf of 

the Minister of Energy and Mines to move second reading of 

The Electrical Inspection Act, 1996. The electrical inspection 

department, in its efforts to become more efficient and 

customer focused, has taken the initiative towards 

implementing a system that would allow it to receive notices 

and permits by electronic means. It would certainly bring us 

into age with the services that are available through 

telecommunications, and through Internet, through e-mail, and 

other services that are now available. 

 

The membership of the electric contractors within the province 

are very receptive to this and they are anxiously awaiting its 

implementation. The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993, as it now 

reads, provides contractors with the ability to give notices and 

permits to SaskPower only by prepaid first-class mail or hand 

delivery. Accordingly, this Bill would simply add to the existing 

provision of The Electrical Inspection Act, the right for 

contractors to give notices and permits by electronic means in 

addition to the existing methods. 

 

This amendment would have a positive impact on both the 

operation and efficiency of the electrical inspection department, 

as well as potentially increasing its . . . or decreasing its 

operating costs and contractor operating costs. 

 

Accordingly, I move second reading of The Electrical 

Inspection Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

minister for his remarks, and I truly do appreciate the fact that 

the whole thrust and intent of this legislation is to bring the 

inspection Act up into the 21st century. 

 

I think it’s a very appropriate thing to do. And as a very positive 

comment, I would actually encourage the government to look at 

other areas of their statutes that maybe have the same pony 

express kind of attitude to be brought into the 21st century as 

well. That would be a very positive step forward and  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 394 

we certainly would encourage this to move forward to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 14  An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted to have 

this chance to address the proposed amendment to The 

Saskatchewan Income Plan Amendment Act. 

 

As seniors’ critic for the official opposition, I feel it is my 

responsibility to follow any changes in legislation that could 

affect the seniors of our province, especially when the 

legislation involves the money they receive, as this proposed 

amendment does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, someone must look out for the seniors in this 

province when it comes to these matters, and I’m not sure that 

the government is. In the Speech from the Throne, the issues 

facing seniors received very little attention. I can only assume 

that this means they have little interest in seniors. 

 

This is particularly shameful because 10 years ago when the 

NDP was in opposition, the hon. member for Regina Dewdney 

said to the Tory administration, and I quote: 

 

Your government is still not prepared to do anything to 

help those people between the ages of 60 and 65 who find 

themselves in dire straits. Many of them are ill or 

handicapped or widowed and therefore they do not have 

adequate income. But neither the government’s pension 

plan, which is a vehicle to access money so that the 

government can help pay for its deficit, or this Bill, is 

going to help the people between the ages of 60 and 65. 

 

So I know the members opposite will understand my concern 

about any changes that may affect the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors are no different than any of us when it 

comes to worrying about money. Like us, they strive for a 

decent quality of life. They want to know that the money they 

save will see them through the rest of their lives. People are 

living longer, and although that’s a wonderful thing, it can 

mean that people may have to stretch money even further into 

their golden years. 

 

(1515) 

 

For many, many people this is a scary thought. So we must do  

whatever we can to make sure that their financial security is not 

jeopardized in any way. 

 

The Saskatchewan Income Plan is designed to give seniors 

some peace of mind. To receive benefits, a person must be a 

resident of Saskatchewan, be in receipt of a pension and a 

supplement, and meet other criteria in the regulations. What 

that means is that on average almost 21,000 people receive 

benefits under the plan every month. 

 

In financial terms, the total amount paid out in benefits in the 

1993-94 fiscal year was almost fourteen and a half million 

dollars. Under the current plan, the beneficiaries receive their 

cheques directly from the province. As I understand it, if this 

Act goes through, the Minister of Social Services would be 

permitted to enter into an agreement with the federal 

government which would permit the federal government to 

administer the Act and to make payments under the Act. 

 

In a nutshell, this would mean that senior citizens who receive 

benefits under the federal government’s Old Age Security and 

guaranteed income supplement would also receive their 

Saskatchewan Income Plan payments from the federal 

government. The total benefits will apparently remain exactly 

the same. Saskatchewan seniors will just be getting one cheque 

instead of two. 

 

I also understand that if overpayments are made under the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, they can be recovered by the 

Government of Canada under this agreement. Although we 

don’t have serious concerns about the amount of money 

Saskatchewan seniors will receive, we do have some concerns 

about the cost of implementing the changes. We need to know 

if there will be any cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers if this 

system is turned over to the federal government, and secondly, 

what are the projected savings to our province in the long run? 

 

I believe the members opposite will understand this concern as 

well because they have continued to bemoan the lack of money 

in our province, blaming the federal government at every 

opportunity. 

 

If this amendment does appear to be beneficial to our province, 

we will support it fully. However, we would hope that the 

provincial government would stop blaming the federal 

government for all of their problems and openly recognize that 

the federal government is helping in this matter and many 

others. 

 

We have been in touch with the federal Minister of Human 

Resources and have been informed that Saskatchewan officials 

are still in the discussion stage on this matter. In their 

estimation, if an agreement is reached, it would be for the 

purpose of merging technology. 

 

However, because we are still not comfortable with all the 

details proposed in this amendment, we would like some more 

time to confer with lawyers, seniors, and other affected groups 

to determine how these changes will affect our province. 

Therefore I ask that this debate again be adjourned for further 

consideration. 



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

The Speaker:  The question before the House is the motion 

to adjourn debate, moved by the hon. member for Humboldt. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Those in 

favour of the motion, please say aye. Those opposed say no. In 

my opinion the no’s have it. Debate continues. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat surprising 

that this House wouldn’t allow for a little more of a process to 

review this piece of legislation. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Bill that’s presented 

to this Assembly, if I’m not mistaken, a lot of the funding 

already is handled by the federal government, and basically it’s 

tied to the federal pension plan. And the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan, senior supplement plan, kicks in based on what a person’s 

income is. So I don’t have a problem with us working together 

with the federal government, having that cheque come out once 

and for all. 

 

But I think, as I look through the Bill, it would seem to me 

more appropriate that there should be more time, a little more 

time allowed to review this Bill in a little more detail to make 

sure that we are indeed addressing all the questions, so at the 

end of the day we are indeed making sure that the seniors of 

this province and their views . . . and we’re protecting them. 

We’re giving them the proper protection. And the fact that the 

funding that they should be having come into their possession is 

handled in an appropriate form that certainly meets their needs 

is . . . is efficient and is effective. 

 

And therefore I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker:  The question before the Assembly is the 

motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, as moved by the hon. 

member for Moosomin. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? Those in favour say aye. Those opposed say 

no. In my opinion, the no’s have it, and the motion is lost. 

Debate continues. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it was my understanding that there was a prior 

arrangement to allow some debate to occur on this particular 

Bill, so I appreciate the opportunity. And we will adjourn it. 

And there will be ample time to discuss the merits of the Bill. I 

know the hon. members recognize that the seniors’ portion is 

one important but very small piece of this particular Bill, as 

important as it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the hon. member from Humboldt, I 

would say that while we may have . . . in her capacity as the 

critic for seniors . . . certainly we have a long way to go, in 

Canada especially, with regard to income support for senior 

citizens. But I think it’s fairly well accepted in Canada that 

we’ve done pretty well in Saskatchewan, relative to other 

provinces. 

 

For example, you will know likely that, the member will know, 

that we’re only one of three provinces with a seniors’ income 

plan-like program where the provincial government is in fact 

topping up the income supplement. And I know that seniors 

appreciate that. 

That program is so effective, in fact, that we have by far the 

lowest number of seniors  or percentage as well  of senior 

citizens on social assistance than any province. We have 300 

seniors on social assistance in Saskatchewan; that’s 300 too 

many. But out of 130,000 senior citizens in the province, only 

300 are on social assistance. And that is because of programs 

like the seniors’ income plan where very few provinces have 

such a plan. And that makes just the difference to take people 

over the social assistance rates. And I know that having been 

the minister for Seniors for two and a half years, while you can 

always do more, that that is appreciated by seniors. 

 

I know that the member will be in touch with seniors’ groups, 

and she will know that a far bigger concern of seniors’ groups 

than this Bill  this Bill is not a concern to seniors’ groups  

but a far bigger concern is the recent federal budget and the 

long-term impact of low income seniors. And while Mr. Martin 

says that nine out of ten seniors will be better off, the reality is 

that that is not the case for many women, women especially 

between the ages 55 and 65 and certainly many women who are 

widowed. That will not be the case. 

 

And I would like to send a copy over to the hon. member of two 

articles if I could, one by Leonard Shifren who I know all 

members will recognize as one of the most respected social 

policy journalists in Canada, who says that “The federal budget 

is important for what it does not say about pensions.” And this 

is a very informative article which was in the Star-Phoenix. 

 

I’ll also send over a copy of the article by Jim Knisley, who 

says, “Nothing budget means lots to seniors.” That’s a headline. 

So I would, with respect, say to the hon. member that seniors’ 

organizations in Saskatchewan are much more concerned about 

the impact of the federal budget on their long-term security and 

the security and income support programs than anything the 

province is or could do with regard to pensions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member is right, as I understand it, that 

the senior’s portion is simply that for administrative efficiency, 

and I might add a cooperation between governments  federal 

and provincial that the cheque will be combined, one cheque 

instead of two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is to address my 

comments on this particular Bill to the history of the social 

assistance program as I understand it. And I’ve studied this for 

some twenty years or so, so I’ve got some things I think are 

important to say in this regard. 

 

I’d like to talk about some of the case-load changes, some of 

the key issues that are driving the reform, and then focus on the 

redesign provisions themselves. And in this regard I would like 

to commend the Minister of Social Services from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow and his staff, client groups, and community groups 

for their input with regard to the redesign. 

 

And I’ve had the opportunity to talk to many groups in the 

community, and I of course, I am well aware of the public 

meetings that the minister had which were very well attended 

by hundreds and hundreds of client advocates and clients 

themselves, that by and large this redesign discussion paper is  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 396 

very well received, which does make me a little bit sad to see 

the member from Humboldt’s resolution  in the blue book  

her resolution about condemning the discussion paper. And the 

only conclusion I could come to is that the member has not read 

the discussion paper because it does deal with, it does deal with 

the issues that she says she is concerned about. 

 

So I would suggest to the member from Humboldt that there are 

some things that she could learn if she comes in with an open 

mind. And if she has an open mind and is inclined not to be so 

politically partisan than to sort of learn what she can learn here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the history, the history of the 

social assistance program, it was designed of course, has always 

been designed in Canada to be a program of last resort. That is 

the way the program was designed, where people’s basic needs 

were met. And, Mr. Speaker, the program was designed over 30 

years ago. 

 

I might add, like medicare, we designed a program ourself and 

went it alone without the federal support. I don’t know if the 

member is aware of that, but 1966, later that year the Canada 

Assistance Plan was established. And the reason it was 

established, the reason the Canada Assistance Plan was 

established then, is just as valid as today when the federal 

government is phasing it out at the end of this month. And that 

is to provide consistency across Canada on certain basic rights 

 five basic rights in the Canada Assistance Plan which will be 

gone in about 10 days, Mr. Speaker, related to standardization 

and equal cost-sharing and so on. 

 

And the federal presence was felt to be important at that time 

because of the loose federation and the importance of making 

sure that people could move from province to province. And the 

Canada Assistance Plan had allowed that to occur with a 

reasonable amount of consistency from province to province. 

 

Now the program as intended and developed was such that the 

numbers were small, the numbers on assistance were small. 

There were very few employable clients on assistance. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, people were on for short periods of time 

because through their own resources they were able to get back 

into the labour force. 

 

So on balance, on balance the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan in 

cooperation with the Canada Assistance Plan has served low 

income people reasonably well over the years, up until the last 

10 years or so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that certain changes, major 

changes, have been undergone in society over the last number 

of years. The employable rate at the time . . . the unemployment 

rate at the time of the development, the evolution of the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, was 4 per cent. Now of course 

it’s 10 per cent, roughly 10 per cent across Canada, and in some 

provinces twice that. So that’s been a major change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Although the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan has been modified 

and adapted a little bit as things have shifted over the years, 

there have been no fundamental changes in the program for  

some 30 years, and the program has not been rebuilt. And many 

would argue now that it is not even meeting the basic needs that 

families and children and individuals have. 

 

I think it is important, Mr. Speaker, not to just simply throw a 

program out because it is time for change, that we have tried to 

carefully analyse what’s working and what isn’t and, in our 

discussions with clients and community groups, to try and build 

on what works. I think that’s what the design is trying to do. 

 

But the reality is across Canada that unemployment rates have 

doubled and tripled over the last 30 years since the program was 

designed. And I think another thing that went along with this is, 

unemployment rates rose and there became more structural 

unemployment. The fundamental program in Canada that 

supported unemployed people, that being the unemployment 

insurance program, has been drastically reduced as a front-line 

program and consequently in all provinces has shifted from 

income supports federally through the UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) program to social assistance programs 

in every province. 

 

And especially of significance is the increases of employable 

people on case-loads across Canada, the increases in the 

number that they designate as employable. And of course the 

concern here is that of the notion of dependency: employable 

people being dependent on social assistance. And this has 

increased of course due to the higher unemployment rate and 

the greater numbers  I think all members would agree  who 

are lacking the prospects for longer-term, secure, sustainable 

employment that adequately meets their needs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, over the last 30 years we have seen the 

numbers increase across Canada. Now we still have the lowest 

percentage. Between us and Alberta, we have the lowest 

percentage of our population on assistance of any other 

province. And while we are proud of that on the one hand, 

that’s not good enough, and we need to even do more. 

 

(1530) 

 

So it is higher than we would like. But what we do not want to 

do is to trap people on assistance, which is the big concern that 

we have. People want their independence. They want to be able 

to make their own decisions and choices. They want to be able 

to participate meaningfully in their communities. They want 

opportunities. And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps most of all, they want 

to preserve their dignity and have a sense of hope about the 

future for they and their children. That’s what people want. 

 

We are in a situation again in Saskatchewan, but across Canada, 

where half of the people on assistance, more or less half, are 

what we would say employable, traditionally employable. But 

the reality is, Mr. Speaker, they do not have the skills. A lot of 

those people do not have the skills to get a job today and to 

compete in the market and require further education and 

training. 

 

They also in many cases need additional supports, like child 

care. Literally 35 per cent of the social assistance case-load are 

single-parent mothers. That’s why I’m so sad to see the federal  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

government just simply cancel the red book commitment on 

$750 million in day care. That is going to be devastating, Mr. 

Speaker, because most provinces can’t adequately fund child 

care on their own to the degree that it’s needed. 

 

And I’m still hoping that the hon. member from Humboldt can 

join with us on this side and urge the federal government not to 

cancel . . . join in an important venture and that is to try and get 

the federal government to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  In spirit . . . 

 

Mr. Pringle:  In spirit, yes. In spirit. And with her signature 

 well, even join us  to in fact encourage the federal 

government to honour its commitment, at least partially, to meet 

some of the child care needs in Canada that exist. 

 

This is a very serious matter. I know we’re having a bit of fun 

here, but this is a very serious matter and I know the members 

know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be virtually impossible for a lot of these 

women to move off of assistance into the labour market, into 

training programs, and into participation in the community 

without the combined efforts of the federal and the provincial 

governments on child care programing. And I certainly know 

that Mr. Axworthy personally  personally  was very 

supportive and he understood that concept, but he just simply 

was not able to get the money from his colleagues, and 

hopefully the new minister will be able to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to remember, to reinforce, 

that people on assistance do want to work. They need, though, 

to be able to earn enough money to make it worthwhile, to not 

be trapped on assistance, so that they can become fully 

independent. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, despite some of 

the perceptions, the reality is that 1,000 people in Saskatchewan 

on assistance work full time. And about 4,600 clients on 

assistance work part-time  in many cases two or three 

part-time jobs  so that’s about 5,600 clients on assistance 

who actually work. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it would take 8 or 9 or 10 or $12 an hour 

under the current systems that we have in order not to be 

dependent on social assistance, and there just isn’t a market to 

increase minimum wage to that degree. But it would take that 

kind of minimum wage. So people are working on assistance, 

contributing, earning about $20 million a year. 

 

So as I said, half the clients are, what we would say, 

employable but not really necessarily all employable in today’s 

market. The other half are, really, partially employable, partially 

are unemployable because of maybe a physical or an emotional, 

mental disability, or it could be lack of education, training, and 

proper experience. But the point is, they’re unable to support 

themselves and they’re unable to get off assistance. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re still poor, though. For those who 

aren’t employable, they’re still poor, and something has to be 

done. And I think the redesigned proposal offers a solution 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

Now there are many income support programs like the Canada 

Pension Plan, Workers’ Comp, UIC, and those of course 

traditionally have only been available to people who are 

working. Those programs have not been available to people 

who are not working in the labour force. 

 

So this group, this other 50 per cent who are not employable, 

require additional help, Mr. Speaker, by federal and provincial 

governments. And I would say that there’s some interest with 

the federal government as well in income support programs for 

disabled persons. So I know the Minister of Social Services is 

pursuing that with his counterparts. 

 

As I said earlier, seniors, we’ve got some ways to go, but 

fortunately only 300 of 130,000 on assistance, and I think that 

is great. But I wanted to highlight that women between 55 and 

65 who do not have any kind of pension, something just has got 

to be done for those women. And we believe that the reform 

paper offers some support there. It may not be perfect but we 

would welcome any ideas that any members of the House have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I tried to give some background about the 

development of social assistance when first initiated and what 

are some of the changing dynamics over the years that in fact 

make the case-load composition different and require some 

reform initiatives. 

 

I think there are other key issues driving reform, and I’d like to 

highlight just a few of those, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the demise 

of the Canada Assistance Plan requires all provinces to reform 

their social assistance programs. 

 

Now I’d like to think . . . well in fact I like to think I know that 

it’s generally well regarded across Canada that the 

Saskatchewan paper. . . I would inform the House that I know, 

for example, that having discussed these issues with Lloyd 

Axworthy, he feels that these are very positive initiatives. 

 

I know from having discussed this paper with the Hon. James 

Smith from Nova Scotia, the Liberal minister, that Dr. Smith 

endorses many of the initiatives in this paper. I also know that 

B.C. (British Columbia) does. 

 

And what I would say is that Mr. Axworthy federally, 

personally; Dr. Smith, the Liberal minister from Nova Scotia; 

the B.C. government and us are in step on the kinds of reforms 

that are an alternative to the punitive measures that we see in 

Alberta, Ontario, and recently you would know that Manitoba’s 

announced a cut of 10 per cent in their rates. 

 

This is a different vision, and I think this is the vision that gives 

better vision. It gives people, low income people and 

unemployed people, some hope for the future because it’s based 

on a compassionate approach, on a fair approach, and an 

approach which protects people who are most vulnerable. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the key issues driving reform across 

Canada, of course, is the elimination of the Canada Assistance 

Plan, come April 1, being replaced with the CHST (Canada 

Health and Social Transfer), which basically combines health, 

education, social services programing . . . by 106 million this  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 398 

year, 200 million next year. It gives provinces more flexibility 

but, Mr. Speaker, a lot less money to work with. 

 

What I’m concerned about with the loss of the Canada 

Assistance Plan is more that it actually will mean there will be a 

patchwork program across Canada. And we’re seeing the 

development of that again already. Which again, as I say, means 

that we’ll lose the reason that the Canada Assistance Plan came 

into initially. 

 

The second key issue, Mr. Speaker, that drives this of course, is 

the actual reduction itself in the transfer payments. Now it’s not 

a matter of blaming Ottawa for Saskatchewan’s woes. The 

reality is, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that we have picked up 

about $70 million in costs. And the Finance critic will know 

this. In fact he says, in the Moose Jaw paper, 64 million loss in 

transfers this year. And I respect his figures, although ours 

don’t agree with that. But I respect his figures; he got them 

from somewhere. 

 

But what he’s forgetting is that we’ve already picked up about 

70 million on the last two rounds of UIC cuts. And the fact that 

now we’re responsible, as first nations leave reserve, 

immediately for their social assistance. So it’s more like 140 

million. Even using his figures, that isn’t insignificant, Mr. 

Speaker. So the reductions in funding are creating some need to 

redesign the program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the shifting cost to the province in the 

health, education, and social services sector is creating a 

challenge, to put it mildly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, leaving the treaty responsibility with regard to the 

federal government aside, it challenges the province to try and 

respond in a humane, compassionate way, which is why we 

picked that cost up to start with. It challenges us to redesign the 

program to meet people’s basic needs. 

 

I think a third factor driving the redesign, Mr. Speaker, relates 

to the economy and labour market changes over the years, 

where our unemployment rate might still be the lowest in 

Canada. It certainly is. And our economy has performed well 

relative to other provinces, Mr. Speaker. In 1995 our economy 

performed well in the agricultural sector, in the resource sector, 

housing, retail, tourism. And our Partnership for Renewal has 

been successful; our Partnership for Growth builds on that. So 

the prospects economically are good for the province, but 

there’s no question that in every province and in the country as 

a whole the global economy and expanded international trade 

. . . We see the phase-out of the Crow and the deregulation 

policies. These have resulted in changes in the structure of 

Saskatchewan’s labour force. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if one takes the politics out of all of this, Mr. 

Speaker, everybody would have to agree that it is harder to get a 

job, to find secure work, to find full-time work. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that if you do not have at least a grade 12, 

it’s very difficult to get a job even flipping burgers or anything 

these days because that’s kind of the level at which people  

employers  weed people out, so to speak. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, children’s needs often exceed their earning 

potential. That’s one of our challenges. Their needs often 

exceed their earning potential. 

 

A fourth issue driving reform is the fact that we’re losing 

ground in Canada on the family poverty front. Across Canada, 

Mr. Speaker, income is the most important determinant of 

health. We know that. The implications of low income and 

poverty on health and well-being is well known, Mr. Speaker. 

This is why we brought in the health care reform measures with 

regard to health promotion and prevention and so on. 

 

So research has demonstrated that long-term poverty 

contributes to lifelong disadvantages for people, such as poor 

education, poor health, poor employment prospects, and family 

problems. And we just simply have to, Mr. Speaker, do 

something in Canada about the growing poverty rate where 20 

per cent of Canadian families are living in poverty. And 

probably you could add another 10 per cent or so because those 

people just living above the poverty line are not doing much 

better. So, Mr. Speaker, the level of poverty in Canada, in 

Saskatchewan, is unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fifth key issue in the reform is the need for the 

supports and the tools to be provided to people so that they’re 

not trapped in social assistance. Mr. Speaker, it has to be that 

people are better off working than they are on SAP 

(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan). Otherwise they’re not going to 

be able to get off assistance; they’re going to be trapped. 

 

The earning exemption is too low. People lose their health care 

benefits as they go off assistance. And of course, if you’re on 

assistance the maintenance payment is deducted. And again 

these design measures in the proposal are designed to deal with 

all of those. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, social assistance in Canada today is not, as it’s 

designed and operating in every province, is not a route out of 

poverty. Nor is it today in many cases a satisfactory transition to 

sustainable jobs. Our government is committed to seeking 

programs and solutions to protect the most vulnerable citizens. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s critical that ways be found to provide 

individuals, children, youth and families with an adequate level 

of benefits, opportunities for training and support, and ways to 

move in to the work force. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the goals in the paper, the philosophical 

framework if you will, is to protect those who need to be 

protected the most, firstly; secondly, to enhance the tools that 

people need, the bridges to secure training, education, 

employment opportunities for them; thirdly, to reduce poverty; 

fourthly, to support participation into the economic and social 

life in our communities; and of course fifthly, to simplify the 

program. 

 

(1545) 

 

Those are the goals of the redesign, Mr. Speaker, and of course, 

as I say, it is a different set of goals than our neighbouring 

provinces have in the redesign of their programs. We believe 

that our program in social assistance, our redesigned proposals,  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

are not unrelated. We believe in holistic approaches. We believe 

in integrated strategies, and that’s the centre-piece of our action 

plan for children . . . community driven, where the community 

prioritizes their challenges, seeks the solutions and then the 

strategies unfold. 

 

So whether it’s the Agriculture 2000 paper, the Partnership for 

Renewal, now the Partnership For Growth, the Future Skills 

programs, or the social assistance redesign, Mr. Speaker, the 

approach basically is that the communities have been involved, 

and the communities look at these issues as issues not in a 

compartmentalised way, as we’ve tended to in the past, but in a 

holistic way. 

 

And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the National Anti-Poverty 

Organization, Bonnie Morton being the local representative 

from Saskatchewan, believes that Saskatchewan’s approach  

balancing the budget by increasing the strength in the economy 

and education and training programs, and not cutting social 

service programs  is the model in Canada. They’ve 

reaffirmed that publicly when they met in Saskatchewan 

recently, wanting to meet here because this is the approach that 

they believe is the one that is the approach which will in a 

meaningful way help people. So we got the support from the 

national perspective as well in terms of this approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the redesign . . . and I know it’s been a concern 

for the member from Humboldt that we deal with family 

poverty, child poverty. We know that half of the beneficiaries 

on assistance are children. 

 

What the Saskatchewan child benefit would do, Mr. Speaker, 

would be to provide additional support for low income families 

whether they’re on assistance or not on assistance, based on 

their income, to lift them up higher than the social assistance 

levels. It would also make work pay for families. In other 

words, they could earn more before their benefits are deducted 

if they’re on assistance. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it would be . . . how it would work: it would 

be a low income supplement. You would take the benefits for 

children out of social assistance and of course for families not 

on assistance too. It would support them. 

 

Another important provision, Mr. Speaker, in the child benefit 

is that families, when they came off social assistance, would not 

lose their health care benefits. So they would still maintain their 

optical, dental, and other services as if they were on assistance, 

and that is a way to support the low income working poor rather 

than leaving them on their own. That satisfies a major concern 

where people are afraid to come off of assistance because they 

get too much deducted or they don’t have their health care 

benefits. Again I can tell you that we’re the only province 

looking at that. 

 

The second provision, Mr. Speaker, is the working income 

supplement. As I said earlier, you would need 9 or 10 or $12 an 

hour in many cases to get off assistance. And if that isn’t on, on 

minimum wage, the society has to find other ways to bring 

people up to that level of support. So it would be an opportunity 

to increase the earnings. And in addition, it would  

be an opportunity and make it worth it to pursue child 

maintenance because that as well would be taken into account 

and be exempted. 

 

It would come in the form of a monthly supplement for low 

income families based on the amount of money they earn and 

the maintenance that they receive. So it would have the benefit 

of topping up wages and topping up the maintenance payments. 

We’re talking primarily here about women and their children. 

So it would allow families, we believe. 

 

The model is good. The design is good. It depends how much 

money you put into that. It would allow families to in fact be 

independent of social assistance. 

 

Now back in late 1994, we had negotiated with Mr. Axworthy 

where in fact there would be a Canada-Saskatchewan child 

benefit which was really quite exciting because the federal 

government, the province would in fact combine forces to have 

a family poverty strategy. Now again, Mr. Axworthy personally 

was committed to that. In fact he agreed to a letter with the 

Saskatchewan government on that kind of a program, five-year 

program. Again unfortunately, he was not able to get that 

through his cabinet which was again the missed opportunity to 

deal with family poverty. 

 

Again in a way . . . and I can tell the House, as the Minister of 

Social Services will know, that every single province that is 

interested in helping low income people . . . but the Liberal 

minister in Nova Scotia is very interested in our child benefit 

proposal. They see it as one of the innovative ways to bring 

families up out of poverty, and they’re looking at modelling it. 

And the opposition members might want to talk to Dr. Smith in 

Nova Scotia about his views. 

 

I think a third important provision, Mr. Speaker, relates to 

young people on assistance. Now the numbers are climbing, 

Mr. Speaker, and as the Minister of Social Services has pointed 

out in the consultations of the discussion paper, that I believe 

70 per cent of the 5,000 young people on assistance under the 

age of 22 do not have a grade 12; 30 per cent do not have a 

grade 10 even. So given what I said about the grade 12 being 

sort of the bottom level that you need in order to even have the 

opportunity to go for an interview, that issue has to be 

addressed. Seventy per cent of those young people need greater 

education, and they need to develop a greater skill level. 

 

So the paper deals with young people on assistance and their 

future. And we all have got to cooperate here to make sure that 

we prepare young people who want to work, who want 

opportunities, that we make sure that they don’t lose hope early 

in their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you add the demographics in this province 

of young people who are anywhere from 8 to 12 or 13 today, 

moving into the 15 to the 22 age group, then this program for 

youth makes a lot of sense because the demographics are very 

alarming here. And we just simply have to provide 

opportunities, guarantee opportunities for young people for 

further education, further retraining, and ways to move into the 

labour force and to participate in the community in many ways. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 400 

So the youth future’s program does this. Anyone under 22 will 

have the opportunity for positive activities. And of course an 

important part of that is to remain connected to your family 

because we want to make sure that we provide specific support 

to families who recognize it’s their responsibility to provide for 

the children. In many cases, some of these other provisions will 

give them the additional supports where they’ll be able to do 

that. So the emphasis on the youth future’s program is family 

connections, the importance of education, retraining, additional 

training, and work experiences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other proposals in the paper that speak to 

issues like the provincial training allowance. That’s very 

important too because right now if you’re in a training program, 

you get whatever the going rate is. It has no connection to your 

family’s size or your basic budget needs. 

 

In the redesigned proposal, families would get a training 

allowance based on the family needs, family size, and again 

gives them the best shot at a meaningful income. So the nature 

of training allowances would change and taking the welfarism, 

so to speak, out of the whole concept of training. We believe 

that’s a positive initiative. And of course the enhanced child 

maintenance initiatives . . . and some of those I think would be 

complemented by the Bill that entered second reading today on 

child maintenance. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, let me say that these 

proposals in the redesigned paper on social assistance are 

getting a very positive response across Saskatchewan, and it is a 

discussion paper for that very purpose. The concepts are 

outlined. The value base is there. The key issues, the reasons 

that the redesign needs to occur, is in the paper. 

 

And if this paper is implemented, I think it would continue the 

tradition of Saskatchewan being a social policy innovator and 

an innovator of income support programs which have then been 

modelled, in many cases, by other governments across Canada. 

 

So I would like to say that to those involved, it is a good piece 

of work. It has been recognized by social policy people who 

have got experience in the field. It is a complex area. There are 

no simplistic solutions to income support programs and training 

programs and their relationship to work. And there’s 

jurisdictional considerations if there’s money involved. This 

might be one of the most intellectually challenging areas of 

public policy. I would say it may very well be. So it is not easy, 

and it requires the energy and support of all members of the 

House and the ideas. What it doesn’t require is the punitive 

approach of Alberta and Ontario. They are going to pay big 

time in the future; there is no doubt about that. 

 

And I think the biggest ways in which the official opposition 

could help in this approach in this redesign would be to 

encourage their federal counterparts to look at joint funding in 

some of the initiatives. And I think that when they have a 

chance to ask their questions and to feel a better comfort level 

with the paper, I’m sure that they will do what they can to 

encourage the federal government to maintain that national role, 

that national presence, in income support programs, especially 

related to Canadians who feel the most vulnerable. 

The Leader-Post on January 12, ’96 the headline, says: Welfare 

proposals fresh and innovative. They make the point that I have 

been trying to make, that it is the most progressive approach in 

Canada and not to be . . . not discarded but ought to be 

supported and built upon. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, no family should have to rely on 

social assistance to meet their basic children’s needs in the view 

of this government. Low-income families need supports, tools, 

bridges, incentives in order to earn more money that they can 

keep. It gives them the best shot at being independent from 

social assistance. 

 

Young people need opportunities for going back to school if 

necessary, staying in school, better training programs, better 

links to employment. And the paper addresses that, as will the 

initiatives of the hon. Minister of Post-Secondary Education . . . 

some of the ideas to make those links, and we’re working very 

closely on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those in-training programs need to make sure that 

training allowances are suitable for their needs. And of course if 

this paper was implemented, I feel very confident that the 

numbers on social assistance would drop over time. People 

would feel better about themselves. They would be contributing 

as a tax base, and of course the cost of social assistance would 

drop. And the paper also talks about simplifying the program. 

This paper will prepare us for the 21st century in this area as 

well. The hon. member from Melfort was talking about the need 

to move into the 21st century on a previous Bill. I’m sure he 

would agree that this design paper, this discussion paper, moves 

us into the 21st century. 

 

So this side of the House, we accept the challenge to redesign 

the program, to rebuild it so that it meets the needs of all 

low-income people in the province. And it’s a design, Mr. 

Speaker, that will work. I’m confident that it’ll work, but we do 

need positive  we don’t need condemnation  we need 

positive suggestions from all members of the House, and that 

way Saskatchewan people, especially low-income people and 

seniors and young people, will see that there’s something here 

that works for them and that we’ve all got their best interests in 

mind. 

 

So in closing, I support the Bill and look forward to other 

members’ comments about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I should say. I want to begin by commending the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview who just has spoken. As the 

former minister of Social Services, I think he’s actually rather 

modest in his remarks about this social service reform program 

that the government has embarked on. And I say that he is 

rather modest in his remarks because he is one of the principal 

architects in the present government for this design or redesign 

of social services in our province. 

 



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

I want to begin by echoing his remarks that there needs to be 

from Saskatchewan people positive suggestions for change. It’s 

all too easy for anyone of us in our own family life or in our 

larger public life to come up with criticisms of the way things 

are. Criticism is very easy in any dimension of life. It’s much 

harder to come up with positive, concrete, tangible, workable 

suggestions that can improve the functioning of a family or a 

marriage or a program such as social services which is delivered 

by government. 

 

I think one of the principal concerns for me in Bill No. 14, as 

brief as it is . . . it’s only a page and a half long. One of my 

principal concerns is that this is the key. This legislation is the 

key to protecting some of the most vulnerable people in our 

society, and Saskatchewan has had a long and distinguished 

tradition of doing precisely that: taking care of those people 

who need to be taken care of. And as the former minister, the 

member from Eastview, has pointed out, fully half of the people 

on social services right now are people who need assistance. 

They’re people who have physical or mental or emotional 

disabilities. 

 

Now this takes us back to a long-standing principle of 

Saskatchewan people from our pioneer days, namely that we are 

our brother or our sister’s keeper. It’s a biblical principle 

basically  it comes from the scriptures  a tradition of caring 

and sharing and community and compassion that says we have a 

responsibility to one another and for one another. 

 

And so what does this social services reform agenda mean for 

me? It means that my neighbour does not have to be in need, 

and that’s important for me. I happen to be fortunate enough to 

have enough to meet my needs. But I know many people in my 

community, and I know many people in this province who don’t 

have enough to meet their needs. I know people who need 

assistance, and they get some assistance from family and 

friends. 

 

But all too often there are people who fall between the cracks 

and don’t receive the assistance they need for health and for 

food and for shelter and for services for their children. And 

that’s what this legislation is about: a key to unlock positive 

social services, to find new solutions for Saskatchewan people 

so that we can continue the tradition of being our brother or our 

sister’s keeper and so that our neighbours do not have to be in 

need. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, poverty and hunger are an enemy of all of 

us. Even if we are not poor ourselves or if we are not hungry 

ourselves, poverty and hunger are an enemy of all of us, not just 

an enemy of the poor or the hungry. Poverty and the hunger are 

enemies of all of us because they destabilize society. They 

exaggerate the differences between people in very profound 

ways and are life threatening. They rob us all of community and 

dignity and security and peace. And that’s why this government 

is committed to reforming our social services programs so that 

they are sustainable into the 21st century and that we can 

continue our tradition of being our brother and our sister’s 

keeper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Speaker, this government and this piece 

of legislation is concerned with protecting the most vulnerable 

in our society. 

 

Now the problem that we are experiencing presently in 

Saskatchewan, and indeed across Canada, is that that is 

becoming increasingly difficult for any government to do, 

especially for any provincial government. The federal 

government essentially wants to wash its hands of the expensive 

human services. Health, education, and social services are the 

three largest expenditures here in the Government of 

Saskatchewan in that order. 

 

Fully a billion dollars . . . a billion and a half dollars a year, one 

third of our provincial budget, a billion and a half dollars a year 

is spent here in the province of Saskatchewan simply to keep 

people healthy. Almost another billion dollars is spent each and 

every year in the province of Saskatchewan to ensure that 

people can have an education and a future thereby. And the 

third largest expenditure, regretfully, is interest on the public 

debt. But shortly after that is expenditure on human services for 

social services. 

 

Now the problem that we have here in Saskatchewan is that 

given the magnitude of these expenditures on human services 

 health, education, and social services  the federal 

government is making a fundamental decision in principle to 

get out of funding human services and transferring that 

responsibility to the provinces. And that means for the province 

of Saskatchewan, in cold cash terms this year, $100 million less 

for the provision of these services in our province, with $100 

million to follow, another additional $100 million to follow in 

the next calendar year. 

 

This is a big problem for the province of Saskatchewan. And 

the problem with these federal cut-backs, I dare say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, isn’t simply that it means less money for our province. 

It isn’t just the dollars that counts. 

 

For me, the fundamental problem with these federal cuts are 

what they mean for our vision of society, what kind of society 

we want to build, not just here in Saskatchewan but across our 

country, and what it means, not just in terms of dollars but in 

terms of turning our backs on those who need our help  those 

who have physical, mental, or emotional disabilities, fully half 

of those who are on social services in our province. 

 

Finally social service reform comes down to the question of 

what kind of society we want to build, what kind of people we 

want to be, whether we want to be our brother or our sisters’ 

keepers, and what kind of values we hold to, whether we are 

concerned about those who are most vulnerable in our society, 

or whether we are concerned primarily with ourselves and 

ourselves alone. 

 

A major study has been done on American society, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, recently, and it shows that American society south of 

the border is increasingly characterized by a lack of trust  a 

lack of trust not just in politicians and in governmental 

institutions, public institutions, but a profound lack of trust on 

the part of American people, a lack of trust in their neighbours,  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 402 

in their employers, in their fellow employees, in their teachers, 

and their religious leaders, even in their sports and 

entertainment figures. A fundamental lack of trust in men and 

women around them throughout American society. 

 

And no society can be stable and strong when it’s built on 

insecurity. And that’s why in this province of Saskatchewan we 

are taking steps with this legislation to build a stronger, more 

secure Saskatchewan. And that’s why this Bill 14 is amending 

the Saskatchewan Income Plan so that we can build a stronger 

and better society that better provides for the needs of those 

who are most vulnerable in our midst. 

 

Some of the key issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this amendment 

of the Saskatchewan Income Plan. First of all I’ve talked a bit 

about the demise of federal assistance in funding for human 

services, $100 million less this year, with another subsequent 

$100 million less next year. That is a key issue that needs to be 

addressed and is addressed through this legislation. 

 

Another key issue is not just the funding for human services, 

the $100 million less. There are also increasing shifts of the 

burden for training programs for example, for employment 

programs from the federal government to the provincial 

government. Changes also to unemployment insurance, which 

I’m sure people are aware of over the last five years. 

 

Unemployment insurance changes have included lower income 

benefits for people and shorter periods of time for the payment 

of benefits, which have forced more and more employable 

people to turn to social assistance for income support. And now 

there are further cuts in store for unemployment insurance this 

year. 

 

Indeed this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the first time social 

assistance expenditures in our province will exceed for the first 

time, expenditures for unemployment insurance. Imagine that. 

 

This is a profound shift, not just in terms of federal offloading, 

but in terms of the orientation of the provincial government and 

its responsibilities for the unemployed, not only for those who 

require assistance because of their physical, emotional needs. 

 

The federal government in 1993, also which should be noted, 

withdrew from providing social assistance for first nations 

people living off reserve in Saskatchewan. And this in itself in 

1993 has added $40 million to the annual budget of 

Saskatchewan Social Services. Clearly we have to make 

profound changes in the design and structuring of our Social 

Services program whether we want to or not. And this 

government is committed to making those changes. There are 

changes also in the economy and in the labour market that 

dictate that we need to change our orientation to Social 

Services. 

 

In Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s shameful that fully one in 

five children live in families with incomes below the Statistics 

Canada low income cut-off line. That means fully one in five 

children live in families in poverty in our country. And the 

number is far too high here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We simply don’t have the luxury of sitting on our hands and 

doing nothing or of wringing our hands and doing nothing. We 

need to protect the most vulnerable in our society. We need to 

reduce disincentives to work. We need to attack poverty and its 

effects on people. We need to encourage participation in the 

economy, and not just encourage it, but provide people with the 

tools and incentives to participate in the economy and in the job 

market. And we need also to simplify the administrative 

structures that have grown over the years, and this we are 

committed to doing in Bill 14 as we amend The Saskatchewan 

Income Plan Act. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say again that 

Saskatchewan has a long and proud tradition of innovation in 

social policy, a principle and a value and a commitment to 

putting people first, to being our brother or our sister’s keeper, 

and that this legislation and the amendments to the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan will continue this tradition of 

progressive legislation for people and their needs here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Many provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many 

provinces, most provinces in our country, have taken another 

approach; to punish the poor, to reduce financial benefits, to 

tighten ineligibility, to institute residency requirements. We 

here in Saskatchewan believe there is a better way, and that way 

is to redesign social assistance  not to punish people but to 

provide the help that they need. And with a redesigned system, 

no family will have to rely on social assistance for their 

children’s basic needs. 

 

Secondly, low income working people will have an incentive to 

earn as much as possible, and to keep it. Novel thought. 

 

Thirdly, youth would be involved in productive activity such as 

education or work experience so that they can have a future that 

is more than receiving a pay cheque from government, on social 

assistance. 

 

Fourthly, that all persons attending training would receive the 

same level of financial help based on family size, and that the 

administration of funding for training and these programs 

would be simplified so they could concentrate on their training 

program and not cutting through bureaucratic red tape. 

 

And fifthly, that the number of individuals and families who are 

dependent on social assistance, over a period of time would 

begin to drop in our province and the cost of social assistance 

programs would be reduced. 

 

But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, most importantly of all for 

me with this legislation, is the principle that it upholds that we 

protect the most vulnerable in our society and we provide for 

those who are most needy in our society. And that is a long and 

cherished Saskatchewan tradition that I am proud to say this 

government is upholding and carrying forth almost alone across 

the Dominion of Canada. 



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like, with those remarks, 

to move adjournment of the debate on Bill No. 14, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

believe that there are a number of issues on this particular Bill 

though, that members on this side of the House did have some 

concerns with and had tried to adjourn the Bill earlier. So I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that at this time it would be appropriate to 

adjourn this piece of legislation. 

 

I would move adjournment of debate, Mr. Speaker, on this 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The hon. member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland has adjourned debate already. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 16  An Act to 

amend The Highway Traffic Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just rise, Mr. 

Speaker, to make some general comments with respect to Bill 

No. 16, which is An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

and known by the short title, The Highway Traffic Amendment 

Act, 1996. 

 

In perusing the proposed legislation, I have come to the 

understanding that this Bill is primarily one of a housekeeping 

nature in that it sets out first, to provide for the definition of an 

agricultural implement; second, to set a policy of paying 

members of the Highway Traffic Board; and thirdly, to make 

provision for the safer operation of a vehicle transporting cargo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have no difficulty in ensuring the appropriate 

definition of an agricultural implement. What we have difficulty 

with is that the definition is to be determined by regulations. 

But that regulations, further on in the Bill, is set to be set by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, or in other words the cabinet, 

on the advice of bureaucrats. It is this area that we have some 

difficulties with. 

 

A few days ago in the legislature I spoke about the “we know 

best” approach that governments utilize in developing 

programs, and yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, legislation. I spoke 

about the desire to have less interference in our lives. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I fear that when we allow the bulk of the meat of 

proposed legislation to be done by regulation by the cabinet in 

the secrecy of the cabinet room, we allow the opportunity for 

more interference which could be counterproductive, in fact do 

harm, just like GRIP. 

 

It has been said that the devil is in the detail. And we have seen 

this on so many other occasions by this government, Mr. 

Speaker. In its first term, for instance, we came to see the 

regulations proclaimed under The Labour Standards Act. When  

cabinet gets to make the decision without the input of the 

legislature, there is created the opportunity for more and more 

control, which might not be appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we are to give appropriate consideration to 

legislation and if there are to be regulations, why are the 

regulations not tabled by the government with the legislation? It 

is high time, Mr. Speaker, that this government lay all the 

information on the Table. If we are moving to the new century, 

as we hear from the Premier and from the members opposite . . . 

and if I recall from the Premier during the election standing in 

his office, staring out the window, looking into the new century 

 if he’s really looking into the distance, then why doesn’t the 

Premier be prepared to make some changes? 

 

I just recently heard from the member opposite from Saskatoon 

Eastview about being open-minded. Mr. Member, let’s be open-

minded. Let’s put everything on the table. Let’s bring the 

regulations into the public where we can talk about them. He 

talked about moving into the 21st century. Let’s move into the 

21st century and deal with some of these regulations in the 

open. I challenge that the government lead by example and 

change the way the legislation is proposed and considered by us 

as lawmakers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again what we are seeing is the government 

throwing 100 Bills at this House with little background and the 

expectation that this House will deal with the legislation in a 

quick fashion. How long, Mr. Speaker, has the government 

considered this or any of the legislation before the House? I 

have to ask this question: is this the most effective manner to 

deal with it? The answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I 

hear the member opposite saying, no it’s not the most 

appropriate way to deal with it. 

 

And what about good governance? What the bureaucrats have 

had months to consider, we only see for a short time, and you 

expect the lawmakers to absorb and consider with very little 

time and information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So back to this Bill, back to this Bill. We will want to know a 

lot more about the issue of paying or reimbursing members of 

the Highway Traffic Board. We will want to know what the 

reimbursement process has been, what is the necessity of 

change, and why is this being addressed now. We will also 

want to know if the proposal for reimbursement is open-ended, 

or if there are caps on the number of days or meetings for which 

the board members will be paid. Many unanswered questions, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, while this Bill may seem brief in nature, 

it does raise a number of fundamental questions, and I would 

like to address a lot of these in the committee process. And I 

think we can do that, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll not hold up debate 

any further. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

believe there are some issues in this Bill that, before we get to 

Committee of the Whole, should be pointed out to the minister  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 404 

so that he can have his explanations and clarifications prepared 

before we reach Committee of the Whole. Because I do have 

some concerns with some of the wording in the Bill that needs 

to be clarified to determine whether or not the explanations 

being given in the notes and the wording of the Bill are exactly 

what the minister intended to have happen. 

 

I’m glad to see though that he’s bringing in some changes to the 

agricultural implementation regulations. I think those have been 

needed for a period of time and I was glad to see that that’s 

going to happen. 

 

But some of the areas that I do have some concerns with, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, concern the provisions for remunerations for 

board members. I would have to wonder what scale the board 

members were being paid on prior to this Bill being brought 

forward because now they’re going on to the civil service rate 

that regular employees of the province receive. And I think that 

we need to take a look at what those members were being paid 

beforehand. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, sir, the questions of exemptions on 

following . . . or obeying the traffic rules of this province. It 

says in the Bill that you have to follow all the traffic rules 

except when told to do something otherwise by a traffic control 

device. Well, Mr. Speaker, at times these traffic control devices 

fail. If you are to follow their indications, their signals, but 

which contravene The Highway Traffic Act, somebody is going 

to get themselves into trouble, Mr. Speaker, by following these 

devices when they’re not operating properly. There’s going to 

be a resulting infraction. 

 

And I think that the minister needs to clarify that when we get 

to Committee of the Whole as to what exactly he means and at 

what times. If the person driving down the road knows and 

realizes that the traffic device is not operating properly, are they 

still compelled to follow the directions of the traffic control 

device? 

 

So that’s one of the areas that needs to be clarified, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, on this issue. So I would hope that the minister, when 

he comes back to the House for Committee of the Whole, will 

have some explanations prepared for that particular concern that 

we have. 

 

And I believe that, Mr. Speaker, those are two of the concerns 

that I wanted to direct to the minister so he can be aware of it 

when he comes forward to the House later. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 23  An Act to 

amend The Archives Act be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to 

discuss The Archives Amendment Act in this Assembly on 

behalf of the Liberal caucus. Although the word archives does  

not instil the sense of a long, controversial debate, I think it is 

important to assure any changes made to the provincial 

Archives Act will adequately protect the documents of our past, 

present, and future. 

 

Archiving materials is about recording history as accurately as 

possible and the documents we preserve today will serve as a 

guide for future generations to come. Photos, letters, books, 

materials, and even the decisions we make in this House may 

someday be used to shape future decisions in this province. 

 

Some of the changes proposed are very straightforward, 

including the recommendation to increase the number of board 

members from the current five to a minimum of seven and a 

maximum of nine. All appointments are made by the Lieutenant 

Governor after he receives a nomination from each of the 

universities and two from the public service. 

 

I also understand this Bill will also change the criteria for 

honoraria. Currently, only the expenses of the members were 

paid. If this amendment is passed, members that are not 

employed by either the university or the public service will 

receive an honoraria at a rate approved by the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The amendment also deals with accountability. The changes to 

the Act would allow the board to enter into agreements for 

services such as office space, accounting, auditing, and personal 

services, inside or outside Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I have 

some deep concerns about this ability to look outside for 

services. 

 

If this government is serious about creating jobs within 

Saskatchewan and improving our economy, why does it think it 

has to look outside of our province? A case in point involved 

the Workers’ Compensation Board review recently done by an 

Ontario bean counter; this despite the fact that the Provincial 

Auditor was fully qualified to do the review himself. It seems 

ludicrous that we are farming out work to people in other 

provinces when there are so many Saskatchewan people looking 

for jobs here. 

 

(1630) 

 

Speaking of auditing, this amendment also proposes changes to 

the auditing system of the Saskatchewan Archives Board. 

Currently the board prepares and submits a financial statement 

to the minister under The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991, 

showing the business of the board for the preceding fiscal year. 

 

With this amendment, the Lieutenant Governor would appoint 

an auditor to audit the records, accounts, and financial 

statements of the board annually. As well the Lieutenant 

Governor may request an audit at any time. I approve this 

change because it makes the board more accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan. I also approve the proposed changes 

to restrictions on access. Currently the board has agreements 

with private donors placing restrictions on access that are 

binding to everyone. 

 

In the amendment, no one can have access to restricted material  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

unless they have the permission of the donor and the Provincial 

Archivist. I think this is an essential clause. I know if I was to 

donate a family document, I would want to take any steps 

necessary to ensure the documents were protected from harm. 

When people donate to the provincial archives, they do so 

because they want to make a valuable contribution for many 

years to come. 

 

Besides my concern about allowing services to go outside the 

province, I also have a concern about the two representatives 

from the public service. Currently the Provincial Archivist is 

secretary. What I want to know is who would the other one be 

and what would be his or her expert experience? As long as 

these concerns and any others that arise in the next while are 

addressed, I would approve The Archives Amendment Act be 

passed on to the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 27  An Act 

respecting Architects be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Act respecting 

Architects is once again an Act that differentiates and 

distinguishes some very necessary definitions of the role of 

architects. There is some question within this profession about 

the commonality between architects and engineers. And 

although some of these issues may be discussed in the 

Committee of the Whole, I’d just like to make some comments 

with respect to this particular Act. 

 

The self-governing body of the architect association is 

somewhat similar to what the legal profession has in place. And 

again it seems that each profession needs a regulatory body to 

make sure that there is discipline, conduct, and once again, 

responsibility and deterrence against performing actions that are 

not acceptable or are against the law. 

 

This legislation, and I will suggest that it clearly spells out 

procedures that the association must now follow in 

investigating conduct of its members. And again it’s 

unfortunate that in this day and age we seem to need more and 

more regulations and rules governing people in a profession 

that should be able to govern themselves and we should not 

need to threaten them with punishment or penalties in the event 

they do not perform their duties in a responsible fashion. 

 

This legislation establishes a professional conduct committee 

which will in fact be appointed by the council. The discipline 

committee is in place to decide punishment for members found 

to be in misconduct by the conduct committee, and this again 

lends itself to ensuring that there is no professional 

incompetence and/or professional misconduct. 

 

The new Act much more precisely sets out when and why this  

association passes its by-laws in order to govern its members. 

The definition of the term architecture has been changed in this 

new Act and the terms architect and registered architect have 

been removed. All now are referred to as member in this new 

Act. 

 

One again the concerns that have been brought to our attention, 

Mr. Speaker, is that in fact graduates of engineering schools in 

Saskatchewan have been receiving the architects’ designation 

for years because there is no school of architecture here. And 

those are some of the concerns that we will be prepared to 

address in Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 8  An Act 

to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just looking 

quickly at the Bill, I’m still not sure if this in fact is where the 

business people of this province want to be heading  in a 

direction in fact where the government is still in a position to 

borrow extreme amounts of money, I guess to try and inject 

themselves into Saskatchewan business. 

 

And the concern I have, Mr. Speaker, comes back to when the 

government opposite, being the ones to first bring in the 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) 

industrial parks . . . And you know, when you drive around 

Saskatchewan and you go into some of the communities such as 

Shaunavon where in fact there was an industrial park set up 

under . . . I think the sign is still there, Mr. Speaker, a great big 

SEDCO sign. And in all the years that I’ve lived in Shaunavon, 

that park has been there, holding up a lot of land I guess that 

used to be agriculture land. Now all I see is lots that are empty. 

I think there is one building out in that huge industrial park. 

 

So I’m not sure if in fact this is where the government wants to 

go, is to keep spending hundreds of millions of dollars, because 

that’s what I see in the Bill itself, Mr. Speaker. The ability to 

borrow or spend hundreds of millions of dollars — if that in 

fact is what the people of this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well it’s right in the Bill. 

 

I notice that the members across would like to heckle about it, 

but it’s in the Bill. It states a hundred million dollar figure. In 

fact this figure used to . . . my knowledge of it, they had the 

ability to have 100 million, and now we’re talking about an 

additional 100 million for investments and the first 100 million 

to promote industrial parks. Of course we’re going to have a lot 

more concern about this, and we’ll be dealing with it in 

committee. 

 

But if you really take a look at these SEDCO parks sitting there 

empty, I would have hoped that the government of the day, 

when they brought in the SEDCO parks, would have learned a  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 406 

lesson. It appears not. 

 

Now the concern, I think, would be not so much on the parks 

side for me as on the dollar side. This is a government that has 

the ability, Mr. Speaker, to go and borrow hundreds of millions 

of dollars to do what they think is probably best, at least from 

their perspective, best for business or best for the communities 

in Saskatchewan. But you know if you were to ask the people, 

Mr. Speaker . . . We’ll use the town of Shaunavon because 

familiar with it. And I know you won’t ask the people in 

Shaunavon. But, Mr. Speaker, if you did, I think what you 

would find is that they would say well, you know that SEDCO 

sign, it’s about time we tore it down. We just don’t see the need 

for it any longer. 

 

The government, because of their high taxation policies, their 

labour policies, the policies that they have regarding Crown 

tendering, you know, the fact that the PST (provincial sales tax) 

is killing jobs and killing businesses all along the south and the 

side of this province, Mr. Speaker, unless they can actually 

stand up and give me a few names of businesses that are 

moving out in that SEDCO industrial park, I have concerns 

about them throwing more money into more parks. Because if 

you were to ask, as I said before, what’s needed in a place like 

Shaunavon, why don’t you use a few million dollars and take 

care of the sick and the elderly? 

 

You know we’ve got a nursing home in the community of 

Shaunavon that in fact I don’t know if it’s condemned, but it’s 

very close. It’s I think the only nursing home in Saskatchewan 

where you still have four beds to one room. That’s what the 

people are living out there. I don’t see anybody needing an 

industrial park; what they need is a nursing home. 

 

And the day that the Premier there can stand up and say, you 

know, we’re going to reprioritize what we’re doing as a 

government, and in fact the people want nursing homes, then 

they should have nursing homes . . . if they don’t want SEDCO 

parks or SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) or 

whatever they want to call themselves today, then they 

shouldn’t have. 

 

Put the question to the people. You know, raise these kind of 

issues before you go into election, Mr. Premier. Don’t bring the 

bills out later and give the people no ability to influence what 

you’re doing. 

 

The first hundred million of course went into  what was it, 

Innovation Place? Well I don’t know . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . investments . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Where? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  In Saskatoon. I mean I don’t think this is 

question period but I sure don’t mind entertaining some 

questions if you want to put them up. But you have to ask better 

questions than what you’re throwing at me right now. 

 

Okay, Saskatoon where both of you are from  you’re both 

from Saskatoon. Okay, well there’s a hundred million dollars 

that we’re talking. And the first amounts of money are going  

into Innovation Place in Saskatoon. 

 

Well do you know how many people . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Pardon me? Listen, I’ll tell you what’s needed in Saskatoon 

because you’re obviously not in touch with the people out in 

your own riding. Do you know how many calls I get from 

people who are not sure if they’re going to have a place for 

their mother and father in their senior years to live? It still 

comes down to governments having priorities. 

 

If your priority is to forget the sick and the elderly and 

somehow let on you’re the driving force behind biotechnology 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m sorry but that’s just not 

on. People aren’t buying that at all. You may sit there and think 

it’s real funny that in fact you’ve got an Economic 

Development minister that will throw Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 

hard-earned tax dollars into Ontario companies to invest in 

Cuba or whatever he’s going to . . . he made a trip to Nicaragua. 

I expect that we’ll see an announcement soon where we’re 

doing something there also. 

 

I don’t know; we’ve got to get that guy to stay home for once 

and quit skiing around the world because he’s just costing us 

money. And yet I still see senior people, senior people, Mr. 

Speaker, that don’t have places to live. 

 

I don’t want us to get back to the day, I don’t want us, Mr. 

Speaker, to get back to the day when in fact people are going to 

be housed, you know . . . build a small room off the side of the 

furnace room and rent it out to a senior. If this is where you’re 

going, and obviously it is . . . And the member from Moose 

Jaw, the minister from Moose Jaw  I’ll clarify that  I mean 

this is where your Bills and where your direction was going a 

year ago. 

 

If you’ve got a hundred million dollars, don’t go out and tell the 

people in health care fields that we can’t afford, we can’t afford 

to have a hospital in Coronach or Climax or Mankota, but you 

have a hundred million dollars to make an investment and have 

there sitting with empty SEDCO parks . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well you guys did build those . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well sure. Well talk to the member from 

Elphinstone. That’s where it’s from. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now we seem to have diverted 

from the agenda item here on both sides of the House. And I 

want to remind all members it’s appropriate to direct debate 

through the Speaker. It’s also protocol to allow the member to 

make his points and to address the item before us. I’m sure all 

members will want to cooperate to ensure this continues in an 

orderly kind of way. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know how 

difficult they can be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be honest with you. The only reason I was 

entertaining questions is because, you know, they will at least 

answer a few of those because they don’t in question period. 

And yes, I’ll move along. 



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

But, you know, the member from Elphinstone, the Minister of 

Economic Development, if you want to ask about who brought 

the SEDCO park to Shaunavon . . . Well in fact I think he’s 

raising his hand now. 

 

There, I think, Mr. Speaker, is where the problem is. It’s 

because if we’ve got this kind of money, if in fact the 

government can even access this kind of money . . . You recall, 

as I do, it was only a few years ago when the Premier was going 

around the province saying, you know, we are on the verge of 

bankruptcy; I think that this province may go down. I remember 

hearing him say that a lot. 

 

Now all of a sudden we’ve got a couple hundred million dollars 

to build more SEDCO, SOCO, whatever they want to call them, 

parks. I’m saying, really what you want to do, what you want to 

do is just do what people want of government  that is to take 

care of their sick, their elderly, the roads. Do some of the very 

basic things . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 

from Rosetown keeps wanting to heckle here. And he is a good 

point to what I’m trying to get at here, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a 

guy that wanted to gravel highways  90 miles of highways in 

my constituency  and of course I took offence to that. 

 

Do the basic things. We’re not saying do them well, but just 

start them and we’ll fix them up later  next term. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amendments to 

The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act before the 

Assembly at this time is building on two premisses. The first 

one being that this relatively new Crown corporation is a 

valuable use of taxpayers’ dollars in the first place, and more 

value could be added by freeing up more money because none 

of the original $100 million would then have to be used for 

capitalization. 

 

The second premiss is that it takes government involvement to 

encourage research and development in this province. I do not 

agree. Firstly, let me point out that the Act gives the minister 

retroactive approval to spend taxpayers’ funding on Innovation 

Place, sort of an, oops, I better fix up the paperwork problem 

since I’ve already bought it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed provide SOCO with 

$100 million to be involved in the business of carrying on 

business or proposing to conduct business in this province. 

 

The minister told this Assembly that SOCO was one of the 

ways the government could work with private sectors to make 

the dreams in the Partnership For Growth proposal come true. 

 

Far be it from me, Mr. Speaker, to rain on the minister’s parade, 

but SOCO is not a shining star in this government’s helmet. 

SOCO has been in operation since mid-1994 and from the latest 

figures I’ve been able to attain, there’s been over 1,100 

inquiries to the corporation. 

 

That sounds great. But the number of applications approved as  

of December 1995 was only 11  11 out of 1,100 inquiries. At 

least one of them was an Ontario firm. 

 

Now that must mean, Mr. Speaker, that either a lot of 

Saskatchewan companies are viewed as being very bad business 

risks by this government, which is understandable with the 

maze of overwhelming regulations that this government has 

provided. Maybe they’re asking for not enough money. 

 

Or maybe the dozens of Saskatchewan companies who applied 

just can’t provide a good enough business plan. The minister 

bragged that 29 staff accomplished all this work  11 

applications approved with a mere $2 million budget. 

 

Using the minister’s figures, that means it cost $3 million of 

taxpayers’ dollars, over 18 months to lend out $11.4 million to 

11 firms. That’s $3 million of taxpayers’ dollars in 18 months. 

 

In the minister’s own words, this $11.4 million created 266 full 

and part-time jobs. Take one step further, that means that the 

minister was willing to risk Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars to 

the tune of $44,000 a job. I think the bragging should end, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to do a comparison. Just last week, we received 

notification of the activities of PARD (Partnership Agreement 

on Rural Development), the joint federal-provincial partnership 

agreement for the assistance to rural projects in Saskatchewan. I 

know all of the members present got a copy of that. There were 

239 projects approved with funding totalling $5.3 million. 

These were firms that were receiving funding in rural 

Saskatchewan. That money was used to start individual 

ventures, undertake applied research and development, increase 

product lines and start new businesses. All of these members 

received a list, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure many of the members 

across know of people who received support for their 

initiatives. 

 

If each one of these projects resulted in only one job, Mr. 

Speaker  and I know lots of these projects personally, hey 

created more than one job  it would mean that the cost was 

around $20,000 a job. That’s less than half of the cost of the 

SOCO jobs. 

 

The Minister for Economic Development, as well as the 

Minister for Sask Water, applauded the program with 

statements like, and I quote: 

 

Without this assistance, many of these new ventures or 

expansions to existing businesses would remain merely 

dreams. 

 

I know that funding from SOCO is not a grant; I also know the 

determination required by people to get funding from SOCO, 

and I salute their perseverance. There’s a lot of red tape 

involved. 

 

SOCO’s history has not been long enough to give it a track 

record, and as the minister so eloquently pointed out the other 

day in question period when he was speaking about the growth  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1996 408 

fund, there cannot be success on every investment. Does that 

mean some of these 11 projects could be in jeopardy and 

risking some more of our taxpayers’ dollars? This government 

still seems to believe that they have to put more eggs in bigger 

baskets and that’s the answer to all the questions. SOCO is an 

example of very few applicants being approved and big dollars 

per investment. 

 

Mr. Minister said and I quote: 

 

If we’re going to spend money, we’ll spend it on small 

entrepreneurs, small companies, small businesses, and 

that’s where you’re going to get your lion’s share of the 

jobs today and in the future. 

 

This government just can’t seem to keep a focus. 

 

Discussions I had with the minister myself involving the 

small-business loans in communities led me to believe that his 

government was determined to work with small businesses and 

programs like this one where the majority of jobs are created. 

Statistics do show that over 75 per cent of jobs that are created 

in Saskatchewan are in businesses with less than five 

employees. Why does this government have the grim 

determination to look only at big businesses? If there are so few 

great ventures in this province, as it is obvious from SOCO’s 

record, then why doesn’t the government save the taxpayers 

money and leave the business of lending money just to banks? 

 

The second part of the grandiose scheme for SOCO is to 

provide a further $100 million for developing and operations of 

research and development parks. As a manufacturer, I know the 

importance of applied research and development to industry, 

and I applaud companies that undertake this work. 

 

Canada has the dubious distinction of spending 1.3 per cent of 

its GDP (gross domestic product) on research and development. 

This is less than one-half of what other industrialized nations 

spend. The cost of doing nothing is not nothing; it leads to 

stagnation. 

 

The biotech industries that call Innovation Place home have 

established a name worldwide for their research, specifically in 

the field of agricultural biotechnology. They are on the leading 

edge of change, in fact change for the better, as we head into 

the next millennium, and they are delighted with their home in 

Innovation Place in Saskatoon. 

 

There are two types of research and development. The first, that 

being pure research of science, and it is usually not undertaken 

by private firms. The second type, applied R&D (research and 

development), is usually undertaken by businesses when 

research and development is required to apply new technology 

for economic gain. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is how much of these costs should 

be borne by the average taxpayer? Shouldn’t these costs be paid 

for by the businesses themselves if it is going to create 

economic development for them? 

 

Pure scientific research is usually undertaken in a lab in a  

university or labs designed specifically for research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the minister’s plan? Is it to undertake 

research and then sell it to private companies? If the private 

companies are doing the work, would it not make more sense 

that if the economic environment was correct for business in 

this province, and given the world-class reputation of our 

universities, that these companies would locate in 

Saskatchewan anyway? If the business environment was 

correct; if they didn’t have to work through yards of red tape 

and have to work with PST and the labour standards and all the 

problems that are facing businesses in this province, they would 

come anyway. We don’t have to throw money to them. 

 

Maybe this government cannot imagine a firm locating here 

without a bribe, and they’re probably right. With the 

unfavourable atmosphere for business in this province, they 

usually do need to extend a carrot to business. 

 

The applied research and development undertaken by hundreds 

of manufacturing firms in this province is equally important to 

the economy of this province. It’s just as important as the 

research that’s carried on in Innovation Place. The Schulte 

Industries, the Del-Airs, and the Bourgaults of this province 

carry out R&D  that’s research and development  as part of 

their operations to remain viable in their own specific 

marketplace. It requires constant upgrading of technology to be 

leaders in a global market. And manufacturing firms that realize 

that in order to stay financially viable nowadays, they have to 

conclude export marketing as part of their plans. 

 

The research and development carried out by firms inside their 

own businesses or contracted out, is outside of Innovation 

Place. This research is very essential to the growth of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the establishment of a research and 

development park in Saskatoon, and perhaps one in Regina, just 

another example of the government choosing which segments 

of business they should be helping? Is it not just a very 

short-sighted viewpoint of government, again picking which 

company they decide they should help? Which company is the 

winner of government favours today? Another teacher’s pet. 

Government research and development parks are just that  a 

gathering of a few who have found favour. 

 

When I was reading the proposed Act, in one point talked about 

research and industrial parks and in other places they said, park. 

I heard the word Regina come up very often and. I assure you, 

like my colleague mentioned, there are SEDCO graveyards all 

over this province. We don’t need them. We need to have actual 

research and development carried on in this province to create 

jobs. 

 

There’s nothing wrong with these companies that are actually in 

Innovation Place, but what about the thousands of people who 

are not able to pick up their businesses and move to these parks. 

The information exchange in the biotech industries at 

Innovation Place is greatly increased by being in close 

proximity with others sharing similar problems. But the biotech 

industry should not be duplicated in Regina or wherever else  



March 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

this government chooses as a site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government is going to encourage different 

types of research and development in different locations, the 

people of this province are not privy to that information yet. 

What are we talking about when we talk about information, 

about research and development? Is it going to be information 

parks? Is it going to be transportation parks? What kind of 

research and development is the government actually talking 

about? 

 

Maybe the minister is considering an agricultural park in 

Humboldt beside PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute). That would make sense if you decided you were 

going to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is, why is the government deciding? 

That’s not their job. The people of Saskatchewan have to decide 

where they want to have their businesses. When will the 

government leave these questions to the people with the spirit 

and the ability to really make the difference. Let industry 

decide. Let industry create . . . The government has to create the 

environment with our taxpayers’ dollars that would let all kinds 

of businesses expand their technology. 

 

This government talks about choices, Mr. Speaker, and there are 

lots of choices and they have to decide how to spend our very 

hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars. We’re talking about $200 

million. This is the same amount of money that we could keep 

hospitals open with. We wouldn’t have to change our schooling 

system. We wouldn’t have to increase power rates. We 

wouldn’t have to do lots of things. 

 

The minister could consider spending this $200 million on tax 

incentives partnering with the federal research and development 

grant. That would give businesses a percentage of their 

completed research back in forms of tax credits. And you just 

ask, Mr. Speaker  there are a lot of companies that rely on the 

federal tax dollars back to allow them to have more research 

done in following years. It could even be monitored by the 

province’s very prestigious and very well recognized Research 

Council in Saskatoon. 

 

I do believe that governments do have a role in research and 

development. They have a role in encouraging businesses and 

industry to locate in this province. Then these industries do not 

have to be spoon fed. Isn’t it the job of government, especially 

a socialist government, not to have to pick and choose 

favourites? Isn’t everyone an equal? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act needs a lot of careful 

consideration especially by the government who is caught up in 

the excitement of dealing with a few companies in specialized, 

exciting areas. The mundane job . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order, order. The Speaker 

has risen on an order of the day and in order to proceed there 

would have to be leave to stop the clock. Is there leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................377 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................378 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................378 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................378 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................378 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................378 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................378 

  Teichrob .............................................................................................................................................................................378, 380 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................379 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................379 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................380 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................380 

  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................380 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan 

  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................380 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................381 

 Sister Eliza of Mary 

  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................381 

 St. Joseph’s School Grand Opening 

  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................381 

 Education Week Tribute to NORTEP and SIFC 

  Goulet .........................................................................................................................................................................................381 

 Rural Service Branches 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................382 

 National Newspaper Awards 

  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................382 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Health Administration 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................382 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................382 

 Service Districts Act 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................384 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................384 

 New Democratic Party Fund-raiser 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................385 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................385 

 Providence Place Geriatric Unit 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................385 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................385 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................387 

 Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................387 

 Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................387 

 Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................387 



 

 Bill No. 40 - An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................387 

 Bill No. 41  An Act to amend The Mental Health Services Act 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................387 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Written Question 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................388 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................388 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact consequential amendments 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................388 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................389 

 Bill No. 28  An Act to provide for the Establishment, Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................389 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................390 

 Bill No. 29  An Act to enable Co-operation among all Types of Autonomous Libraries for the Provision of Library 

Services 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................390 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................390 

 Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................391 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................391 

 Bill No. 33  An Act respecting Service Districts and to make consequential amendments to certain other Acts 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................391 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................392 

 Bill No. 34  An Act to amend The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................393 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................393 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................394 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................395 

  Pringle ........................................................................................................................................................................................395 

  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................400 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................403 

 Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................403 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................403 

 Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................404 

 Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................405 

 Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................405 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................407 

 

 


