
















































May 10, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1509 

 May 10, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 

of concerned citizens with respect to the closure of the Plains 

Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on the petition are primarily from the city of Regina 

and smaller communities in the area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The communities these people represent are Maple Creek, Fox 

Valley, Weyburn, and numerous other southern Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of concerned citizens from throughout the 

province. They are concerned about the closure of the . . . the 

impending closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Balcarres, Weyburn, Viceroy, Regina, Wadena, Chamberlain, 

and throughout the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 

residents regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Weyburn, Kyle, Yorkton, Norquay, Canora, and many from 

here within the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout  

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Oxbow, 

Alameda, Carnduff, Carievale, all over southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition of concerned citizens from southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

The petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by many concerned citizens 

of Lumsden, Fort Qu’Appelle, Gravelbourg, Creelman, 

Southey, Whitewood, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names regarding the Plains Health Centre, and the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

White City, Pilot Butte, and the balance of them are from the 

city of Regina. I notice a number on Shannon Road, Mitchener 

Drive, Mayfield Road, in south Regina. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today to present petitions on behalf of the people all 

throughout Saskatchewan to try and save the Plains Health 

Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it looks like most of these people are from the 

Regina area and Yorkton area. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

cause the government to take action to allow an increase in 

security deposits on rental properties. 



1510  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower: (1) how much 

is SaskPower paying per month to lease the new Toyota 

Avalon being driven by SaskPower president Jack Messer; 

(2) does Mr. Messer have an option to purchase this car at 

the end of the lease, and if so, what are the terms of this 

purchase option; (3) how much is SaskPower paying a 

month to lease the new Toyota Camry being driven by 

Carole Bryant; (4) does Ms. Bryant have an option to 

purchase this car at the end of the lease, and if so, what are 

the terms of this purchase option? 

 

I respectfully submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on day no. 54 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation with regards to leased vehicles: (1) will you 

please supply a detailed list regarding leases of vehicles for 

Crown corporation presidents and vice-presidents and 

government agencies; (2) what is the length of the lease for 

each vehicle; (3) how many of these leases are paid for by 

Crown corporations; (4) what is the average cost of the 

vehicles leased; (5) how much is spent annually on the 

lease of vehicles for government officials? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 

Enable the Recovery of Funds Stolen by Members of the 

Legislative Assembly; the short title, The House Internal 

Economy Fraud Act, or THIEF Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. Members will 

come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really am very, very 

pleased this morning to introduce to you and through you to my 

colleagues in the legislature, probably one of the largest groups 

that it’s ever been my pleasure to introduce. We have with us 

today 160  160  school safety patrol members. These 160 

students are here as part of the Canadian Automobile 

Association Sixth Annual Provincial School Safety Patrol 

Jamboree. And they are seated not only in the west gallery but 

also in the east gallery. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are all very familiar with these young 

people as they stand outside their schools at their crosswalks in 

all weather, ensuring that our children cross streets safely. In 

fact many of us likely were school patrollers when we were 

young; I know that I was. 

 

So in some small way today I think we can say thank you to  

them for being part of the school safety patrols, and I will ask 

you to join me in extending to all of them a very warm 

welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my pleasure to introduce to you and to all the members of this 

House, four ladies seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. These 

ladies are from the Saskatchewan and Regina chapters of 

FRIENDS Incorporated. That acronym, Mr. Speaker, stands for 

Fibromyalgia Research Information Education and New 

Directions Inc. 

 

The ladies that I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 

are Anne Herley, who is the president of the Regina 

fibromyalgia group  Anne, would you stand, please  Donna 

Gordon, vice-president of the Saskatchewan chapter; Yvonne 

Makie, who is the founder and Chair of FRIENDS; and Noreen 

Northcott, who is the co-founder and Co-Chair of FRIENDS. 

Please make welcome the four ladies of FRIENDS. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

House, a lady seated in the west gallery, a friend of mine from 

the Eston area, Mrs. Heather Piett. Heather is a school teacher 

in the Eston School. 

 

From time to time I have the pleasure of doing business with 

her husband, Jack Piett, who is a representative for Investors 

Group. And I would ask all members to welcome her here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly a 

long-time friend and associate of mine sitting behind the bar 

here, a former cabinet minister, a distinguished educator; now 

he has a retired life and is enjoying life to the fullest. I’d like 

you all to welcome John Penner. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Preeceville Fire 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like the people of Preeceville to know my thoughts are 

with them in the aftermath of a devastating fire that totally 

destroyed four downtown businesses early Thursday morning. 

 

This is an extremely trying time for owners of Sportrends, 

Golden Leaf Café, Misty Moments Florals, and Downs Garage. 

Preeceville’s mayor, Gary Sawatzky, says, and I quote: 

 

Any time a circumstance like this hits a community it hurts 

very deeply. Preeceville has a strong business sector, but to  



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

lose four stores is devastating for any community. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

Given the level of provincial offloading, here’s a portion 

of the tax base that’s suddenly gone, and if these owners 

are unable to rebuild, that’s a few more jobs gone too. 

 

I would like to commend the caring spirit demonstrated by 

people in Preeceville’s neighbouring communities, whose fire 

departments also helped battle the blaze. I wish the owners of 

the destroyed businesses all the best as they wrestle with the 

option to rebuild. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Youth Celebrate 100th Anniversary of Red Cross 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again I’m pleased to bring attention to a unique event held by 

dedicated people in my constituency. 

 

May 8 was World Red Cross Day. On that day in Weyburn, I 

attended the only Red Cross 100th Canadian anniversary 

celebration to be held in Saskatchewan. This celebration was all 

the more significant to me because it was initiated and 

organized by youth at the Weyburn Junior High School. The 

celebration was the culmination of many months of work. The 

Weyburn Red Cross youth have about 25 members under the 

guidance of their teacher, Judy Buzowetsky. They have been 

working extremely hard for the benefit of others. Part of the 

celebration consisted of the Weyburn youth presenting $1,000 

to the provincial Red Cross, money that this amazing group of 

kids raised themselves. 

 

But the money is not all. These young people have also put 

together 30 health care kits for overseas. They made lap robes 

for seniors and sent greeting cards to the elderly. They have 

made and contributed stuffed animals to needy children and 

held many cinnamon bun sales. They help at blood donor 

clinics, and some volunteer as candystripers. And the list goes 

on. Other volunteers from Weyburn and other communities in 

the area were also honoured for their many contributions to the 

many and various Red Cross programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am truly proud of the Weyburn Red Cross youth 

for making the effort to honour and recognize the incredible 

contribution that the Red Cross has made to our world, our 

country, and our province. They have followed the tradition of 

the Red Cross; where there is need, they’ve helped. I am proud 

of how dedicated these young people are in serving others. 

What fine examples they are for all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mother’s Day 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday, mothers 

across Saskatchewan will receive some much deserved 

recognition. We all know what an extremely important role 

mothers play in today’s society, especially under all the  

increasing pressures and demands. They provide invaluable 

guidance, nurturing, leadership, and love. Unfortunately many 

mothers are often taken for granted, but their love and support 

should never be forgotten. 

 

So on behalf of my colleagues, I would like to salute all 

mothers and grandmothers across Saskatchewan. You deserve 

this special day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As our colleague 

has noted, Sunday is Mother’s Day, and although we have the 

pressures of business in this Assembly and a busy day ahead of 

us, it is only right and proper, I believe, that we take a moment 

to honour our mothers. After all, politicians, too, have mothers 

and they are quite willing to stand by us in bad times and with 

us in the good. 

 

One day is not enough of course, but we do need to formally 

pay attention to our mothers, or where necessary, treasure their 

memories. The time-tested ways of recognizing our mothers, I 

suppose, are the best. And I know those of us who can will 

provide the traditional meal, card, visit, phone call, gift, or 

whatever combination is appropriate. 

 

But as well, Mr. Speaker, Mother’s Day, even with all its 

commercial pomp, gives us the opportunity to reflect somewhat 

beyond the merely sentimental. The term “mother” after all 

reminds us of selflessness, of love freely given whether it’s 

deserved or not; of tolerance for imperfection  qualities we 

could all have a bit more of regardless of our gender, our age, 

or our parental status. 

 

So on this day, as on all days, I thank my mother for giving me 

so many gifts, not the least of which is the gift of life, and I’m 

happy to honour her and to honour all mothers. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia Awareness Day 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

Sunday, May 12, is also a very special day for a large group of 

people across Canada. People from across the country will 

recognize thousands of Canadians who suffer from chronic 

fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, these diseases are often 

misunderstood and misdiagnosed, but they can seriously 

debilitate people, often making it difficult to pursue normal 

lives. One British publication described chronic fatigue 

syndrome by saying: 

 

Imagine you had a severe, constant hangover plus daily 

influenza, muscle pain, and exhaustion as though you had 

run a marathon and could not think or comprehend 

anything for weeks, months, or even years. 

 

Symptoms of fibromyalgia include headaches, fatigue, sleep  



1512  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

disturbances, and amplified pain in the muscles and tendons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Beryl Gaffney, the Member of Parliament for 

Nepean, has collected over 15,000 signatures of petitions from 

every province. These petitions call on the federal government 

to recognize CFS (chronic fatigue syndrome) and fibromyalgia 

as official diseases, to set identification guidelines; and to 

ensure care, treatment, comfort, and dignity. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly today to become active in 

creating awareness among the public, doctors, and educators, 

about these two illnesses affecting many thousands of people in 

Canada. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Health Day and Registered Psychiatric Nurses’ Day 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to recognize Canada Health Day, which is on Sunday, May 12, 

and also Registered Psychiatric Nurses’ Day, which is today. I 

think that good health is the greatest form of wealth. Perhaps 

that’s why people in Saskatchewan value their health care 

system as much as they do, and Saskatchewan’s people are the 

healthiest people in the world. 

 

This year’s theme, “A New Perspective On Health”, highlights 

the view that health encompasses many factors such as where 

we live and how we live and the quality of health care. Our 

wellness approach fits into this theme well with this emphasis 

on illness prevention, education, and quality health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, psychiatric nurses play a very important role in 

health care. Their motto is, “Seeing People Through”. And they 

can be found in hospitals, clinics, schools, and many other 

facilities, teaching people about mental illness, how to prevent 

it, and how to recognize it and where to go for help. The 

registered psychiatric nurses association is working to promote 

a greater awareness and better understanding of mental health 

issues. But they are also seeing people through when they need 

help. 

 

I would like to thank the association and their members and 

their tremendous contribution to health and wellness in 

communities throughout this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Globe Theatre Fund-raiser 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, as some clown Shakespeare 

once said, “The play’s the thing.” Well for His Hon. the 

Lieutenant Governor, Mrs. Wiebe, for the member for 

Regina-Qu’Appelle Valley, for the mayor of Regina and some 

city councillors and for myself and for about 25 other Regina 

fugitives from modesty, the play this weekend is certainly the 

thing. 

 

I’m speaking of course of the Globe Theatre’s third celebrity 

fund-raising production to be performed at the Globe tonight 

and tomorrow night, 8 p.m. both nights, with a reception to  

follow, and all proceeds going to the Globe Theatre. 

 

I use the word celebrity, Mr. Speaker, very loosely. This happy 

band of Thespians will be performing a play called “The Dining 

Room” by A. R. Gurney, a play which uses the setting of one 

dining-room for a series of quick scenes which depict the 

unfolding breadth and depth of life during much of this century. 

 

The play by turns is witty, sad, moving, and yes, even political 

at times. It presents a rich tapestry of humanity. I urge all who 

can, both within and without the legislature, to attend. Your 

support will help the Globe plan for its new season and you 

will, I believe, find it to be a very well . . . an evening very 

pleasantly spent. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Indian Head Farmer Elected President of the Soil 

Conservation Council of Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 

like to congratulate Gerry Willerth, an Indian Head area farmer 

who was recently elected president of the Soil Conservation 

Council of Canada, a significant event in that it marks, for the 

first time, a farmer has been elected to this position. 

 

The Soil Conservation Council of Canada is the national 

coordinating body for soil and water conservation efforts. It 

functions as a liaison between farmers and government in the 

area of land resource policy, development, and programing. 

Gerry has been an active member in the SCC (Soil 

Conservation Council of Canada) since 1992 when he was 

appointed Saskatchewan’s representative, and has served as 

vice-president. 

 

An ardent supporter of soil conservation efforts, Gerry has 

practised soil conservation on his farm for 20 years. Early in his 

farming career he recognized where soil degradation was taking 

place and took measures to correct and prevent the damage. He 

seeded natural water runs in his fields to grass, planted many 

miles of maintained shelter belts, and has adopted direct 

seeding techniques on all his cropped acres. 

 

Gerry has become active in the soil conservation movement and 

was a founding member of the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 

Association, serving as a board member and as president. 

 

It is good to see Gerry take his talents to the national level. This 

shows that farmers are taking a lead role in the development of 

soil conservation policies and programs that ultimately will 

protect this vital resource for the benefit of us all. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Recovery of Government Funds 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think  



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

every member of this House will agree that the most 

disappointing part about being elected to the Legislative 

Assembly is the public cynicism that greets us daily, cynicism 

bred by the dishonest and unethical Conservative administration 

of the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the court has dealt with several of the cases 

involving Tory misuse of taxpayers’ dollars. Unfortunately, as 

we’ve seen, the jail sentences imposed in this matter, like too 

many others in our province, are not carried out, and there’s 

still the matter of money. I want to ask the Premier once again 

today if his government is looking into ways of recovering at 

least some of the nearly $1 million on behalf of the taxpayers, 

so it can be put towards the many under-funded services in our 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I would like to respond to the member’s question. As you will 

know, the Board of Internal Economy is responsible for the 

expenditure of caucus funds, and I think that it would be fair to 

say that all of us were very much disappointed with respect to 

the past administration and how the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus handled public funds. 

 

What I would say to the member is that I would urge him to put 

a request in writing to the Board of Internal Economy with 

respect to this initiative. I think that if there is an opportunity to 

recover public funds, that it would be best dealt with by the 

Board of Internal Economy. You have a member, sir, as Leader 

of the Opposition, on that board, as do members of government 

and as do members of the third party, who may, as well, be 

interested in recovering these funds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

response and as an ex-member of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police), I can only imagine the thousands of dollars 

that has been spent on the investigation and subsequent trials in 

this sorry affair. This is money that obviously could have been 

spent elsewhere. 

 

I realize the major players in this conspiracy may not be in the 

position to pay back the hundreds of thousands of dollars stolen 

from the taxpayers. That’s why we are introducing The THIEF 

Act which will hold parties responsible for their members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a personal vendetta against any 

individual. It’s a matter of ensuring that we uphold justice; that 

it is served, not only perceived to have been served. There’s a 

cliché that says, we hate the sin but we love the sinner, Mr. 

Speaker. I ask the Premier if his government will support this 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, specifically with 

respect to the Act, I think that members of the government side 

would want to have a look at the content of the legislation. I 

would want to say to the member that it may be appropriate to 

put your request for action on this matter in writing to the  

Board of Internal Economy. And through the board we can pass 

on these concerns that all of us have to the Speaker of the 

Legislative Assembly. And I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that it may be supported as well by the members of the third 

party who also have representatives on that board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Economic Development 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The annual meeting 

of the chamber of commerce in North Battleford this week left 

members feeling very frustrated with the government’s lack of 

commitment to business. 

 

Albert Lowe, president of North Battleford’s Chamber of 

Commerce, asked, and I quote: 

 

When is this government going to stop playing politics 

with the issues we have in economic development and start 

dealing with the problems? 

 

Many of the problems that have been created by the 

government, such as workers’ compensation fiascos and the 

Crown tendering policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier said yesterday that members of the 

Assembly have a right to their own opinion on issues such as 

boycotting small-business retailers. Mr. Speaker, can the 

Premier tell me when his government will start actually 

listening to the concerns of business and make economic 

development a priority? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

obviously wasn’t at the chamber meeting in North Battleford, as 

my colleague the Minister of Labour and the Minister of 

Environment and the minister of continuing education was, 

because the meeting was very positive and upbeat. 

 

And I can guarantee you that the working relationship between 

the government and the business community is in fact very, 

very positive. Unlike, I might say, the relationship between 

business and the official opposition, given the fact that Crown 

Life has publicly commented on the negative aspect of the 

questions that the members opposite continually raise. 

 

I just urge you, Madam Member, to get on the agenda; be more 

positive. And if you would have been at the chamber meeting in 

North Battleford, you would have found a very, very 

cooperative spirit existed at the meeting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Crown 

Life isn’t the only business in Saskatchewan. The chamber of 

commerce represents a huge percentage of businesses in this 

province. The chamber association is asking the government to 

scrap the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement). 

 



1514  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

We are asking the government to make Workers’ Compensation 

Board accountable to the stakeholders who actually pay the 

premiums. We’ve also asked for a review of the oppressive 

labour regulations that have been imposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic Development tell 

the people of this province when he will admit that the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement is a costly mistake and 

scrap this legislation, as Saskatchewan businesses have asked at 

the chamber of commerce meeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

reiterate some of what the Minister of Economic Development 

answered in regards to the first question, and it was a very 

positive meeting yesterday that we attended. In fact it was so 

positive, I’d inform the member opposite that in answer to one 

of the questions, myself, as Minister of Labour, I actually had 

someone clapping in the audience. That’s how positive the 

meeting was. 

 

The members opposite continue to preach doom and gloom. 

They talk about regressive legislation in the province. I would 

submit to the members opposite that Saskatchewan has some of 

the most progressive legislation in many, many areas that 

should be creating the positive climate for business and for 

people to live in their communities that we promote, and they 

chastise all the time. 

 

It’s not correct to do that. We want the members opposite to be 

as positive as the Saskatchewan business community are, as 

well as the positive aspect that this government puts forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Proposed Health Legislation 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister talks 

about progressive legislation. This government has brought 

forward three pieces of legislation this session which will give 

unilateral control of health to the Minister of Health. Your 

government has promised just the opposite, Mr. Speaker. The 

government has promised to give control to the people and to 

the communities. 

 

Due to the absolute control of health care by the minister 

through these regulations of this legislation, will the Minister of 

Health today, or a designate, table all the regulations pertaining 

to Bills 76, 77, and 82? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in terms of the legislative 

process, the member is well aware that legislation in broad 

concept is debated, passed, or defeated in this House; that the 

process of regulation is a process that is worked out with 

affected stakeholders and groups in the community. And 

regulations are then brought forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the appropriate question that 

the member from Arm River should address himself to is a 

more fundamental question, and that is the question of  

two-tiered medicine. The member has very publicly stated  

and I’m quoting generally  that if we have money we should 

be able to or should be required to pay for our medical services. 

He’s earned a bit of a reputation out in the country as the 

two-tiered member from Arm River. 

 

Will the member from Arm River now in his next question 

declare to this House and to the people of his constituency, to 

the people of the province, is he a proponent of two-tiered 

medicine? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 

have been informed by health officials that in fact cabinet has 

already approved the regulations for this legislation. What has 

the government got to hide from the people of Saskatchewan? 

You’ve got the regulations; they’ve been approved by cabinet. 

Will you table those regulations today in this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm 

River, like many of his colleagues, comes into this House on a 

daily basis with all sorts of accusations of fact of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, and then of course a day later, it’s clear to all 

concerned that it’s not fact at all but the imagination of the 

members. Now, Mr. Speaker, again I ask that member . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order! Order, order. Now I’ll . . . 

order! Now the Speaker was having some difficulty hearing the 

question being put, and now I’m having even more difficulty 

hearing the answer being spoken. I am asking for the 

cooperation of all members on both sides of the House to allow 

question period to proceed, to allow the questioner to put the 

question, and the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I would 

ask that member to clearly identify for the people of this 

province and the members of the House and the members of his 

. . . people in his constituency, what is his position on medicare. 

 

We know the position of the Liberal Party in 1962. Mr. 

Speaker, we know the party . . . we know the position of that 

party in 1962; they opposed medicare. Now we have members 

of the Liberal Party saying publicly that we should be paying 

for our medical services. The member from Arm River said that 

very publicly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask him then which services, which medical services, which 

hospital procedures, which doctor services, does the member 

from Arm River suggest that we should pay for as individuals? 

Does he, does that party, support a single-payer, universal 

medicare system in this province and nation or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Executives’ Car Leases 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr.  



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

Minister, you just can’t seem to keep them under control, can 

you? It looks like Jack Messer has forgotten all about his little 

austerity program he went on back in 1992 when he gave up his 

$35,000 Lexus. He’s now driving a top of the line Toyota 

luxury car  a 1996 Avalon worth about $48,000 after taxes. 

And SaskPower’s paying for the lease. Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order! Order! Now when 

the Speaker calls for order, he expects order on both sides of the 

House. Order. And I’m having great difficulty being able to 

hear the question being put by the Leader of the Third Party. I 

will ask for all members to come to order and allow the member 

to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  The 1996 Avalon is worth about $48,000 after 

taxes, and SaskPower is paying for the lease. Mr. Minister, in 

1992 when Jack Messer was forced to give up his Lexus, he 

said a luxury car was inappropriate during tough economic 

times and he vowed that his next vehicle wouldn’t exceed the 

average cost of vehicles leased for SaskPower executives. 

 

Mr. Minister, what happened to Jack Messer’s commitment to 

restraint? Why is SaskPower once again leasing a luxury 

vehicle for Jack Messer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question that the member has posed. And I’m pleased to 

because it gives me the opportunity to describe to him, and 

members of the general public, the policy that has been put in 

place by this government with respect to executive vehicles in 

the Crown corporation sector. 

 

But I also want to begin by saying, Mr. Speaker, that his 

research assistant from the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) is of no better quality than the ones he hires within 

his caucus. The information was given to the reporter who 

questioned this yesterday, but he chose not to use it. And this 

member chooses not to use that information today. So let me 

confirm for you what the policy is. 

 

The Crown corporations will pay for executive vehicles up to a 

limit, before taxes, of $24,000. Anything over and above that is 

paid by the executives of the corporation out of their own 

pocket. I think that’s a fair way to deal with executive costs. I 

think it’s in tune with what this government has been doing 

since they’ve been elected in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Minister, it looks like old organ-grinder Jack Messer has his 

newest chimp trained pretty well already. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much is SaskPower paying for Jack Messer’s 

Avalon? If indeed what you say is correct, will you release the 

lease agreement, including any provision Jack Messer has for an 

option to purchase this car at the end of the lease. And while 

you’re at it, will you release the same information on Carole 

Bryant’s Camry? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me once again 

confirm the policy that’s been put in place by CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) with respect to 

executive vehicles. The limit that the corporations will pay for 

will not exceed the lease amount on a vehicle that costs, before 

taxes, $24,000. I want to say that this is across the piece. This is 

pertinent to every executive in all of the Crowns. I think it is a 

very responsible approach that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has taken. 

 

I wish that his party and he, when he was running in 1991 to be 

part of Grant Devine’s administration, had used the same kind 

of restraint that this province and this government has used 

since 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this morning are for the Minister of Labour or for the 

minister that chooses to answer for him, if he will choose to 

duck again today. 

 

Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan businesses are fed up with your 

union-preference tendering policy. Now the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce is saying that they are drawing a line in 

the sand, and they have unanimously passed a resolution calling 

on you to scrap your union-preference tendering policy, and 

they’re calling on you to scrap this policy immediately. Doesn’t 

sound like so much harmony to me, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, for once will you listen to what the business 

people of this province are saying. Will you admit that this is a 

union preference policy? Will you admit that it drives up the 

cost of Crown construction projects, and will you admit that 

this regressive, destructive policy is costing this province jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well it’s interesting that the member 

would end off his question by referring to jobs. I think it’s a 

very positive day that most recent statistics out show more 

people in the workforce and more jobs levels . . . the 5,000 for 

the people of Saskatchewan. So instead of preaching doom and 

gloom like the Liberals do, why doesn’t the member ask a 

positive question as to what he thinks it is that’s fanning the 

new jobs, the new optimism within Saskatchewan? 

 

On the issue of the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, 

it’s been answered a few times this week in the House. We 

were almost done the review. Mr. McLauchlan from the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association wanted to enter into 

some discussion with Crown Investments Corporation. There 

was a meeting earlier in the week. There’s another meeting 

scheduled for later this month. And we expect that the review 

of the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement will be 

concluded by the end of the month. At that time, the member, 

as all people in Saskatchewan, will be privileged to know what 

the results of the review have been. Thank you. 

 



1516  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

supplemental question for the minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I’m 

glad you mentioned the job figures, because what you neglected 

to tell the folks here once again is the fact that there are 2,000 

jobs lost in the construction industry in this same time frame 

from April of this year and April of last year. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you also created 10,000 jobs, but it was all 

in the public sector of service industry which is minimum wage. 

I’d hardly brag about creating jobs for long-term, sustained 

activity in this province if they’re all in the minimum wage area 

of the service industry and in our casinos. 

 

Mr. Minister, Albert Lowe, the president of the North 

Battleford chamber, says that there is not just one policy that’s 

hurting business in this province. He says there’s been an 

accumulation of policies under your NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government that are causing these problems. That’s 

exactly what it is, Mr. Minister. It is an accumulation of 

anti-business, NDP policy. 

 

Workers’ compensation, occupational health and safety, labour 

standards, The Trade Union Act, and all of the regulations that 

goes with these — you have added one unnecessary regulation 

after another, one unnecessary cost after another. That’s why 

business people are saying they have drawn a line in the sand. 

And . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Order, order, order, 

order. The member — order — the member has been lengthy in 

his preamble and I’ll ask him to put his question directly. Order. 

Order. Order. I’ll ask all members to come to order, allow the 

hon. member for Cypress Hills to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My direct question 

to the minister is this: Minister, a little while ago we introduced 

Bill 19 in this Assembly . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now I asked . . . Order. 

Order. All members will come to . . . all members . . . Order. 

Order, order. Now the . . . Order. The hon. member has the right 

to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the 

minister directly, will you support Bill 19, our private members’ 

Bill that we’ve introduced, that will eliminate this destructive 

policy of Crown tendering for the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Do you mind if I answer this? . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, thanks. 

 

Well you know, there is no line drawn in the sand, Mr. Speaker. 

Businesses are optimistic in Saskatchewan. Do you know the 

main reason businesses are optimistic in Saskatchewan? 

Because the Tory government is gone; this government has 

been able to balance the budget; it’s been able to set a climate 

where business can do quite well in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve looked at our strengths through the Partnership for 

Renewal and the Partnership for Progress. We’ve built a strong 

resource sector in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’m 

telling you if we hadn’t been left with the debt and the legacy of 

the Tory government in Saskatchewan, on which we have to 

pay $850 million a year plus, we could remove the sales tax in 

Saskatchewan. We’d have even a more positive climate for 

business, and everybody in Saskatchewan would be prospering 

a lot more if we got rid of the Tory government years sooner 

than what we actually did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Infrastructure Program 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

year a number of rural municipal governments received 

approval from this NDP government for road reconstruction 

projects under the national infrastructure program. In spite of 

the fact that many of these projects could not be completed last 

year, this government promised RMs (rural municipality) they 

would still receive funding to complete these much needed 

projects this year. Now these same local governments are being 

told that the program has been fully utilized, and these projects 

will no longer be approved. 

 

Will the minister explain why her government has broken yet 

another promise to our local governments in rural 

Saskatchewan? And also, where in fact did the remainder of the 

federal infrastructure money go? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me say 

that the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order! Now the Speaker is 

simply not going to permit members to be shouting across the 

floor during question period. 

 

An Hon. Member:  I wouldn’t either. 

 

The Speaker:  I am not seeking advice from members as to 

how the House should be conducted  from either side. Now 

the question has been put, and I ask all members to allow the 

minister to provide the response. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 

let me say that the contribution to the rural road construction 

program is exactly the same, at $33 million, as it was last year. 

Everybody knew that there was a sunset on the infrastructure 

funds, and the federal participation was a set number of dollars 

in the allocation, and it’s been fully subscribed to. There still is 

a pool to pay for projects that were applied for, approved, and 

not completed. 

 

But there is no reduction in the contribution to construction for 

rural roads in this province, Mr. Speaker, by our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well, Madam Minister, there definitely has 

been a reduction because if these projects were approved last 

year for this year and now they are reneged on, that’s just 

another broken promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two months ago the federal government made $85 

million commitment to Saskatchewan’s rural road system. They 

indicated at that time that $20 million would be made available 

this year, 10 of which was unconditional funding. Rural 

municipalities now know how much they will be receiving but 

not when. At the time of this announcement, Ottawa indicated a 

desire to have the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities distribute these funds to local governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been informed that this NDP government is 

standing in the way of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) distributing these funds. And, Madam 

Minister, local governments need this money as quickly as 

possible, not when your government decides it’s to your 

political advantage. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 

remove any roadblocks and ensure these federal funds will be 

passed on as quickly as possible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I find it passing strange 

that the member opposite in the Liberal benches would ask our 

government why the federal money is not forthcoming. We 

knew absolutely nothing about this announcement, Mr. 

Speaker, until the federal minister made this announcement at 

the SARM convention in Regina this year in March. It was a 

complete surprise to us. 

 

The arrangements were made that the federal government 

would work with SARM to deliver this money, so if the 

member opposite has questions about it, I suggest that he direct 

them to his Liberal friends in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highways Maintenance 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I brought to the 

attention of the House earlier this week a number of serious 

problems concerning the highways in this province. I 

highlighted the fact that the highways will do nothing to win 

over tourists who may travel through this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even Tourism Saskatchewan officials are putting 

out warnings indicating it will have a negative impact on their 

industry. They’re even going so far, Mr. Speaker, as to warn 

travellers to stay off certain highway routes. 

 

Will the Minister of Highways, or his designate, explain why 

when a government agency identifies our highways as a serious 

concern, he and his government are doing absolutely nothing to 

address the problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to tell the member opposite . . . ask him if he might 

open his eyes to the reality. I mean they want all the highways 

fixed; they want all the hospitals opened; they want everything 

just like the old days. Well I’ll tell you, the old days were 

wrecked by the old people who were in power in the old days. 

 

It takes this government, Mr. Speaker, full-time, with all our 

cabinet members, keeping up to the debt that these guys ran up 

and the cuts that their federal cousins keep imposing on us. I 

mean if he wants to complain about the highways, why doesn’t 

he go and talk to Mr. Goodale and Mr. Chrétien in Ottawa. 

 

I mean we are doing the best we can with the money we have. If 

he wants us to fix the highways, Mr. Speaker, my question to 

the member opposite is  Mr. Two-Tier over there  is where 

should we take it from? Where should we take it from? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

First Reading of a Bill Ruled Out of Order 

 

The Speaker:  The next item on the order paper, the Speaker 

finds it necessary to make a statement. I would like to preface 

this ruling with a reminder to members that it is the duty of the 

Speaker to refuse to propose the question on any motion which 

is irregular. This is clearly established in parliamentary 

authorities. 

 

The next item on the order paper is the proposed motion of the 

member for Saltcoats to move first reading of a Bill to repeal 

The Service Districts Act. The members will be aware that 

already on the order paper is Bill No. 33, An Act respecting 

Service Districts and to make consequential amendments to 

other Acts; short title, The Service Districts Act. 

 

There being no existent service districts Act as part of the 

statutes of Saskatchewan, the Speaker must conclude that the 

proposed legislation of the member for . . . Order! 

 

I will ask for the cooperation of all members. The Speaker is 

attempting to bring a ruling to the House, and I expect that all 

members will allow the Speaker to do that. 

 

There being no existent . . . Order! All members. 

 

There being no existent service districts Act as part of the 

statutes of Saskatchewan, the Speaker must conclude that the 

proposed legislation of the member for Saltcoats is operable 

only if Bill No. 33 is passed by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I point out that the title of a Bill is required to reflect the 

purposes of the Bill and should therefore cover everything in 

the Bill. Therefore in this case it is not necessary for the 

Speaker to see the actual contents of the proposed legislation in 

order to determine its object. 

 



1518  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

The object of the Bill proposed by the member for Saltcoats, as 

clearly established by the title, is to negative Bill No. 33 if it 

were to pass into law. In effect, first reading motion is an 

expanded negative, the object of which could be achieved more 

directly by voting against Bill No. 33. 

 

The principle here is the same as that more commonly observed 

for amendments to motions. An amendment which would 

produce the same result as if the original motion were simply 

negatived is out of order. 

 

Consequently, in accordance with the practice of this Assembly, 

such a motion cannot be proposed from the Chair, and therefore 

I find the motion for first reading of a Bill to repeal The Service 

Districts Act to be out of order and I direct its removal from the 

order paper. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, to 

propose a motion. By leave. 

 

The Speaker:  By leave, to do which? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  To propose a motion, before orders of the 

day. 

 

The Speaker:  Under rule 46? The hon. member for Cypress 

Hills has requested leave to propose a motion. I would provide 

for the hon. member for Cypress Hills just momentarily to 

advise the House as to what specifically he’s requesting the 

House to consider, to be proposed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have heard recently that the chamber of commerce has passed a 

resolution to scrap the government’s Crown tendering 

agreement. In light of this and the ongoing economic damage to 

our province caused by the CCTA, our caucus . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I think the hon. member 

has given an indication of the subject that he wishes to deal 

with . . . has not asked for leave to introduce a motion under 

rule 46. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87  An Act to amend  

The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to move second reading of The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 1996 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, our 

government indicated in the throne speech its concern with 

finding ways to shift limited financial resources from 

administration and lower priority infrastructure to the delivery  

of vital services for people. We believe that this amendment is 

consistent with our goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each of the four largest Crown corporations  

SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 

SaskEnergy, and SaskPower  are directed by boards of 

directors appointed by cabinet and are subject to numerous 

other controls with respect to decisions made by their respective 

boards of directors. Each board has a cabinet minister as 

chairman and one or more other cabinet ministers would sit on 

that board. Crown Investments Corporation, as parent of each 

of those Crowns, is comprised of a board of directors made up 

entirely of cabinet ministers. 

 

Each of the Crowns are required to submit for approval their 

annual capital and operating budgets. This affords CIC an 

opportunity to review the plans of the individual Crowns and 

consider such plans in the context of what all of the Crowns are 

proposing. 

 

As parent, CIC, through the provision of The Crown 

Corporations Act, 1993, has considerable statutory authority to 

require the Crowns to seek and obtain approvals prior to 

implementing specific initiatives or strategies. Once the Crown 

capital and operating budgets are approved, all of the Crowns 

except one may purchase or sell personal property without 

having to obtain further cabinet authorization. 

 

The exception is SaskPower, which through subsection 10(3) of 

The Power Corporation Act, must obtain cabinet approval for 

specific personal property purchases and sales where the price 

included in the transaction exceeds $1 million. 

 

This requirement is therefore, notwithstanding that CIC would 

have already approved the capital operating budgets for 

SaskPower, and notwithstanding that the purchase or sale of 

specific personal property would be made within such 

approvals . . .  

 

This proposed amendment, Mr. Speaker, in no significant way 

reduces or eliminates the level of accountability required of 

SaskPower today. The amendment will, however, eliminate the 

utilization of government resources to process a specific request 

through the corporation to cabinet when what has been 

requested falls within an already approved operating plan or 

capital budget plan. 

 

By eliminating this requirement, all of our major Crowns will 

essentially be subject to the same external approval 

requirements, and the people of Saskatchewan will be better 

served by the elimination of a process which is not necessary, 

given the other controls available to government. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 1996 (No. 2). Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to introduce 

guests. 

 



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce two very 

special people that are with me today, my wife and my 

daughter, in your gallery. I have asked them to sit in our gallery 

but they chose to sit in the middle, and so we’ll have our 

discussion on that at a later time. 

 

But I’m also pretty happy that the Minister of Education is in 

here today because my daughter’s skipping kindergarten classes 

this afternoon and playing hooky. So I would ask the Assembly 

to welcome my wife Beckie, and my five-year-old daughter 

Taylor to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to just 

make a few brief comments on this particular Bill here today. 

Unfortunately we have not had much time to collect feedback 

and to evaluate whether this Bill makes positive changes for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Fortunately, it’s only one clause long and it’s easy to see what 

the government is proposing to change. Mr. Speaker, I’m not 

sure why the government would not have included this in Bill 

No. 38, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, no. 1. We can 

only assume that it was an oversight. Still the government 

obviously thought this change was imperative, so we should be 

willing to look it over carefully. 

 

As I’m sure the members opposite are aware, we had some very 

serious concerns about the first Power Corporation Bill. We 

were particularly concerned that the Bill gives SaskPower 

employees a ticket into any home, in any town, anywhere in 

Saskatchewan. The proposed Bill gives too much power to the 

appointees who run SaskPower and way, way too much power 

to the provincial cabinet, with no accountability to this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 87 is far less complex than Bill 38 in terms of 

length and in terms of implications for Saskatchewan people. 

The original Act states: 

 

Where the purchase price or sale price of real property 

included in one transaction exceeds $150,000, or where the 

purchase price or sale price of personal property included 

in one transaction exceeds $1,000,000, the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council shall be obtained. 

 

This Bill, Bill 87, removes the phrase: “. . . or sale price of 

personal property included in one transaction exceeds 

$1,000,000 . . .” 

Mr. Speaker, we have some serious questions for the members 

opposite about why they want this phrase removed. Will it give 

them greater freedom to spend taxpayers’ money? Is it a step 

towards less accountability for this government? Why is this 

change being proposed? 

 

It is these kinds of questions we would like to ask the 

government before we allow this Bill to pass through. And as is 

the case with all Bills brought forward by the government, we 

would like to consult further with outside parties to see how 

this will affect Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although this change to Bill 87 is relatively 

straightforward, we do not necessarily accept it without some 

reservations. We would also like to see how this Bill melds with 

the changes to the same Act proposed in Bill 38. It would make 

sense to discuss these two Bills together. Officials would only 

have to be brought in once, which saves taxpayers both time 

and money. Unlike the government, Mr. Speaker, we truly do 

care how the money is spent. 

 

That is why we refuse to support any changes to Bills that allow 

for unilateral changes to legislation in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, for the reasons I just stated, I move that the debate on 

Bill 87, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act and to make a consequential amendment 

to another Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 

is John Edwards, the director of the municipal policy and 

legislative services. Behind me is Graham McNamee, chairman 

of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. And on his left is Perry 

Erhardt, legislative officer of the Department of Municipal 

Government, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Deputy Chairman. Just a couple 

of minutes to welcome you here, your officials from your 

department, and also to thank you for bringing this Bill forward. 

 

The first few questions I have in reference to this Act is, have 

you seen or done any extensive consultation with the 

communities in reference to population shifts in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there were extensive 

consultations carried out with respect to the development of the 

amendments that are proposed in this Bill and would have 

included discussions with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban  



1520  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

Municipalities Association), who represents a number of the 

northern urban municipalities. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The reason why we’re looking at the 

situation of population, Madam Minister, is the fact that there 

has been a tremendous shift in terms of the population of 

different communities. And we look at the introduction of the 

amendment, in terms of the northern municipalities, regarding 

assessment and property taxes and the whole bloody bit; really 

the population of each community does have a significant 

impact on this Bill. 

 

And I was just wondering whether there has been any stats, any 

figures that you have available for us today, in reference to the 

population growth of the 1986 census versus the 1991 stats? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we don’t have here 

any statistics on population in the North as it relates to the 

current or past census procedures. 

 

And I’m not exactly sure what it might be that the member from 

Athabasca might be addressing, but if it is the issue of the 

population in the revenue-sharing formula, since the 

revenue-sharing formula this year delivers . . . and in fact letters 

have been written. I’ve signed letters to each and every northern 

municipality outlining exactly what the amount of their 

revenue-sharing grant will be this year, and it will be exactly the 

same, to the penny, as last year. 

 

In future, because of the reduction in the size of the whole 

municipal sharing pool, we will be reviewing the distribution 

formulas. And so shifts in population will not necessarily affect 

the revenue-sharing because we won’t be using the same 

distribution formula that has been operative in the past. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Some of the questions that we have about 

taxation in northern Saskatchewan  and this of course has a 

lot to do with it  in many of the northern municipalities, as 

you’re probably most aware, Madam Minister, is the fact that, 

you know, with the poor economy in northern Saskatchewan 

and the fact that there’s no housing markets, and the fact that 

the tax base in many of these northern communities is virtually 

non-existent, so the whole question of, you know, the 

population stats, many northern communities feel that the stats 

provincially do not reflect the true numbers locally. So in fact 

many of these northern communities are not getting as much of 

the revenue-sharing grant in the province as they should be. 

 

So that’s why I think it’s very important that we nail some kind 

of indication as to whether the population of the North is indeed 

increasing, as many of the studies have shown and many of the 

stats have shown. Yet what we see — a shrinking 

revenue-sharing pool from the province. And this is the reason 

why we’re going back to the whole situation of taxation versus 

the population growth of the North versus the allocation to 

northern communities. So is there any figures at all that your 

department has that would suggest that the population in the 

North is indeed increasing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, as the member 

knows, four days from now we’re having Count Yourself In.  

There’s a national census happening almost as we speak, so that 

data will be available to us next year for 1997. 

 

And certainly we will be entering into discussions with the 

municipal organizations and directly with the municipalities as 

we did when we initiated the Northern Municipal Round Table 

where we had our first meeting in La Ronge fairly recently. It 

was a very well attended meeting, very productive. The 

northern mayors had certainly had some prior organizational 

meetings amongst themselves and had some very 

well-developed research to support the agenda items that they 

wanted and had been invited to place on the agenda. 

 

So the member from Athabasca may be assured that any 

changing conditions in the North will, through consultation 

with the people who live there and the local leaders, will be 

adjusted to meet those realities. And the member is certainly 

correct in that it will cause some difficulty as we try to move to 

market value for assessment province-wide. 

 

The member is absolutely correct when he says that in northern 

Saskatchewan there really is an absence of a complete market. 

Because in order to have a housing market, you not only need to 

have demand, but you need to have the financial institutions. 

You need to have the access to the supplies. And just all of the 

factors that constitute a market for housing, many of those 

factors are absent in the North and must be compensated for in 

other ways. 

 

So we recognize the unique situation of our northern people, 

and we will work with them to accommodate their needs to the 

extent that we can within the fiscal capacity that we have. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you for those comments, Madam 

Minister. I guess the other question, when we talk about the 

whole assessment and SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) role in this whole process, there’s no 

question in my mind that there has to be more consultation and 

certainly more awareness amongst the northern communities, 

because assessment and reassessment, market value and so on 

and so forth, really is confusing to me. So to the average person 

on the street, it’s probably much, much more complicated than 

that. 

 

I guess the other question, when we look at northern 

Saskatchewan as a whole, how would the Northern Revenue 

Sharing Trust Account be affected by any changes proposed in 

this legislation? 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

future of the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account, the 

member is correct when he observes that there is a potential for 

some changes. If you looked at the raw data — which the 

member may have seen — which was provided by SAMA 

about the end of 1995, that raw data of assessment would 

indicate that there would be a shift from the mining industry to 

residential, and these are the factors we will have to be mindful 

of as we work through the development of the regulations that 

establish property classes. 



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

And of course the variable mill rate factor and the opportunity 

to phase in the new regime will be available to the leaders of 

northern communities on exactly the same basis as it is in the 

South. And this Act also provides that exactly the same appeal 

procedures will be available to Northerners as are available to 

other residents of the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and don’t mind 

if I bounce all over the place here because that’s how I try and 

grasp at things here. And I guess the one point I have is, am I 

correct in saying today that as minister of municipal services, in 

reference to northern Saskatchewan, that this legislation in its 

rawest form is suggesting that some of the property taxes will 

be shifting from the mining industry onto the residential 

properties as a result of this change? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no, that is not correct. 

I would not want you to go away with that impression. This 

legislation has nothing to do with that. This legislation assists 

the framework in which the SAMA, the Assessment 

Management Agency, does its work. And I just observed that 

the raw data coming from the assessment agency would indicate 

that, based on their assessment values, there is a potential for 

that kind of a shift. But that is why . . . And that’s in the 

information done by SAMA, their analysis. 

 

What this legislation does is provide the tools to mitigate that 

and to not allow that to happen or to lessen the extent, because 

it will give municipal councils the ability, in using that 

assessment base, to mitigate the tax shifts either by phasing in, 

by using mill rate factors. And then before they do that, the next 

step is in the regulations pursuant to this legislation, where the 

province will set the number of property classes and the 

percentages of value to be used when establishing the mill rates; 

then it makes a whole package. 

 

But, no, even looking at the raw data, it’s not correct to say that 

there will be that kind of a shift because the proposals that 

we’re making in this legislation provide the tools to mitigate 

that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay then, can perhaps I put it in a different 

frame of mind then. Are you saying to me that the province will 

then establish the mill rates for all Crown lands outside of 

municipal boundaries in reference to the Northern Revenue 

Sharing Trust Account, in which the mining companies will 

indeed be afforded the process of appealing and all the other 

avenues of, you know, the variable mill rate factor and so on 

and so forth. So they’ll have the same opportunity to appeal 

their taxes as an ordinary resident of the North would under this 

rule? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is the ability to 

appeal the assessment. There is no ability for an appellant to 

appeal taxes. They can appeal the assessment which provides 

the base the taxes are calculated on. 

 

And I guess, you know, the really good news for the North is 

the development, the astonishing development, of new mines 

and the increase, the really positive increase, in the mining 

activity in northern Saskatchewan in terms of the ability to raise  

taxes, the ability to provide jobs. It’s a very exciting part of our 

economy. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I most certainly agree with your point that 

the northern development is a very exciting part of the 

economy. I couldn’t agree with you less. Then again I go back 

to many earlier statements — the fact that northern 

Saskatchewan does have a lot of potential to offer the rest of the 

province. 

 

I think in saying that, in looking at the mining sector and in 

looking at perhaps the explosion of the mining sector in 

northern Saskatchewan, what is the government currently 

receiving in terms of just the land lease fees for the Northern 

Revenue Sharing Trust Account, from all the mining activity 

happening in the last year or so? And what’s the anticipated 

increase over the next couple of years that in essence is 

connected to this new Act? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would not have that 

information available now. We’re just dealing with the 

legislation here, and those figures would be more appropriately 

provided during the estimates for that department. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, I’ll certainly hold my questions till 

estimates of that particular issue. I guess the other thing is, 

when you talk about the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 

Account — and it’ll have some impact on this — several years 

ago the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account was at a $10 

million figure. And could you more or less give me a 

breakdown of where that money came from as the minister 

responsible for the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would not want to be 

inaccurate on this, and I’m not prepared outside of the estimates 

procedure to be precise about the numbers or the source of 

revenue to the trust account. And so I would ask the 

cooperation of the member opposite to hold the questions of 

that nature until he has the opportunity in estimates, at which 

time I’d be most pleased to provide him with the information. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Again we’ll be bouncing around here quite a 

bit. When you talk about the impact of assessment in northern 

Saskatchewan, one of the groups and organizations that is of 

course dealing directly with northern communities is the North 

West Saskatchewan Municipalities Association which I’m sure 

you’re familiar with, and we also of course recognize and 

participate with the SUMA group. And of course I was a former 

member of SUMA for four years as the north-west director, and 

I believe my replacement in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mayor Morin, is 

now also the north-west director. 

 

However, I guess he’s also the chairman of the North West 

Saskatchewan Municipalities Association, and they submitted a 

proposal to one of your deputy ministers to fund full-time staff. 

And one of the reasons why they’ve asked to fund full-time 

staff is that they’re able to assess some of the impacts of some 

of the rules and regulations being designed by the government 

in reference to effects on their properties and their taxation and 

the way northern municipalities work. 

 



1522  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

Since the proposal was revised and re-sent back to your 

government, could I get a status report on the actual proposal 

itself and whether your department’s prepared to commit 

funding to this organization, so they can really have a clear and 

direct say and effect in consulting with you when it comes to 

changes of this magnitude. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman. I acknowledge that I’m 

aware of the request by the north-west mayors for funding. A 

decision has not been made at this time, but I would point out 

that in the Inter-Community Co-operation . . . the ICC 

Committee as it was known, the group did ask for and receive 

$30,000 in the form of assistance, and I believe the last 

instalment of that has just been paid out recently. It was 

contingent upon the completion of a report which has been now 

filed and the last of the money has been paid out. 

 

We also have in the department’s northern office, as you will be 

aware as leader of that group, we do have our own personnel up 

there who are familiar with the conditions and the people in the 

area, who are always ready to provide municipal advisory 

services in the interim until a decision on this request is made. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I think the call of northern 

communities  the mayors and the councillors  for many 

years have asked to really be heavily consulted in any changes 

that affects certainly northern Saskatchewan and their 

municipalities and their jurisdictions. And some of the points 

that they bring up is in reference to the Northern Revenue 

Sharing Trust Account. I keep coming back to that because of 

course this assessment will have some impact on that. 

 

The northern municipalities and the northern leaders would like 

to have more say on where the funding of this Northern 

Revenue Sharing Trust Account is allocated, plus any impacts it 

may have on that. Because in essence, the Northern Revenue 

Sharing Trust Account does have some bearing on their capital 

grants budget. So they have proposed a concept of having a 

board oversee the operation of the Northern Revenue Sharing 

Trust Account and this board of course would consist of 

municipal leaders that they are most willing to find for you if 

there is a problem. 

 

How does the minister feel about giving the northern leaders an 

opportunity to govern NRSTA (Northern Revenue Sharing 

Trust Account), thereby become more aware of its operations 

and thereby become more aware of some of the impacts of 

some of the changes regarding the assessment that’s proposed 

in this particular Bill? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that 

this is something, this is an issue, that could be discussed at the 

Northern Municipal Round Table. And we did have one initial 

meeting  as I said it was a very constructive and positive 

meeting  and we’re actually in the early stages of planning 

for another one. We want the northern round table to work and 

we want to give everyone as much opportunity as possible to 

express their views and have, you know, as thorough a 

consultation as we can. 

 

But as you know, one of the constraints is financial. And what  

we do not want to do is . . . we’d rather have several . . . or few, 

very well constructed meetings that everyone has had an 

opportunity to prepare for. Because when you bring people 

together from all across the North, there is a large amount of 

travel that has to be done. And so whether those local 

municipalities pick up the cost or if we do, you know, it’s a 

question of trying to be as efficient as possible. 

 

So we are being mindful of the cost of travel to get people all 

into one location together. We’re trying to do as much work as 

we can ahead of time on the agenda and on communications to 

make sure that when we’re in a face-to-face situation that we 

have time to deal with, you know, the very most important 

philosophical and economic questions that we can so that we 

don’t waste any time in housekeeping issues that can be done 

by letter or, you know, by phone. 

 

So this wasn’t asked at the last time. I don’t know what kind of 

a priority it is with the northern mayors, but it’s not one of the 

issues that they placed on the agenda last time, even though 

they were invited to place any agenda items that they thought 

were a priority. But perhaps in a future meeting, they will ask 

for this to be discussed, and we would be glad to have those 

consultations and discussions with them. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I think the key thing is that the municipal 

round table is certainly a positive idea. I think there has to be, 

you know, a willingness amongst government to come together 

with the northern municipal leaders. And I know this thing is 

recorded, and I say on record that over the past years 

government has been more than fair to northern Saskatchewan 

when it comes to absorbing the brunts of some of the, you 

know, some of the cuts in reference to the lack of tax base. And 

I certainly can appreciate your efforts as well the Minister of 

Northern Affairs and the Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs 

in pushing this point. 

 

I think that the key thing in the message from the northern 

communities is that we need to elevate the participation in the 

northern leaders a bit more. Because if you elevate the exposure 

of northern leaders through this type of consultation, especially 

when you talk about reassessment, you talk about taxation, you 

talk about the impacts on Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 

Account, it all adds up to some major or significant impact on 

every northern municipality that exists. 

 

So there’s other serious concerns that they want raised to your 

attention in reference to this particular Bill, and this is in 

regards to the sewer and water grants. This program obviously 

has been cut. The funding used to be for engineering cost and 

expanding systems. It’s all been eliminated. And northern 

communities are saying, well what’s the next process? The 

taxation process. Well that gives us very limited opportunity. 

 

What if there’s a major breakdown in terms of water and sewer 

systems? The funding formulas are all up in the air. The 

taxation system is up in the air. These programs are up in the air 

and some of them have been eliminated. 

 

And if you could give us some background on your feelings on 

the general point that we’re trying to make as northern people. 



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, again this is really a 

subject that we will have the opportunity to go into in depth in 

the context of the department’s estimates. 

 

But I would say that at the round table, the first and most recent 

initial meeting of the Northern Municipal Round Table, the 

very highest priority that was identified was housing. And we 

are certainly planning and in the process of trying to devise a 

policy which will compensate for the withdrawal of federal 

participation in this area. It’s a very difficult one. But I would 

like to answer those questions in the context of estimates. 

 

But there’s two other things I would like to say, is that on that 

round table, when you talk, when the member talks, about 

awareness of people, there was, for instance, at the . . . I just 

saw this morning a little summary of a newsletter that came 

from the last SAMA annual meeting that was held in Saskatoon 

in the early part of April. It had about 700 municipal 

representatives there. 

 

And they did a survey about the awareness of council members 

themselves and the perception of council members who 

attended there as to how aware the public, the ratepayers, were 

about the issues of assessment and taxes. And it’s generally 

conceded by that questionnaire that over 90 per cent of people 

in Saskatchewan do not understand this. So northern people are 

certainly not alone. 

 

And in the context of understanding, another interesting thing 

that did happen with the last Northern Municipal Round Table 

was that the whole proceedings from beginning to end, as you 

probably know, were carried on Missinipi radio. And you may 

have had some feedback from that, as the member for 

Athabasca. But I did have some feedback that people were very 

interested, that even in locations that were far remote from La 

Ronge, that they were able to listen in to the whole meeting and 

all of the speakers. 

 

And we didn’t know, actually, that we were going to be on the 

air until we got there and the press was there. Of course we had 

no objections, but it was a very interesting concept and 

something new in the North that I think generally people did 

appreciate. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess since SAMA is involved in it, I 

couldn’t agree with you any further that, you know, the point of 

confusion is all over the place, and I’m just trying to appear like 

I know what I’m speaking about. 

 

When it comes to SUMA and the assessment, it really becomes 

a major issue in northern Saskatchewan. And this is the reason 

why I am calling for more consultation and more cooperation 

from the government when it comes to forming committees to 

look at the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account, funding 

the north-west Saskatchewan municipal associations — they 

could become more involved in the discussions affecting issues 

of their regions, and also government choices. 

 

So going back to the assessment and the actual Bill itself, how  

is this going to affect the taxation of some of the properties 

owned by government, for example some of the commercial 

properties; some of the government buildings? The government 

owns 80 per cent of the housing in northern Saskatchewan. I’m 

not sure, you know, the breakdown in terms of value, whether 

it’s 75 by the federal and 25 per cent ownership of the province. 

Has there been any discussion and any studies done on how 

that’s going to impact on these particular properties? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in terms of the 

communications and the understanding, I’d just like to say that 

this is really, in terms of the assessment, the responsibility of 

SAMA. And for those who were at the annual meeting of 

SAMA, on I think it was April 11 in Saskatoon, they released a 

number of questionnaires, brochures, posters, and 

communication materials that are available to local councils and 

to anyone who is interested. 

 

Another interesting result of their survey was that most people 

though, as your questions indicate, obviously want to look at 

assessment and tax policy at the same time. Because at the end 

of the day we know that what people are really interested in is, 

what is that number on the bottom line of my tax notice and 

how did it get there. 

 

And so we want to, we’re planning to, have some workshops 

and information sessions throughout the province, in smaller 

groups, as we get closer to that date of January 1, 1997 when 

this new system will come in. 

 

And with respect to the question on Crown land or government 

buildings, generally speaking land, property, owned by the 

Crown is exempt. But that certainly doesn’t . . . is not the 

interpretation of the houses in Sask Housing’s portfolio whether 

they’re federally, whether it’s . . . There’s all kinds of different 

programs out there. Some of them are strictly provincial. Some 

are strictly federal; and some, as you know, are joint in some 

ratio. 

 

But it doesn’t matter which part of the portfolio it is. All of 

Sask Housing’s housing stock is assessed, and Sask Housing 

pays property taxes to the relevant municipality just as any other 

home-owner would. 

 

I guess I’d just say this, that probably the reason that most 

people don’t understand taxes is we don’t like to think of it. I 

mean the only time we want to think about it is the day we have 

to write that cheque. And back in the olden days, property taxes 

were generally considered to be temporary things. Usually some 

lord that owned a lot of land would tax his tenants to raise 

money to fight some battle or whatever, with the idea that when 

the battle was over the taxes would go away. And that’s really 

how property taxes started. But it was such a great idea that 

people just kept on doing it. 

 

A lot of people think too, you know, that taxes are dull, and 

property tax is really interesting, you know, I mean if you look 

back to some of the reasons that some of those people in 5 or 

600 and a thousand years ago raised property taxes to fight their 

turf wars and so on. 

 



1524  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

And then there’s the one . . . you know the one about Lady 

Godiva. Her husband was the Earl of Coventry, and the 

villagers in Coventry thought that they were paying too much 

taxes. So they went to the earl’s wife, who was Lady Godiva, 

and asked her for her support in reducing their taxes. So she 

went to her husband and said, I think the people of Coventry are 

paying too much tax. She said, I would like you to lower it. And 

he said, the day that you ride naked on a horse through the 

streets of Coventry is the day that I will reduce the taxes. And 

so she went, and with the cooperation of the people of Coventry 

. . . the people were so happy to have her support that, by 

pre-arrangement, they agreed to close all their shutters while 

she made the ride. So of course, with her modesty protected by 

her long hair, she rode her horse down the main street of 

Coventry. And everybody except one person . . . the tailor 

whose name was Tom, peeked and that’s where we get the 

expression peeping Tom. 

 

So you see, I mean we’ve got all these . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  If it wasn’t for something as dull and 

boring and onerous and all the rest of it as property taxes, we 

wouldn’t have all these wonderful additions to our folklore and 

all these interesting stories to tell. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Well that’s not a bedtime story I can take 

home. 

 

I guess the second part of the question is, when you look at the 

assessed value of homes, of properties in the North  you’re 

obviously going to have to do that to have an impact on this 

Bill, and one of the contentious issues in northern 

Saskatchewan is market value of housing  how do you feel 

that you’ll be addressing that particular problem as minister of 

municipal services which also involves housing? How will you 

determine the market value of a house in northern 

Saskatchewan from a government perspective in reference to 

this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, thanks to the 

devolution of the assessment policy and practice from within 

government where it used to be, to the independent agency, the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency which operates 

at arm’s length from government, they are responsible for 

establishing the assessment. And they have . . . the people that 

they engaged to do this work are highly professional, and the 

integrity of the provincial data base in terms of assessing the 

value of properties is their responsibility. 

 

But as we noted earlier in our exchanges, there certainly are 

factors in the North that make the market different, and I’m sure 

that the appraisers at SAMA are well aware of that and that they 

will do their work in a fair and equitable manner. Because that 

is the objective of all of this, of all of SAMA’s work and the 

framework of enabling legislation that we are bringing in, is to 

bring the system up to date and make it more fair and equitable. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I imagine the approach that the assessors 

and SAMA take is that one size fits all in northern  

Saskatchewan. And on that point, are we to say that the 

municipalities in northern Saskatchewan will not be adversely 

affected as a result of this legislation, or this amendment, when 

it comes to the allocation . . . or payment of property taxes that 

the government owns within their jurisdictions or within their 

municipal boundaries? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’d certainly like to 

correct the impression that the member from Athabasca makes 

when he says that one size fits all for the North. Because that’s 

exactly the reason, for instance, that we have property classes 

and percentages of value. 

 

And of course if we’re moving to market value, we would have 

. . . And I’m not going to speak for SAMA, but the approach 

would generally be, that would be market value for the land, 

and then the dwelling, if it’s a residential dwelling, would be 

the depreciated value from the actual cost, which would take 

into account the northern factors like higher costs of materials 

and so forth. 

 

So the system is designed to . . . this legislation is designed to 

provide the tools to mitigate what happens in the raw 

assessment. So I’m confident at the end of the day that the 

system will be fair for northern people. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So again this is kind of, you know, a choice 

of interpretation here. Am I to interpret those comments as 

saying that this legislation is simply allowing us to modernize 

the assessment system in Saskatchewan? Thereby all the tools 

that are allowed to northern municipalities to mitigate those 

changes you speak about, and all the rules that they’re allowed 

to use to their advantage, they will see very little if any changes 

in the way that they tax people and the income that they expect. 

This is not a rule here to decrease the amount of money they get 

from the province on the backs of some of their residential 

properties. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s premature to 

draw those conclusions at this point. The same tools will be 

provided to northern municipalities and residents as are 

available to residents and business people in other parts of the 

province. And we’re bringing . . . what SAMA is doing is 

bringing the assessment up to date, which has not been changed 

since 1965. So we’re catching up for over 30 years. There are 

bound to be some changes. 

 

So SAMA’s doing that while we are, in this framework of this 

legislation, providing some tools that haven’t been needed 

before to help to mitigate and to phase in where there are 

changes. So there will be changes. 

 

(1145) 

 

If the tools provided were able to mitigate the shifts enough that 

everything would be exactly the same as it was before, why in 

the world would we do it? So there is unfairness in the system 

now, and property tax is the least progressive tax in the world. I 

mean, it’s there. It doesn’t go away if you get old or sick or 

unemployed or your circumstances change. It’s an ad valorem 

tax that’s based on the perceived or appraised value of the  



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

property. And because it is not a progressive tax, it is absolutely 

critical that it be as fair as possible. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I’ll just jump from the municipal perspective 

down to the Indian band perspective as well. Has there been any 

sale of any Crown lands in northern Saskatchewan to Indian 

bands as a result of the TLE (treaty land entitlements) 

agreement? And if there has, how do you determine a value of 

that land? Do you value it on the assessment or market value? 

How does that work when you do look at the possibility of 

selling Crown land to the Indian bands? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly am 

aware of some transactions, but I am not the minister 

responsible for the treaty land entitlements or personally 

involved in any of the negotiations or sales, so I really don’t 

think it would be appropriate for me to answer or become 

engaged in that line of questioning. That would be for another 

minister at another time. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It is my 

pleasure to introduce to you and other members of the 

Assembly two special guests seated in the Speaker’s gallery this 

afternoon, one of whom you will obviously recognize because 

he is no stranger to this Assembly  Mr. Dave Abbey. 

 

And seated with him is Ms. Jessie Caryll. She is the outreach 

coordinator of the Canadian Conference on Reform Judaism 

which is a national organization of Reform Jews in Canada. She 

is visiting us from Toronto for the weekend, and she is a guest 

of the Temple Beth Tikvah which is in Regina and of which 

Mr. Abbey is the president. 

 

So if you would join with me in welcoming both of them back 

to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 72 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Going back to an 

earlier statement, you talked about assessment. Is a community 

assessed differently if they are to have services such as natural 

gas, in terms of the value of a community as a whole? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, my response to that 

would be that it wouldn’t make a difference, the same as the 

level of services that a property receives or doesn’t receive is 

not grounds for an assessment appeal. So my answer to that  

would be, generally no. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And, 

Madam Minister, welcome to your officials. 

 

Madam Minister, I understand from this Bill, that it’s actually 

given the power to the minister to have authority to define the 

property classes and set percentage of values that are applied to 

property assessment in different classes. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in the wording in the 

Act it would appear that that power is vested in the minister, but 

that’s part of what we spoke about yesterday in the . . . It’s the 

development of the regulations whereby the legislation has to 

have the authority of the whole House, the whole legislature. 

But the regulations that are developed pursuant to the 

legislation is the regulatory review process. And then the 

regulations are ultimately approved by cabinet. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. But it does lay out that power for 

you, and I’m wondering why that power wouldn’t be left to 

SAMA or some other non-political body instead of the 

minister’s office. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, seeing as I 

explained yesterday that the government always has had, except 

for this brief term since the establishment of SAMA and to now 

. . . SAMA was not comfortable with that function. Let’s face it, 

I mean, assessment is a technical procedure that takes all these 

factors into account by professionally trained people whose job 

it is to make those assessments and analysis. 

 

The tax policy is the responsibility of the government because it 

is political. Like for example, right now the value of property is 

assessed. Then the percentage of the value that is used to 

calculate the taxes on is reduced, again by a political decision. 

For instance, residential properties in the province now are . . . 

50 per cent of the true assessed value is the value that is used 

for the tax base. And that’s a political decision. 

 

If you were to use the pure assessment base to calculate the 

taxes on, every residence in this province would double because 

we’re using 50 per cent. And that’s an arbitrary . . . it’s a 

political decision. It’s got nothing to do with the assessment. 

 

Same thing with farm land. Farm land currently is assessed, but 

by order again, only 60 per cent of the actual assessment is used 

to calculate the actual taxes. And don’t forget that this tax, this 

assessment base is not just used to apply the municipal levy and 

raise municipal taxes. It’s also used to raise education tax, and 

it’s also used to raise, in the 2 mill levy, some monies for the 

health system. So the integrity and the accuracy of this base, the 

assessment base, is very, very important. 

 

But you can see that if there was a decision made . . . and the 

decisions have not yet been made, as to what the percentages of 

value will be in the new regulations. That analysis still has to be 

done. 

 

But just say that there was not a reduction and the tax moved up 

to 100 per cent of assessment. This would shift, for instance  



1526  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

education tax, a huge burden of the cost of education onto rural 

lands because right now rural lands are assessed at 60 per cent 

of the percentage of the appraised value. And if you didn’t go 

through this exercise of setting percentages of value to property 

classes, education tax on rural properties would go up from the 

60 per cent now to 100. And it would be an enormous shift 

whereby, you know, it can really be set or certainly be set on a 

per capita basis. Rural people pay a hugely disproportionate 

share of education tax already. And if we didn’t ascribe 

percentages of value to buildings and land, the shift would be 

just horrendous. 

 

Ms. Draude:  But, Madam Minister, basically the bottom 

line is then the responsibility or the powers in authority are 

going from the local people, the ones who have hands-on input, 

the ones who live in the North and understand some of the 

difficulties, it’s going from them to government. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there has to be a 

framework or a context in which this is set. The local 

parameters are too narrow to deal with such things as the tax 

shift, for instance, from the mining industry or to or from the 

mining industry to other parts, and the oil and gas industry of 

course. There has to be a provincial framework in which this is 

set so that there is equity throughout the province. 

 

And then we are allowing, by this legislation, some tools to be 

used locally. But these things have got to be developed hand in 

hand, and the local tools have to be used within a context. So 

that’s why it’s a two-part process. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Again, Madam Minister, by actually 

identifying this Northern Municipalities Act, it is recognizing 

the fact that the North has special and unique concerns and 

problems. And I’m just wondering if this . . . by looking at the 

whole province, I understand the necessity of that in some parts. 

But I feel that the North has got some responsibilities and 

concerns that are not going to be addressed if we’re looking at 

. . . if there isn’t the same input from the local people. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, because for the very 

reason that the member has outlined, in that there are special 

conditions in the North, that there are unique features in the 

North, is the exact reason why we have a separate Act for the 

North. And we can set different property classes and different 

percentages of value for the North than are operative in the 

other parts of the province pursuant to the rural municipal Act 

and the urban municipal Act. So the existence of a separate Act 

is a recognition of those unique features of the North. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Are the property 

classes for the North identified as yet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no, none of the 

property classes that will find themselves into the regulations 

have been defined as yet. And there will be extensive 

consultations, and work is going on, and analysis is going on 

right now, and consultations will be held. And we should have, 

within a few weeks or months, decisions on what will be 

contained in the regulations. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are any of the regulations yet prepared for this 

Act? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, work is under way on 

the whole package of regulations. But no, the work is not 

complete. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are the people that are on the decision-making 

committee or board that are drawing up these regulations . . . 

are there a large number of them from the North? Do they have 

the local input? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the work is being done 

by the department in consultation with a variety of people. And 

I do just have a list here of participants in a consensus-building 

session that was held last November, and it indicates 

representation from Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Air Ronge, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Missinipe  a number of northern 

communities  as well as the Cameco Corporation, the Cigar 

Lake Mining Corporation, Municipal Government, SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), SUMA. 

 

There were certainly extensive discussions at that time. Those 

are just some of the participants, and these will be the people 

whose advice will be sought in making the decisions on the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess the final question for this session is, 

when you talk about all, you know, the potential for the impacts 

of this assessment and the reassessment and the market value 

versus the other values and the appeal process and the variable 

mill rate and the whole bloody bit, what type of consultations 

have you prepared especially for northern communities? And I 

most certainly agree that northern communities must be looked 

at in an entirely different sense. 

 

And in reference to the mining sector as well, obviously they’re 

going to be somewhat involved. Will you share that information 

with this House and with myself and with the people in the 

North once you determine where the problem areas and where 

the potential for a huge shift may occur? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t undertake 

to share the information in the House. It’s my hope that the 

House will no longer be sitting by the time this happens, 

although at the rate we’re going my expectations are getting 

kind of dim. But we certainly will have extensive consultations 

and information sharing before any regulations are put into 

effect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, we report very 

considerable progress this morning, and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

(1200) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

The Chair:  These estimates were last before the committee 

April 24. I’ll invite the minister to reintroduce his officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. I’d like to introduce to members of the opposition 

and to the people of Saskatchewan the officials I have with me 

today. 

 

To my right is Ray Clayton, who is the deputy minister; to my 

left, Dan McFadyen, who is the assistant deputy minister of 

resource policy and economics. Behind me is Donald Koop, 

assistant deputy minister of finance and administration. And 

Bruce Wilson is sitting there as well, the executive director of 

petroleum and natural gas. And in the back, Phil Reeves is the 

director of the mines branch; and Lynn Jacobson who is the 

director of personnel and administration. 

 

I want the members of the opposition to know that we brought a 

full complement because I know they will have some detailed 

questions, some of which I may not be able to have the answers 

on the tip of my tongue. So I’m sure the officials will be able to 

assist us in this endeavour. Thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just I would like to 

welcome your officials and yourself to this very important first 

round. 

 

Of course most of the questions that I have will be northern 

based. And just off the top of my head, could you kind of give 

us a perspective of, northern and southern, as to how your 

department’s vision has changed from this year to last year  if 

there’s any change, if there’s any optimism; is there any 

increase in production and exploration and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I think it’s fair to say that 

there is a great deal of optimism with respect to northern 

Saskatchewan, particularly in the mining sector. We have . . . 

and are looking at the expansion of uranium development, 

which the member will be well aware of. There are some 

opportunities that we see with respect to other precious metals 

and other mineral resources in the North. 

 

And in terms of vision I think that we want to, in a very planned 

way, develop these resources working with northern people, 

and I know that will be a concern of yours. I think that we want 

to see expansion of employment opportunities for northern 

Saskatchewan residents as well as other people in the province. 

We continue to work with the mining industry to ensure that we 

have a good complement of Northerners who are involved in 

the training process and in the workforce. 

 

And I think to some degree I could report to you that the mining 

industry in northern Saskatchewan has been probably more 

successful than many other sectors with respect to employment 

for aboriginal people. And I think it’s something that we as a 

province can be proud of. I think it’s something that the 

industry should be proud of. 

 

I don’t want to make a long, protracted answer, but just to 

describe to you what people in other parts of the province are 

saying about our initiatives in terms of the North, they report to 

us that we are light years ahead of where they are and they only 

hope that they could be where we are in terms of northern 

employment opportunities and involving Northerners in the 

economy. 

 

We had a forum some few months ago at which people from 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations presented their 

impression to industry and to other governments. And I think 

it’s fair to say that we have done a lot, but there is much more 

that we need to do. And certainly the department will continue 

to work with industry to assure Northerners that they will in fact 

be a very integral part of the development of the resources up 

there. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much, and we most certainly 

share some of those comments. 

 

I guess the mandate of your department is to achieve full and 

responsible development of Saskatchewan’s energy and mineral 

resources and create jobs. I think that’s the key issue in northern 

Saskatchewan, is jobs. And energy and especially mining in 

northern Saskatchewan is such a key part of the economy at this 

point in time. 

 

I guess in saying that, what mines do operate in northern 

Saskatchewan and who owns these mines and how is the 

Saskatchewan government involved in terms of shares? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member opposite, the only 

investment that we have in any operations pertaining to mining 

and to the mineral sector are the shares that we still hold in 

Cameco. We hold, I believe it’s in the neighbourhood of 5 

million shares, which is about a third of what we had. And I 

might be inaccurate in this, but I think we had . . . I shouldn’t 

quote the percentage because I’m not sure, but I know it’s in the 

neighbourhood of 5 million shares. But we have no active 

participation in any other mining operations in the North. 

 

We don’t have a list of all of the different mines that are 

operating there. Some you’ll be familiar with  Key Lake, 

those. But the department will put together a list of the ongoing 

mining operations in the North and we will undertake to get that 

to you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I guess it’s fair in saying that the 

Saskatchewan government and no Saskatchewan company 

operates or owns any mines in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Could I ask the member to repeat 

that question. I didn’t hear it. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess the question I asked is, is it fair to say 

that the Saskatchewan government and no Saskatchewan 

companies own or operate a mine in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think, to the member opposite, in 

terms of ownership of these corporations and where they’re 

headquartered, as you will know, Uranerz has headquartered its  



1528  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

mining operations, its uranium mining operations, now in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Claude Resources, headquartered here in Saskatchewan, operate 

the Seabea Gold mine. And of course Cameco, whose head 

office is here in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  What are some of your primary 

responsibilities as minister responsible for Energy and Mines? 

Do you look after the environment? I see you have a section of 

your budget talking about exploration and accommodation and 

central services. Like what exactly are some of your 

responsibilities when it comes to monitoring or looking after 

the mining sector? Do you have a monitoring secretary or 

committee and could you explain those services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think the main functions that the 

department participates in is certainly the regulatory and the tax 

regimes. That’s one of the functions of the department. 

 

The department is also involved in environmental assessment 

committees and actions that take place before mines are 

licensed. And other initiatives that we do is provide 

information, geological information, to people who are 

investing in the . . . and want to invest in exploration in mineral 

activities, as well as oil and gas, for land purchases. 

 

And as the member will be aware, there’s been an enormous 

amount of activity, in particular in the oil and gas sector, since 

we revamped the royalty regimes in 1993. That certainly has 

created an awful workload on the department. It’s a relatively 

small department compared to others but they seem to be able 

to manage with the enhanced workload, with the enhanced 

activity in the resource sector 

 

And so I guess basically, we deal with fiscal matters; we deal 

with licensing; we deal with environmental matters, and we 

help to facilitate investment through sharing of information in 

terms of the resources or the potential for resources in the 

province. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In reference to that particular statement, of 

your staff complement of 234.4 people that’s employed by your 

department, what portion of that is really northern responsibility 

versus southern responsibility? When I think about Energy and 

Mines, like, how many mines are there in northern 

Saskatchewan? We see an increase, so obviously we see a fair 

allocation of staff as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think to describe the department, 

as you will know, it’s a fairly small department relative to 

others, as I’ve indicated. We don’t have it broken down in 

terms of geological area . . . or geographical area, I’m sorry. 

 

I think the department is fairly flexible in that when there’s 

pressures on one area, or where there’s activity in one area, the 

department, the senior management of the department, will 

allocate the appropriate resources to be able to handle those 

pressures. We have a small office, as you will know, in La  

Ronge and I believe that there are about three employed there. 

But mainly the office is administered out of Regina, and the 

staff complement is put to the areas where we need the work 

and where the workload is. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess in essence, is there any 

possibility of making that information as to where your staff 

are, you know, primarily placed . . . and as well, a breakdown of 

your aboriginal employment rate versus your non-aboriginal 

employment rate. If that information could be presented to me, I 

would certainly appreciate it. 

 

I guess that goes to the next question, and I’ll basically put the 

question forth. What are your staff members’ names and their 

positions and their job descriptions in the northern areas? Talk 

about La Ronge. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We will undertake to get all of the 

information to the member and send it across. I don’t think they 

have that kind of detailed information here with them, but we 

do certainly for the senior management. But in terms of the 

whole staff complement, we will attempt to put all of that 

information together and send it across to you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. The next question, what is the 

total value of . . . you’re obviously in charge of the Cameco 

shares, as well as the minister responsible for Energy and 

Mines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well the Cameco shares are 

administered by Crown Investments Corporation, and the 

minister in charge is responsible for that. I am a member of the 

board of Crown Investments Corporation and so am involved in 

some of those discussions. 

 

The share value of the Cameco shares, as you will know, will 

vary from day to day based on the markets. It trades on the 

stock exchange. And so the value of our shares will appreciate 

and/or depreciate depending on market conditions. 

 

As the member will know, recently we sold in the 

neighbourhood of  and don’t hold me to these figures; I’m 

giving you pretty rough figures  but we sold in the 

neighbourhood of 10 million shares which generated revenue, 

roughly $700 million, that was put to debt reduction in the 

province. 

 

I think that we got a very good return for those assets. It appears 

to be a very strong industry now and hopefully growing. And 

hopefully the 5 million shares that we do still hold will 

appreciate in value over time so that we can deal with some of 

the problems that we have in this province. 

 

One of the main problems we have is the massive debt load in 

Saskatchewan. And if CIC deems it appropriate and the 

ministers on that board along with the officials deem it 

appropriate, we’ll certainly look at what we do in the future 

with the remaining shares. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  There is no question in my mind that the 

northern mining sector and the development of the North  



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

certainly has a lot of value to Saskatchewan. I think every 

northern resident is recognizing the tremendous opportunity 

associated with mining in the North. 

 

Has there ever been a very comprehensive study in terms of the 

total value of your land leases derived from the northern mining 

sector, as well as your royalties and your taxes that you also 

derived from the mining sector in the North? And as well the 

. . . all the taxes that are paid by your employees, no matter 

where they are actually living, whether they’re living in 

Saskatoon or Regina or Prince Albert. Has there been any kind 

of study done to determine the exact benefit and the exact dollar 

value from our perspective as provincial people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The department certainly tracks, 

you know, the amount of revenue generated through royalties 

and through taxation from the different sectors, whether it be 

uranium or potash or oil and gas. That’s part of our job, part of 

our mandate. It’s part of what we do to prepare for our budgets 

and to help the Department of Finance prepare their budget 

estimates. And that certainly is a big function within the 

department. 

 

I can say to the member that we, along with other government 

departments, provided some fairly detailed information to the 

uranium panel at its hearings. Part of that came from Energy 

and Mines, part of it came from other departments such as 

Economic Development, Finance, within government. But we 

track the revenue flows on a fairly regular basis. 

 

In terms of the economic spin-off to the staff complement, I 

don’t know that we have ever done that within Energy and 

Mines or within other government departments. But I think it’s 

fair to assume that one could use a multiplier effect of spin-off 

benefits to a government department similar to what you would 

with other industries. And I guess the multiplier effect can 

certainly vary depending on the amount of remuneration that 

the employees receive, the wage levels, whether or not it’s 

seasonal work, or whether it’s full-time work. 

 

So I think it’s figures that we just haven’t been asked to put 

together  we haven’t had occasion to put it together — in 

terms of the employees within the department. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I think that type of study would really, you 

know, in essence prove the value of mining and the 

contributions that northern Saskatchewan makes to the 

economy of the province. 

 

When you talk about the total value, what other charges have 

you got for the mining sector? Suppose I own a company and I 

want to set up shop and open up a gold mine next to 

Ile-a-la-Crosse or something. What process would I have to go 

through and what taxes would I have to expect to pay in all the 

leases and so on and so forth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that it 

would not only be the Department of Energy and Mines that 

you would want to contact; you would want to contact 

Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, in that 

they are responsible for letting surface leases. 

The royalty structure would be available from Energy and 

Mines so that you could determine, based on the, I guess, the 

richness of your ore body, whether or not — and whatever the 

markets are — whether or not you could make the mine deliver 

a reasonable return for you. So the royalties would come, the 

royalty structure would come, as information from Energy and 

Mines. 

 

While your mine would be operating, you would be responsible 

to pay for lease rentals, which rates would be set by Energy and 

Mines through their rate-setting structure. And then I guess you 

would have to comply with the federal and provincial income 

tax regulations that all businesses in that field of endeavour 

would apply to. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So in essence if I want to set up a mining 

company basically in any location in northern Saskatchewan, as 

long as I meet the provincial and federal responsibilities and 

I’m able to do it on my own, basically a mining company can 

set up shop anywhere that they wish. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think it’s fair to say that the 

department would certainly help to try and facilitate the 

development of mineral deposits, keeping in mind that there 

will be certain environmental requirements by both the federal 

and provincial governments that companies that would want to 

operate would have to adhere to. 

 

I could say to the member that we have been working as a 

province with Natural Resources Canada and with Environment 

Canada to try and streamline the process with respect to 

environmental scrutiny of proposed operations. One of the 

difficulties we have is that the, I guess you can call it the red 

tape, or the process, is a very costly process for industry. And in 

some cases I think it creates an environment where business 

will look elsewhere, where mining operations will look 

elsewhere in the world where their cost of operations are 

lessened. 

 

I can say that we work, my department works, very closely with 

Natural Resources Canada, to try and have the federal 

Environment department understand that we don’t need two 

sets of similar scrutiny and we don’t need duplication. And 

what we want to do is reduce that overlap. We believe that our 

department  our environmental initiatives here in 

Saskatchewan, our administration  can aptly deal with the 

concerns of people in this province. 

 

So the bottom line is that we’re working where we can to 

reduce the duplication. There’s still much more cost to industry 

than there needs to be. Industry is very much aware of it and 

continue to work and pressure the federal government to work 

with us to reduce the amount of bureaucracy, the amount of 

paperwork, and the amount of overlap. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I certainly wish you . . . on record that as a 

member of the Assembly in that particular riding, I support 

northern development as a whole. I think there is no question 

that we have to look at that opportunity and try and develop it 

as best we can with the full intent of maximizing the benefits to 

the people in the region. 



1530  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

And I also support your efforts of trying to streamline the 

environmental process that some of the companies have to go 

through, because you do it for one particular government and 

you have to do it again, and of course the cost becomes a factor. 

So we certainly have to do our share as governments to try and 

attract industry here. 

 

So to that point, have you done anything in terms of trying to 

attract companies to Saskatchewan by giving them deals or 

programs or anything of that nature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We do that in, I guess, a number of 

areas. We have within the department a lot of geological 

information that we try and share with interested business when 

they come to the province looking for developmental 

opportunities. And I think on the other side of that coin is that 

we try and have in place a reasonable royalty and taxation 

regime that doesn’t preclude investment dollars from coming to 

our province. 

 

I think that as investment dollars . . . And when investors are 

looking at the costs of operations, look at a number of areas. 

They’ll look at the costs of labour. They will look at the kind of 

bureaucracy and kind of process that they have to deal with in 

terms of establishing their businesses. And certainly they will 

look at the costs of royalties as to whether or not they can make 

a fair return for their shareholders. 

 

(1230) 

 

And so we as a province work hard to try and facilitate those 

investment opportunities. I think we’ve been very successful as 

it relates to potash, to uranium, to some degree, gold. As you 

will know, there’s a couple of new small gold mines on stream 

in the North and we certainly are doing what we can to attract 

investment. 

 

I guess some of the trips that ministers and the Premier are 

criticized for taking, in terms of international trips, are another 

element of government initiatives that I think are very 

important. We need to be able to send the message to 

international investors that we have an abundance of resources 

here in our province; that we are a government that is interested 

in attracting business and business opportunities. 

 

And I think  so all of those initiatives really are quite 

important  and I think have borne some fruit in the past, as is 

evidenced by the activity in the oil and gas and in the mining 

sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  There’s no question that some of the trips 

that are taken to promote business in Saskatchewan are 

necessary. I think that to highlight the attributes of 

Saskatchewan, in terms of its people and the possibilities and 

the resources that we have, certainly warrants some of these 

trips. 

 

I think the point that . . . I mean when you look at the northern 

perspective, besides the potash and the gold and uranium, is 

there any other mining activity in Saskatchewan as a whole, and 

where is this activity? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well as the member will be aware, 

we’ve been active in the mining of gold which we use to 

generate the majority of our electrical energy in the province in 

the southern part of the province. There are a number of mines 

in operation there. We have sodium sulphate, clay deposits. As 

the member may know, in Denare Beach, they are working at 

copper and zinc extraction. 

 

There’s been a lot of activity in my home area and I’m certainly 

hopeful that it bears some fruit in terms of diamond 

exploration. There’s some kimberlite pipes, and there’s been an 

awful lot of money spent on drilling and exploration in that 

area. 

 

So there is some potential there. And as well, we have been 

over the years developing some of the other base metals and 

minerals. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Is it fair to assume that since Saskatchewan, 

northern Saskatchewan consists of half the land mass of the 

whole province, that the majority of your mining activity really 

is in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think in terms of value and 

probably the majority of the revenue generated and the activity 

would not be in northern Saskatchewan. Potash is certainly the 

largest activity in the mining sector as well as I’ve indicated the 

activity in the coal fields. 

 

But that’s certainly not to suggest that northern Saskatchewan is 

not an important element of the development activity because, 

as you well know, the uranium development is doing very well 

and has a lot of potential. And we’re certainly hopeful for even 

more activity in the North. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Going back to the mining in northern 

Saskatchewan, you know you mentioned earlier the fact that the 

employment stats are something that you’re certainly quite 

proud of, and certainly I support every effort to employ people 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The big thing is when you talk about mining in the North in 

general, there’s a lot of people that don’t have a whole heck of 

a lot of information in terms of what is mined and what is 

hauled out and what the value is. Will your government 

undertake to make some of that information more available and 

more common to the people of the North, because there is a 

large group of people out there that are not totally familiar with 

what’s happening with the mining sector and what type of 

resources are being developed and where and how. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We have been working with 

industry in terms of creating awareness throughout the 

province. As the member may know, we dedicate a week to the 

mining industry and set aside a week whereby industry works 

with the province to create awareness and to have people 

understand how positive the impact of their activities are, really, 

in the province. Companies have been involved in a number of 

initiatives. 

 

Awareness in the schools with promotion of the some mineral 

activity . . . we just recently had a competition in Saskatchewan  



May 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

schools whereby they could participate in choosing a mineral to 

designate as Saskatchewan’s mineral, which happened to be 

potash. And I was pleased to be able to attend to a ceremony in 

Saskatoon with industry and with the young people from a 

couple of schools who were successful in having their project 

selected and potash being selected as being Saskatchewan’s 

mineral. 

 

There are a number of tours that go on in the uranium sector 

and others with the school teachers who then bring back that 

awareness to their classrooms. I believe the mining week 

designated is coming up here end of the month and I would 

invite the members of the opposition to participate with us in 

helping to create awareness of how important this industry is 

for us there are a number of events. And what I will do is 

undertake to send information to the members of the opposition 

so that they may be able to join us in some of these events that 

are taking place throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Just a few more questions here. I 

noticed when I was talking with the minister of municipal 

affairs, I had my daughter, who was visiting the legislature 

today, fall asleep. Now I’m speaking with you and my wife and 

daughter have left, so I’m going to have to get a little tougher 

here, just to kind of stimulate the conversation here. 

 

One of the crying problems in northern Saskatchewan is of 

course the high cost of doing business, and in our particular 

region, the Athabasca constituency, there is a tremendous cost 

of transporting fuel and the whole bit. In particular, one 

community of Green Lake, they operate a saw mill, much as 

similar to the saw mill in Meadow Lake but much smaller in 

terms of size. They had been speaking about a hook-up to 

natural gas and they’re wondering how the government was 

able to give incentive to the pulp company in Meadow Lake to 

hook up the natural gas and not to the saw mill in Green Lake 

which is only another 16 miles. 

 

You know so as the minister responsible for Energy and Mines, 

why can’t the community like Green Lake be hooked into 

natural gas so that it’ll in turn help the homeowners and help 

the businesses of the north-west? And they certainly want to see 

that happen. 

 

What’s your general attitude towards servicing northern 

communities with natural gas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well the question really isn’t . . . I 

guess I shouldn’t say appropriate because I’m going to answer 

it, but I think it’s not a question that would be directed during 

Energy and Mines estimates. This would be, I think, something 

that would be more appropriate during the discussions in 

Crown Corporations Committee on SaskEnergy. But having 

said that, I’m going to try and answer it for you. 

 

I just want to give a little history in terms of the natural gas 

distribution system in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the 1980s, the former administration embarked upon a very 

aggressive rural gasification program. The investment was 

something in the neighbourhood of $335 million which is no  

small amount of money. And upon reviewing that proposal, 

neighbouring jurisdictions were wondering how SaskEnergy 

was able to accomplish this. 

 

Well they did accomplish it, but it’s not without cost because 

the return on the amount of gas that we sell through that rural 

distribution system will never return an investment. Basically 

it’s an investment that will never pay for itself. 

 

So the government looked at this policy, looked at the fiscal 

health of SaskEnergy and what we might be able to do to 

reduce the debt-equity ratio and make it a healthy company and 

embark on projects that don’t cost the taxpayers money through 

those kinds of investments, and it was decided that we would 

expand and continue with rural gas and with northern gas but 

we would do it based on a return on our investment and a return 

of costs. 

 

We can and certainly will deal with communities in terms of 

their desire to have natural gas  it’s a reasonably cheap source 

of energy  but it’s got to be done based on a reasonable rate 

of return for SaskEnergy, for the corporation. 

 

I can understand what communities like Green Lake and others 

in the North are saying in terms of energy costs, because I know 

that heating with propane and trucking propane to some of 

these communities certainly doesn’t come without costs. We 

will work with you and with people in the communities in your 

area. We’ll do a cost analysis, and based on the cost analysis, 

we can give them the information in terms of how much it 

would cost per unit to bring those kind of resources into the 

communities. We do it on an ongoing basis. 

 

I’m not familiar with whether or not that’s happened 

specifically with Green Lake, but if that community is 

interested in sourcing the costs of perhaps bringing it across, 

we’re certainly more than willing to look at that with them, but 

bearing in mind that the corporation would need a reasonable 

rate of return. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So again just to summarize, that if every 

northern community and every mayor and council and petitions 

of 10,000 people from the north-west came to you and asked 

you as minister responsible, would you consider if the options 

were, you know, if the option was to gasify, I guess, the entire 

west side, you know, provide natural gas service, that your 

department would certainly look into it? Because we know it is 

done in other regions in other communities probably with not as 

much focus and attention. 

 

But certainly the west side and Green Lake is one prime 

example of how natural gas, a cheap source of energy, can 

certainly stimulate the economy. And as minister responsible, 

would you be in a position to instruct your department and start 

looking in and researching with the communities this very 

option? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  What I will offer the member is if 

the community of Green Lake has approached him and if they 

haven’t approached SaskEnergy in terms of costing out natural 

gas supply, I invite the member to give me a call. We’re around  



1532  Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1996 

here quite a bit now while the session is on, so maybe it’s a 

good time. 

 

And if there is some interest, if you want to come over to my 

office, we can sit down and I can put you in charge . . . in touch 

with officials at SaskEnergy who would be able to undertake 

that kind of work on your behalf and on behalf of the people of 

Green Lake. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I think I’ll take the offer of putting me in 

charge. I notice you had changed the response halfway through. 

 

But I guess the other question in northern Saskatchewan  as 

you’re probably aware, there is a lot of impacts when you talk 

about treaty land entitlement and the Indian bands involved. 

Has that ever been a contentious issue with, you know, with 

your department and a mining company and an Indian band, 

where land is somewhat being involved in negotiations or land 

is being contested by the Indian band? Has that been a major 

problem with your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well no, it certainly . . . it hasn’t 

been a difficulty with Energy and Mines in the past, and we 

would certainly want to work with first nations and with Metis 

groups from the North in communities in terms of having them 

understand as development opportunities come. We want to 

work with them. 

 

And I think no one wants to see difficulties in terms of a 

process to get economic development initiatives going. And I 

think that’s part of why we haven’t had those kinds of 

difficulties with mineral and explorations in the North. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The other process we spoke about northern 

Saskatchewan, several years ago there was discussion of a 

peatmoss power plant, and I’m not sure whether you’d be 

involved with that particular problem. But the question we have 

is, has there been a lot of exploration and studies done on the 

value of peatmoss and whether there is an abundance of 

peatmoss in the north-west and whether there is any value in 

developing this particular resource? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that there 

was a lot of study done in the 1980s with respect to peatmoss, 

but anything that they could determine would suggest to 

investors that the economics of development just weren’t there. 

 

So has there been work done? The answer is, certainly. And you 

know, there’s . . . that resource is there and it may at some time 

become economical to develop. But at this point I’m told by the 

department officials that no one has been able to make the 

economics of development of that resource work. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, did 

you bring the answers to the global questions that have been 

provided to your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials that they’re 

in the process of working on a big bundle of information that  

you requested. When the appropriate documents are put 

together, we’ll forward them to you 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, there are just a few things 

then that I’ll list that I would like for you to bring . . . well give 

it to the opposition parties before in fact you come back into 

estimates. Or if that can’t be done, then bring it the next time 

you’re in estimates. But we would like a list. 

 

Firstly, on the mineral compensation, I see that there are 

transfers to and for individuals for both ‘95-96, ‘96-97, of some 

substantial amounts of money. Could you provide us a list of 

who and what the money was for? Also bring lists for current 

year, past year, and in fact for a few years back, of number of 

wells in the province, barrels or metres that they produce, the 

dollars of revenue to the province, broken down by royalty, tax, 

lease fees. Would you be able to provide that to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  With respect to the compensation, 

there are two areas of compensation: one is to former owners of 

mineral rights and the other is in areas where there is partial 

ownership by others, other than the Crown. And those are 

referred to as, I’m told, trust certificates. So those are the two 

areas of compensation. 

 

In terms of the activity in the oil and gas patch, we can put 

together the numbers of wells drilled, the dollar value that we 

have taken in royalties, and we can also put together the 

numbers in terms of lease fees. If you could give me some idea 

of what kind of parameters — how many years back — because 

I’d . . . rather than have the officials scurrying to get all of this 

information, if you can give me, you know, what years you 

would like this information for, we can undertake to provide 

that. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well it’s up to 

you because of course we only have to deal with what you’re 

obligated to here, but if you don’t mind going back three or four 

years if that information is readily available . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Okay, you can provide that. Well then that 

would be the end of our questioning till we have this 

information. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Speaker:  Before adjourning the House, the Speaker 

may wish those of you who are mothers a very happy Mother’s 

Day; and those of you who are not mothers but have some or 

others in your life who are, to have an enjoyable weekend with 

the mothers in your lives. 

 

Have an enjoyable weekend. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:50 p.m. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1509 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1509 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1509 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1510 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
Wall ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1519 
Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Preeceville Fire  

Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
Weyburn Youth Celebrate 100th Anniversary of Red Cross  

Bradley ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
Mother’s Day  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
Hamilton ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia Awareness Day  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 

Canada Health Day and Registered Psychiatric Nurses’ Day  
Stanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 

Globe Theatre Fund-raiser  
Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1512 

Indian Head Farmer Elected President of the Soil Conservation Council of Canada  
Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Recovery of Government Funds  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 
Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1513 

Economic Development  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 
Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

Proposed Health Legislation  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 
Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

SaskPower Executives’ Car Leases  
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 
Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1515 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 
Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 

National Infrastructure Program  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1516 
Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1516 

 
Highways Maintenance  

McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 
Upshall....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 



STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER  
First Reading of a Bill Ruled Out of Order  

Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1518 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 87  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2)  
Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1518 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1519 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a consequential amendment to another Act 

Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1519 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1519 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  
General Revenue Fund  
Energy and Mines  Vote 23  

Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1527 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1527 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1532 

 


