
















































March 25, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 487 

 March 25, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left is 

Mr. Bernie Churko, assistant deputy minister, policy and 

program division. On my right is Mr. Dave Abbey, manager of 

legislation and the safety branch, Department of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening, 

Minister. Welcome again to your staff and assistants and I take 

it we’re into the highway Bill, otherwise I wouldn’t have saw 

your good-looking face over there opening up the proceedings. 

And so I want to tell you, Minister, that we’ve come upon one 

more little glitch in the system that we’d like to bring to your 

attention while we’re dealing with the amendment to The 

Highway Traffic Act. 

 

As you said the other day, this is a Bill that’s supposed to clean 

up some of the things that are wrong and messy in the old Bills, 

and so on, and if we’re going to do that then let’s try to do the 

whole thing at once, as I pointed out the other day. 

 

What has come to our attention, Minister, is that apparently in 

Saskatchewan when a farmer sells his land, the day that he sells 

his property his farm plates by law become null and void and he 

cannot in fact, even after he sells his land, then go out and haul 

the rest of his grain to market using that truck. 

 

Now every farmer that I know of that has sold their farm has 

probably broken this law, except for this one fellow who 

thought to go and check and asked. And maybe he’s wrong now 

so you can correct this if he happens to be wrong, but he went 

to his SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) agent and 

said, is it legal to drive this truck now that I’ve sold my land, 

and the guy said, of course it is  you’ve got your licence; it’s 

paid for. But just a minute; we’d better check the Act and make 

sure. Well he said they hauled out a great big book and they 

flopped it open and they went through it for a while, and lo and 

behold, he said they came up with this line that says on the day 

that you sign the papers your licence is no longer void . . . or no 

longer good, it’s void, and you then have to know that and have 

your plate, of course, transferred to a commercial licence or 

some other licence in order to legally haul the rest of your grain 

to market. 

 

I think, Minister, that it would be fair for farmers who sell their 

land to be able to use their vehicles until that licence expires or 

have some given, advertised time limit so that people would 

know that. I really don’t believe that anybody knows about this 

problem in the law. So I bring that to your attention. 

I didn’t get the information until late today so I hadn’t any 

chance to get an amendment fixed up for it. But if it’s 

something that makes sense to you, I would encourage you to 

do it. I’m not going to hold the Bill up any further. We have a 

couple of amendments that we’re going to deal with, but I 

would encourage you that if you’re sincere about wanting to 

have this Bill clean up your department, then go the extra step 

and clean up this other problem as well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. If I could, when we closed off the 

last day, I was doing some questioning. I’d like to continue that 

if I might. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just had a few questions and observations yet 

with respect to the Bill that we were on last Friday, and I asked 

you some questions with respect to the structuring of the 

Highway Traffic Board and the remuneration of the board. 

 

I believe you indicated  and correct me if I’m wrong  that 

the board meets formally 15 times a year, that there are an 

additional 30 meetings as well as 15 days in public hearings. 

Could you maybe just go over those meetings in a little more 

detail, so that we have an appreciation of the time involved by 

the members of the board  in other words, to clarify the 

number of meetings each individual might be reasonably 

expected to attend. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member for his 

question. We were estimating approximately when you asked 

that question, because there’s no way of telling how many times 

the Highway Traffic Board will meet. Certainly it depends on 

authorities. For instance, how many trucking companies are 

looking for authorities, how many bus companies are looking 

for authorities, how many drivers that have been suspended are 

asking for maybe driving privileges that are restricted and so all 

of those things. . . 

 

I guess my department officials are saying that maybe kind of 

the average would be dealing with the drivers’ licence issues is 

approximately 30 times a year; dealing with motor vehicle 

issues, motor carrier issues, probably you know as much as 18 

or 20 times a year; other, 15 days a year. And of course there’s 

committees and other things that they have to do. So it varies 

from year to year. There’s no real number you can put on that. It 

certainly depends on the workload that the Highway Traffic 

Board is requested to handle. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Would you say that those numbers would be 

possibly an average in the last five years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The officials tell me that the drivers’ 

licence days of work are probably quite similar over the last five 

years. However the motor carrier area is less than what they 

used to do. And likely that workload will get smaller with 

deregulation coming into affect by 1998. So we expect that that 

workload will probably get less. 

 

On the other hand, you know, there’s maybe a role with the new 

legislation in regards to drinking and driving that may affect 

their workload as well. 



488  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Mr. McLane:  How many of the meetings does the chairman 

of the board . . . how many meetings would he attend out of the 

total? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay. Most of the . . . he would attend 

all, or at least if he’s able to, the motor carrier meetings. Also 

the public hearings, he would attend some of the public 

hearings, not necessarily all. The drivers’ licence issues, some 

but not necessarily all. And probably you would look at about 

12 extra days for the chairman with other issues. 

 

Mr. McLane:  On Friday last we talked about the reason for 

formalizing the payments schedule, and I was just wondering 

who’s had authority to authorize the remuneration to this point 

in time. And did you believe there was a problem with it, and if 

so, what was that problem or why did you want to formalize it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  In most cases, the remuneration is 

within the Act for a particular board but in the case of the 

Highway Traffic Board it was not. And Justice believes that we 

should have it within the Act and that’s why we’re moving it 

into the Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Okay. How was it authorized before, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Originally it was by policy and now this 

will put it into the Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’m not sure I understand what you mean by 

policy. Who would have the . . . who would authorize the 

payment for the number of meetings that they had? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  How policy is set in this case is the 

permanent head determines, based on other boards, and passes 

it by Finance and if it’s approved then it becomes policy. And 

so it’s been the policy of the Department of Highways . . . Or 

the honorarium, pardon me, of the Highway Traffic Board to be 

set at what it is and that’s basically so much per diem, and also 

the government rates for meals and for cents per kilometre. 

 

Mr. McLane:  The meetings are at the call of the chair and 

the remuneration is authorized by the chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Not by the chair, to the hon. member, 

but by the department head which would be the deputy minister 

of Transportation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  You mentioned that this is the only board that 

is not included under legislation for the remuneration. Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I don’t believe it’s the only board but 

it’s one of the boards that is not. And so, when we’re trying . . . 

when we do get into the mode of cleaning up a Bill like we’re 

doing here, we would do those kinds of housekeeping activities. 

 

Mr. McLane:  We talked last day as well, Mr. Minister, 

about appealing the decisions of the Highway Traffic Board, 

and I’m not sure that I clearly understood what your answer 

was. You indicated that the board is of quasi-judicial nature,  

and you indicated that appeals would have to be made through 

the courts. 

 

I guess what I was wondering was, if the board sets a regulation 

or undertakes a course of action that could be questionable, 

what is the course of action that could be taken by those 

affected before those regulations or the actions become 

effective and also their enactment? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, I think the answer’s the same 

thing as I gave you on Friday, is that if you’re not satisfied with 

a decision by the board, you could take it back to the board to 

have them look at it again. If you still were not satisfied, then 

you would take it to the court system, or could do that. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, regarding the regulations once 

again for this Bill  and other ones of course would be 

applicable as well  that have some major concerns about a 

Bill being presented without the regulations. And you 

mentioned the other day that you plan to consult on the 

regulations after this Bill has been dealt with. 

 

I’m not sure that that satisfies what I’m asking. And I guess 

what I would ask you is, do you have any idea about the 

regulations that are envisioned under this Bill at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly I do not at this time, and that’s 

why we need some time to consult. 

 

And you’re talking, I guess, about the farm implements, the 

agricultural implements area. It’s certainly going to take some 

consultation with farmers, with farm groups, with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), with 

dealers and those people to determine exactly what those 

regulations should be. Some of the suggestions that the 

department have received is perhaps it could be on tire size or 

on speed and those kinds of things as part of it, but that would 

only be a small part of it. 

 

So it’s a big job. And again, do we have those pictures here? 

 

An Hon. Member:  No, I’m sorry; we don’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, we didn’t bring those pictures 

tonight, but I know that the third party took a look at the 

pictures to look at the problem that’s out there because of 

course agriculture has been diversifying so very rapidly. 

Farmers have been inventing new farm equipment on a regular 

basis. We’ve got to be able to determine whether in fact it is a 

farm implement or whether it’s a highway or road vehicle. 

 

And that’s some of the problems that we have, and certainly 

we’re going to need time to consult to determine that. I would 

appreciate your input into that as well. When we develop the 

regulations, certainly if it’s not ready by the time this House 

takes the break for the summer, we would be certainly sending 

it to you to get your opinion on those regulations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess if you don’t have any idea what the  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

regulations would be, I guess I would wonder why you would 

bring forth the legislation now before you have some idea as to 

where it’s headed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I guess it’s another reason why I 

suggested earlier that some of these things are better in 

regulations than the Act because we can deal with them in a 

more speedy manner. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Away from the legislature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The member says, away from the 

legislature. Well if he doesn’t want farmers that perhaps would 

have a new agricultural vehicle . . . that he would want some 

determination and some suggestions into those regulations, I 

would think that he would want us to deal with them as fast as 

we could and not wait for each legislative cycle. 

 

And that’s why we would like that area in regulations: to meet 

the need of the farmers. And I’m sure you would be in 

agreement with that. It’s just not acceptable to wait a whole 

year to have those regulations in place and to be able to address 

this issue for our Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I think, Mr. Minister, that . . . certainly not 

saying, you know, hold everything up in here and do it in closed 

discussion. What we’re saying is exactly the opposite. 

 

It would seem to me that you would go out and consult with the 

farmers if they wanted this change, come back, present your 

Bill with the regulations, and we could discuss it. And our 

consultations at the same time could have been taking place 

with the farmers. And being one of those, I have some idea as 

to what’s happening out there in the agriculture field. And I did 

look at your pictures that you presented last week, and they 

were very nice. 

 

I guess one of the things that I will be hitting on . . . and 

fortunately or unfortunately, it happens to be your Bill that’s the 

first one that I’ve had a chance to question on, so I guess I’m 

getting on you first on these regulations. And I would certainly 

hope . . . and I’ve always thought in my former life as a farmer 

and a taxpayer of the province that I’d like to see some of these 

things opened up more and have a more open process as 

opposed to having things done behind closed cabinet doors. 

 

On the throne speech, your Premier talked about preparing for 

the new century, and I’d just like to quote from this little card 

here, if I could, where it says: 

 

My government accepts a renewed mandate from the 

people of Saskatchewan with enthusiasm. 

 

Our province has restored its financial health. 

 

Our economy is strong and growing. 

 

Saskatchewan today is the best place in the world in which 

to live and raise a family. 

 

The 21st century holds the promise of even greater things  

to come. Now is the time to prepare for that new century; 

to seize the moment with the plans, policies and reforms 

required to build a better and more prosperous future for 

all. 

 

So I guess I’ll ask you, Mr. Minister, to lead the way in 

changing the manner in which we consider legislation by 

providing the draft regulation with each piece of your 

legislation. And further, will you undertake to convince your 

cabinet colleagues to begin preparing the new century, as in 

using your words, by doing the same thing: laying all the cards 

on the table? 

 

Maybe I’ll let him answer that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well first of all to the member, I want to 

tell him that I certainly agree with what he’s stated and what 

he’s read. And I agree with the Premier and his comments. And 

certainly we are preparing for the 21st century. And that’s 

exactly why we’re bringing this into the Act while we’re doing 

the housekeeping. 

 

What farmers have told us is that we are changing out there. 

We’re diversifying. We’re in fact very innovative, and we 

believe that some of the new equipment that we’re 

manufacturing on our farms is good for our farm operation, and 

we need you to look at that situation. And we said, you know, I 

think you’re right, and I think we’ll do that. And so that’s why 

we’ve brought this piece here. 

 

But we’ve got to change the Act before we develop the 

regulations. If we would’ve had the regulations already ready to 

go, that’s fine. But we need to consult with the farmers. We 

need to know what they’re thinking, what their ideas are. But 

we have to have the Act changed so in fact that we can process 

the regulations to help our farm economy and to help our 

Saskatchewan farmers. And that’s why we’re doing it. We are 

preparing for the 21st century. 

 

Mr. McLane: .I suggest that this process, Mr. Minister, 

might be a little bit like the farmer going out and buying his 

chemical, spraying it on the field, and then going back and 

reading the label to see what it was meant for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, we all know  and I know that 

you know  that the devil is in the detail. And if we’re to be 

effective legislators, we need all the facts before us to make a 

decision and all this information . . . and I’ll ask you once again 

to make that commitment. And at the end of . . . as we’re going 

through clause by clause at the end of this Bill, we’ll be 

proposing an amendment to it, and I hope that you and your 

members opposite will support us. 

 

If we’re going to move into the 21st century, we have to 

change, and we have to change everything, not just selective 

things that the government feels are important. We need to look 

at the whole picture, and we need to be open-minded about  



490  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

these projects if we’re saying we really want a change. 

 

So I’d just like to thank the minister and his officials for 

coming, and I hope that at the end of this Bill that you will 

support the amendment to it. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, if you 

had an answer for the last question, you can throw that in with 

the answer that you give me to my question and kill two birds 

with one stone. I know you will want to answer the member. 

 

So, Minister, very simply put, I want to know  the farmer that 

phoned me and asked if his licence on his farm truck was void 

the day that he signed his bill of sale to sell his farm  was he 

correct in that assumption? If he was, is there any vehicle 

available for farmers to get an extension so that they can use 

their farm truck to deliver the rest of their grain and finish off 

their farming operations after they have in fact legally sold their 

land but still may own and control produce? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  .Could you repeat the question, sir. I’m 

sorry; I didn’t hear it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s three strikes and 

you’re out, and I think you know the old story. That’s twice. 

 

Once again, could you tell us, Minister, if a farmer’s vehicle 

that has been licensed with a farm licence, if that licence plate 

is void the day that the farmer in fact signs the dotted line 

saying that he has sold his farm, if that licence is void on that 

day, then we wonder if there is a vehicle available that can be 

used in order to use that truck to haul the rest of the grain or the 

rest of the produce away from that farm. Because often farmers 

do sell their farms and they still retain ownership of some of the 

product on the farm, and to get it from farm gate to market 

might then require either breaking the law inadvertently or by 

choice, whichever, unless one goes out then and spends extra 

money to hire someone. 

 

So could you clear that matter up for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think the member’s asked a really 

good question and one that I don’t know, and my officials are 

not sure. So certainly we will look into it for you, sir. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. Now I see why you 

took three times before you answered. But you could have just 

said that to start with, and we would have all accepted that. And 

I think we’ll roll on with the rest of the Bill if that’s what the 

rest of the group wants to do over here. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just a couple of questions for the minister. 

Northern Saskatchewan covers 252,430 square miles, roughly 

half of the province, and I noticed that you earlier . . . I was 

advised that you don’t have a board representative on The 

Highway Traffic Act, and on the Highway Traffic Board. And I 

was just wondering how and why a rep from this area was not 

selected to sit on the Highway Traffic Board, and what is your 

procedure for selecting potential members on this board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well my answer to the member opposite  

is the same as it was on Friday . . . is that right now we do not 

have a member from northern Saskatchewan. Certainly when 

there is an opening on the board, I would certainly consider 

that. Right now we’re not expanding boards. In fact we’re 

trying to reduce boards so that there’s less cost to government 

and to the taxpayers of the province. But certainly if something 

occurs that there is a board member needed, certainly I would 

take that into consideration. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I don’t know if it’s in order to ask, you 

know, the names of the members that are on this board and 

where are they from and how is the process . . . in terms of 

selecting an individual to sit on this board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member for his 

question. We have one member from Lloydminster, one 

member from Arborfield, one member from Elrose, one 

member from Canora. We have one member from Regina, one 

member from Aneroid. And the secretary who is also a part of 

the board, Mr. Weafer is from Regina. 

 

(1930) 

 

And how they are appointed is by Order in Council, and they 

come from various organizations or people suggesting names. 

And that’s why I say that if in fact we do have an opening at 

some point in time, we certainly would listen to your 

suggestions at that point in time. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Was there any names ever submitted from 

northern Saskatchewan in reference to people being interested 

to sit on the Highway Traffic Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The board was in place when I’d 

become minister, and so I have not made any changes, and so I 

can’t answer that. There hasn’t been any recently, but I don’t 

know what happened before that. I can’t answer that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Is there any anticipated openings on the 

board, if you’re aware of anybody that may be stepping down or 

somebody that may not be interested or somebody that might be 

moving on to different fields? Is there any anticipation of seats 

being open in the board within the next several months or 

several years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly if you have some ideas of a 

person that would be good on the board that you could submit 

those names to myself, and certainly I would take them into 

consideration if, in fact, we have some resignation or somebody 

leaving the board. 

 

We don’t want to add to boards. We don’t believe that we 

should at this point in time. I mean we’re all tightening our 

belts. Everybody across the province is tightening their belts a 

bit, and we don’t believe that we need to expand the board. I 

know they’re worked . . . they’ve got lots of work, and they 

work hard, but we don’t see the point in increasing the board 

size at this time. 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

Ms. Murray:  With leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you. And thank you to the minister and 

the member from Athabasca for this courtesy. Seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery are a large collection of Cubs. Now some of 

them are part of the 87th Cubs  there they are  and in fact 

13 of them are, and they are here visiting the legislature with 

Leonard Braumberger, Alan Gillespie and Bob Camble. 

 

They’ve had a tour of the building and later on, after they’ve 

had some time to visit here, I’m looking forward to meeting 

with them for a photograph, some drinks, and some questions. 

So would you please join me in giving them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet: 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Chairman, I too would like leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you 

to the minister and the member for allowing time in order for us 

to do this. 

 

I too want to introduce some Cubs who are in the Speaker’s 

gallery, Mr. Chairman, to the House, and ask the House to join 

me in welcoming them. There are 28 who are here today, this 

evening. They are the Glencairn 79th Cub Pack. They have had 

a tour and we’re going to be spending a little time with them. I 

see some of them are waving to us. And we’re going to spend 

some time with them right after they leave the gallery. 

 

They’re accompanied by a number of chaperons: Belinda 

Keller, Dave Duguid, Jim Morgan, Terry Heichert, Tracie 

Raymer, Arlene Gunn, Joe Zieger, and Ellen McEwen. Mr. 

Chairman, please join me, and I ask the members also to do the 

same, in welcoming these marvellous young people to the 

gallery and to the legislature here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 16 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I also would like to apologize to the minister. 

I may have missed the answer, but I just wanted to know what 

the primary functions of the Highway Traffic Board was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you for the question, to the 

member from Athabasca. The majority of their workload deals 

with operating authorities, motor carrier issues. The other thing  

that they deal a lot with is drivers’ licence appeals. It may be 

that a person has been convicted for impaired driving, it might 

be the first offence, and they are requesting a limited use of 

their driver’s licence or a restricted licence of some kind. So 

those appeals they would listen to. 

 

Speed limits, by-laws, municipal by-laws, and those kinds of 

things. So they have a fairly busy workload. And it’s certainly 

. . . it’s a board that is really needed in this area. And they do a 

lot of good work. And certainly I guess I, as a minister, 

wouldn’t . . . or before I was a minister, would not have 

appreciated the work that the Highway Traffic Board does, but 

now being very close to that, I certainly appreciate the workload 

that they have and the work that they do. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So this committee has no reference or any 

bearing on decisions on road construction and road safety 

problems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No, they don’t have anything to do with 

the Department of Highways in that sense. I suppose you could 

say that they have something to do with safety in that, you 

know, setting of speed limits and that sort of thing. So I think 

there is a link there. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I was just wondering whether I had to buy 

you lunch or 13 other guys lunch on the situation when it comes 

to road construction. 

 

You mentioned motor carrier issues. Could you elaborate on 

what you mean in terms of their responsibility in this field? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Generally when there’s an application 

by a carrier, they would look at compliance fitness of the 

carrier, the adequate insurance that a carrier would have to 

carry, and in fact if the carrier has the adequate insurance. And 

looking at the area of the authority and how many companies 

are in fact providing service to those areas. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So in reference to the motor carrier issues 

then, you’re also saying that they would, the Highway Traffic 

Board would, set running rights for taxi cabs. They would set 

load limits for roads and these type of activities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The Highway Traffic Board does not set 

load limits or weights, highway and that sort of thing. They do 

not control taxi cabs neither, except if it’s PB plate, a bus plate, 

and certainly they do. They look at the authority of buses. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In reference to some of the responsibilities 

that they have in terms of drivers’ licence appeals and speed 

limits and municipal by-laws, have they been heavily involved 

with some of the northern Saskatchewan people or communities 

in any particular area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly it’s my understanding that 

there has been some work done by the Highway Traffic Board 

on transport issues in the North, in the La Ronge area in 

particular. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Could you elaborate on those activities? 



492  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As I mentioned before, this is a 

quasi-judicial board and so I’m not . . . I wouldn’t know the 

particular circumstance, only that there was some work done by 

the Highway Traffic Board in that area. But you would have to 

contact the Highway Traffic Board itself and talk to them, and 

they would be able to give you as much information as they’re 

allowed to. And I would suggest that you do that if you . . . you 

know, if there’s a need. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The other question  when I go back to my 

earlier comment on the 252,430 square kilometres called 

northern Saskatchewan  we talk about safety and in reference 

to the problem of having adequate representation and 

information on the Highway Traffic Board, has there been any 

work done in the safety area of any particular problem in 

northern Saskatchewan that may be extra special? By that I 

mean, is there any particular area where safety is a problem, say 

in poor by-laws, or speed limits that haven’t been set properly, 

or unusual amount of impaired drivers or careless drivers and 

that sort of thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Issues like that, you should actually 

speak to the Highway Traffic Board about that  whether there 

is a particular area of concern — and they would be able to give 

you that information. I guess, as the Department of Highways, 

we’re certainly concerned with some of the safety features. One 

of the agreements that we were able to sign in this last couple of 

years is the agreement with the mining companies in the North. 

And we’re allowing them a different type of vehicle. They in 

turn are saving some money and returning to the Department of 

Highways 75 per cent of that savings and we estimate that to be 

1.5 to $2.5 million per year. We’re putting that money back into 

102, 905, La Ronge to Wollaston, to improve that highway and 

the safety concerns that we have with that highway in regards to 

view lanes and sharp curves, steep hills, and those kinds of 

things. 

 

So over time we’ll be able to fix the safety issues on that road in 

partnership with the company. They’re getting a benefit but we 

. . . the department’s getting a benefit, the people of 

Saskatchewan are getting benefit, and the local residents are 

also getting a benefit because their highway will be safer. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And we all know how I feel about roads in 

northern Saskatchewan. I think it’s certainly a pressing 

problem. I guess if the Highway Traffic Board were to say to 

you that there’s a major, major problem in one certain area 

because of the rules that we make regarding highways, how 

much leeway would this board have against your department 

and its officials in determining how much should be spent on 

roads for safety reasons? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly it’s not the role of the board. 

That isn’t the role of the board. They’re to look at the motor 

transport area. They’re to look at the driver’s licence issues, and 

speed limits in municipalities, municipal laws and that sort of 

thing. But, you know, I suppose they could comment as any 

individual on the conditions of roads as an individual, but I do 

not expect that from the Highway Traffic Board. 

Mr. McLane:  Just a question, Mr. Minister, and you raised 

it in the answer to a previous question about the setting of, I 

believe, of load limits and what have you. I’m just wondering 

who sets out the parameters as to when a vehicle will be 

charged for either a safe load or an overload. At what point can 

that vehicle be charged for an infraction from the point of 

departure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think the security of load and the 

dangerous goods, that sort of thing would certainly be 

determined by the officer that would be stopping that particular 

vehicle and they would make that determination. And if the 

vehicle operator believed he was in the wrong, I’m sure he 

would pay the fine or accept the charge. If he did not, he has 

remedies to challenge that charge. 

 

Mr. McLane:  That answers part of it, Mr. Minister. The 

other part of it would be on the load limit. I guess what I’m 

getting at here is, if there needs to be something else in the 

traffic Act that needs to be addressed as well while you’re 

doing amendments, and that’s to do with load limits. Who sets 

the rates on those? And as well, who is in charge of enforcing 

them. Is it not the traffic, the highway traffic patrol, those 

people? And at what point can they be charged from the point 

of their departure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The load limit is dealt with under the 

highways Act which is a separate Act from the one we’re 

dealing with. And it’s dealt with in regulations there. 

 

Mr. McLane:  The enforcement of it as well? Of those 

limits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, the enforcement would be the 

same. I mean it would be up to the highway traffic officer or the 

police to determine if in fact that Act was not being followed by 

a particular person. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I don’t think I’m understanding. I’m not 

following what you’re saying. The highway traffic patrol will 

be under the jurisdiction of the Highway Traffic Board. Am I 

correct in assuming that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  They’re under the jurisdiction of the 

department. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Okay, good. So that’s a question for another 

day then. 

 

The second part was just, on Friday you were going to send me 

some information that I requested. I haven’t received that yet 

and I was wondering if that’s coming or where it’s at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The department is currently working on 

that and we should have it in the next day or two. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I sent over a copy 

of some regulations to the minister and his staff, and I’m not 

sure if these regulations are the ones that are governing what 

the member from  Where are you from, Jack? Cypress Hills 

 the member from Cypress Hills was referring to or not with 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

the farmers that in fact sell their land and their plates are null 

and void I guess that same day. Is this the regulation covering it, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  My understanding that they would not 

be allowed at present, however I think the general principle has 

been that the farmer is normally . . . you know, will do that till 

the end of the crop year. But legally no, he can’t. Once he sells 

his farm that’s it. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Then, Mr. Minister, this is why the 

member from Arm River was correct in saying if you’re going 

to bring in a Bill, bring in an Act dealing with some of these 

things that are important to the people out there  you talked 

about all this consultation, how you want to know what the 

farmers are thinking  and of course the member from Cypress 

Hills brings in a concern, but because you’re dealing with it in 

regulations, if we wouldn’t have went into the law office next 

door and happened to find these regulations as quick as we 

were able to, you know, this would go by and your Act would 

be passed. This is why it’s so unfair. 

 

Now I’m not so sure, Mr. Minister, when you read this, if in 

fact it’s not . . . I suspect the intent in the regulations were that 

it was to deal with vehicles, farm vehicles that had yet to be 

registered. And so these would prevent . . . these regulations 

would prevent them from becoming registered under these 

regulations. Right? 

 

But it doesn’t. I don’t think it’s intended to deal with vehicles 

that are already owned and operated by a farm operation and 

just because, in the regulations, they cease to become an actual 

farm operation the day they sell their land. I think what you’re 

doing here with these regulations is applying it the wrong way. 

You’re coming at it from the other end. And I doubt if that 

intent was ever there. And . . . Well let me hear what you think 

about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly that’s one of the reasons 

why some of these things should be in regulations, so that we 

can look at them. I think that both the member from Maple 

Creek and the member from Wood River make a reasonable 

point. And I think it’s one of the areas that we could take a look 

at when we do look at the regulations. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I hear you 

and I appreciate the fact that you tell us that you’re going to 

revisit this or perhaps look at the regulations and clarify the 

intent. But the problem is, is that then it escapes the scrutiny of 

the legislature. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is if the question had not been raised, 

nobody would have gotten into this. This shows why, I think, 

with all Bills, that if we’re leading into this new politic that you 

claim is out there, then let’s bring the regulations in and step 

through them. 

 

There’s nothing wrong with, in fact in regulations or at least in 

a narrow way, having some input from the general public, from 

the farmers and such. But these sort of regulations would 

completely go unnoticed had we not raised them here tonight. 

And I’m just wondering what it is that you think your 

department can do right now — if in fact you would be willing 

to entertain an amendment to the Act to deal with this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The member says whether we will 

entertain an amendment to the Act. What we’re saying here is 

some of these things should be in regulation because 

regulations can actually be changed quicker than an Act can be 

changed. Certainly the ideas of the farm implements did not 

come from the members opposite but came from the general 

public. And so we get ideas from the general public. We get 

ideas from the members opposite. We get ideas from the 

dealers. We get ideas from many different sources. Certainly 

that’s the good point about regulations, because you can deal 

with those items in a lot faster way. 

 

And so I think, when you form regulations and the public sees 

those regulations or has input into those regulations, if they’ve 

got concerns, certainly they bring them forward. And so 

regulations are not a problem. Regulations are a good thing if 

used properly and with the right amount of consultation. So 

some of these things certainly should be and must be left in 

regulations. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  But you see, Mr. Minister, if I use your 

reasoning in this, that tells us then that most Bills . . . you 

would rather see only a few pages of an Act come in because 

you’re claiming you could run a government by regulation. But 

I don’t hear the people saying that you should run government 

by regulation. 

 

And I think some of your members opposite got the wrong view 

when you brought in The Health Districts Act and in fact 

rammed regulations down people’s throats which in the end 

shut health care down in rural Saskatchewan. And what we’re 

trying to say here is, maybe we shouldn’t go that way again. 

 

And what I would like to know from you, what you can do 

about this. This is a concern to the farmers and if you’re saying 

that you’re willing to deal with their concerns, what could you 

do in the Act; not in regulations? You must be able to hear what 

we’re saying, that the regulations are what’s bothering people. 

And in fact most people don’t follow the regulations out there. 

That’s why we use this House to, in fact, look at the Act and do 

what the public, what the general public, are asking us to do. So 

can you give us a response of what you can do now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well clearly the member knows that 

there is a place for both. I will be bringing an Act in later this 

session that is large, several pages long, and certainly it’s 

appropriate in that case to put that in Act form. However, when 

we’re dealing with the farm economy and the rapid pace of 

change, farmers want to move quickly and we’ve got to allow 

them to do that, and that’s why we’re talking regulations in this 

case. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  But, Mr. Minister, I don’t know how you 

would view the farmers wanting to move quickly. What they’re 

saying is, no, don’t move quickly. If I sell my land, I don’t want 

to lose the plates on my farm vehicles that very day. In fact 

what they’re saying is not to move quickly. Just put out rules  



494  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

governing the licence and registration of farm vehicles in the 

event they sell the land and still have commodities to sell. I fail 

to see what . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps the member 

who is heckling would like to join into the debate. 

 

But I fail to see why, Mr. Minister, you can’t come up with 

something simple. You want your Act to go through, but why 

can’t you come up with some simple way to resolve this 

problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well, you know this is the first time I 

hear of this being a concern, but certainly it could be a concern. 

And I think both the member from Maple Creek and the 

member from Wood River bring a point that we should have a 

look at. Certainly it’s presently in regulations and it would be 

quite easy to change those regulations. 

 

So what we will do is take a look at it. And when we’re 

changing the regulations, we’ll certainly take a look to see if 

that’s an important issue, and it could very well be. It makes 

some sense to me. And certainly at that point in time, we will 

look at it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, I asked 

you a question earlier and had to repeat it three times, so I want 

you to take a deep breath now because this is going to get a 

little trickier. 

 

The copy of the Act that Mr. Cosman has been kind enough to 

dig up for us tonight is in my hand, and I want to quarrel with 

your interpretation of the Act. I think no is the wrong answer. I 

think in fact that the licence is not expired as I read this, and I’ll 

just want to read a little part of it to you and let you think about 

this. 

 

It does say, under (4) of the regulations here: 

 

(4) No person shall apply to register a vehicle in Class F, 

and no vehicle shall be registered in Class F, unless the 

person to be named in the certificate of registration for the 

vehicle is engaged in: 

 

(a) the actual operation of a farm . . . 

 

It goes on to give other classifications. 

 

Now is it not a fact then that if a man has sold his farm and he 

still has product to sell, that he’s still operating that farm, and 

therefore his licence would still be good? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  My understanding of (a)  and this is 

where we have to take a good look at it: 

 

(a) the actual operation of a farm that he or she owns, 

leases, or has purchased . . . 

 

And so I think what, you know, you’re saying is if in fact he’s 

in operation, that’s true. But on the other hand it goes further to 

say that: 

. . . he or she owns, leases or has purchased under an 

agreement for sale . . . 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Okay, I’ll concede that possibly then that that 

interpretation would work and probably would be upheld in a 

court of law, unless of course we went to the simple little 

problem of putting a comma after farm. And I think that would 

probably change the interpretation. So I suggest that’s what you 

ought to do; get a pen and put a comma in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  One of the things that I told the member 

from Wood River, and I will tell you, Mr. Member from Maple 

Creek, is that this certainly has some potential and we should 

look at it when we work on the regulations. We’re going to be 

working on the regulations, as you know, in regards to 

agricultural implement. It would be a good time to take a look 

at this particular regulation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I think 

the point is, as the member from Wood River has raised, and 

from Cypress Hills, is he pointed out one problem with the 

regulations. What I’ve been saying, there’s problem with all the 

regulations. So could you tell us, Mr. Minister, what is the 

problem with allowing these regulations to come forward with 

the Bill so we can debate them here. And we don’t have a 

problem. We don’t miss anything. We don’t know how many of 

these we’ve missed. Who has time to go through all the 

regulations to see what else has been missed, such as this 

clause. I think the question is bigger than yes, it’s a good idea. 

This has merit, this one particular clause. We need to look at 

them all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As I mentioned earlier, we’re changing 

the Act to allow us to put in proper regulations to meet the 

needs of the farm community and the people of Saskatchewan. 

Certainly when those regulations are in written form, if the 

House is not sitting at that time, I would personally see that you 

get a copy for your comments. 

 

I did ask the members of the opposition, if they have any ideas 

on regulations, that they should send them across. Certainly we 

would take those into account. We’re an open and honest 

government and we will continue to be that way. And we want 

to do what’s best for the farm community and for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And certainly we’ll listen to farmers and to 

dealers and to farm organizations, and including the opposition. 

And if you’ve got some good ideas please send them over and 

as we develop the regulations you can certainly have input. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do have one more 

question on those regulations. 

 

Mr. Minister, what form . . . or in what way then can you 

provide the opposition in the legislature to play a role in dealing 

with these regulations? 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’ve asked the member from Arm 

River, and I will say to you, that certainly send your ideas on 

regulations in regards to agricultural implements or any other 

that you may have for us to consider. We will certainly do that. 

 

When we’re out and about consulting with farmers and farm 

groups and organizations certainly your input would be sought. 

I know that many of you are farmers. Certainly you have some 

ideas what a farm implement should be, so we’d certainly 

appreciate your input. 

 

If in fact the regulations are ready before the House . . . before 

the break this summer sometime, we would table them in the 

House  and/or fall  and if that does not happen that we 

would certainly be willing to send them to your caucus for your 

comments. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, there again, I mean you’re 

already saying that you’re going to table the regulations, but 

that would happen before you really had any consultation 

process with the opposition at all. 

 

Let’s be serious here. If you’re expecting us to write you letters, 

what we need as an opposition . . . and the very reason why the 

House works as well as it does is because you step through a 

process where in fact we can question you and your officials. I 

have no idea why you would be opposed to such a process. 

Would you consider it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I believe that I told you before that we’re 

an open and honest government. The farm community are . . . 

We’re an open and honest government. The process is fine. 

We’re going to consult; we’re going to ask for your input. And 

this is very open. I am sure if you were sitting on this side of the 

House we would not have the same opportunity, but we being 

an open and honest government, we’re going to give you that 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, then if 

you’re talking about this open and . . . did you say open and 

honest or just open, whatever, government?  why firstly 

would you be afraid of going line by line through the 

regulations, perhaps even before we move the Bill. You could 

adjourn this from the committee stage right now until we have a 

chance to sit with you and go through the regulations. And not 

to find holes and pick fault with the Bill or the regulations, but 

in fact perhaps if we walk through this process. we would find 

some other things that would help you and your officials, your 

department, you know, deal with people in a lot better manner. 

So will you consider it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The one thing good, to the member from 

Wood River, about regulations is that in fact you can change 

them easier than you can in fact change an Act. And certainly 

that’s why we intend to bring the farm implement situation 

under regulations, or the different situations under regulation. 

Because things change out there and people will . . . as times 

change, the need for different regulations, or fewer regulations, 

that will happen. And so in regulations we’ll be able to deal 

with that. And so that’s why we’re using the process that we 

are. 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the question 

. . . We’re going through clause by clause here, Mr. Minister, 

and you’re asking us to yell yea for each clause and in section 3 

or 2 . . . 3 we’re on, we have no idea what agriculture 

implement means, and yet everybody, including the members 

on your side, are yelling yea, let’s go with it. How do you 

expect us to pass something we don’t know what it means? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well maybe you could ask the Clerk. 

I’m not sure, is it the process that you’re not clear with? 

 

Mr. McLane:  We’re asking to approve these sections, 

section by section. We have no idea what agriculture implement 

is going to be defined as. How are we going to approve this if 

we don’t know what it is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  And that’s exactly the problem, to the 

member from Arm River, is that farm implements  and I’ll try 

to explain it one more time  is changing. 

 

We have a situation in Prince Albert, for instance, where the 

fellow took a truck chassis, set up a tank on this truck chassis, 

hooked up the cultivator and the hoses in order to apply manure 

to farmers’ fields. And he put these huge, huge tires on this 

truck that prevents him from going more than 30 kilometres an 

hour on the road as he goes from one farmer to the next. Well 

he’s asking me and asking the department and asking others, 

should this be registered as a highways vehicle, or should this 

be in fact an agricultural implement. And he raises a very, very 

good point. 

 

We have other people that have invented bale wagons, for an 

example. And they have certain parts of the bale wagon that 

looks exactly like a truck, but can, you know, go on the 

highway only a very few miles an hour and really, basically is 

used in the farmyard. Should that be an agricultural implement 

or should that be in fact a registered highways vehicle? 

 

We have others that look like a truck, and we have the request 

that maybe this is an agricultural implement but yet can travel at 

80-90 miles an hour down the highway. You know, maybe it 

shouldn’t be an agricultural implement. So this is the problems 

that we have to deal with. 

 

What the process is here  and I’ll try and explain it one more 

time  is we’re going to go out to farmers. We’re going to go 

out to dealers. We’re going to go out and talk to people that 

have this situation on their farm or in their business. We’re 

going to talk to the opposition members. We’re going to talk to 

as many people as we can and try and set down some 

reasonable regulations so that the farmers are happy with those 

regulations, so that the people that use the highway are happy 

with those regulations. It’s going to take some time. 

 

What we need now is to provide that in the Act so that we can 

in fact work on the regulations. If by the time . . . We’ve got to 

do that. We’ve got to consult with people. I am not prepared to 

sit in this House and go over regulations that have not consulted 

with and I will not do that. The farmers have to have some input 

in this and that’s what we intend to do. 



496  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Mr. McLane:  Exactly. I think you just made our point, Mr. 

Minister. The point is, go out and do your consulting; come 

back in here with your definition of agriculture implement; let 

us have a look at it; and if it’s appropriate and what the farmers 

want, we’ll pass it. You’re the one that’s confused about the 

process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Could you repeat the question, please? 

 

Mr. McLane:  The question was, Mr. Minister  are you 

listening this time?  the question is, I think you’re the one 

confused with the process. The problem is, if you would go out 

and consult with the farmers of this province and come back in 

here with a definition of agriculture implement and let us look 

at it, and if we agree and it’s what the farmers are telling us, 

then there’s no problem. It’s the process that you’re confused 

with, and the member for Regina South, who doesn’t 

understand agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I didn’t really want to get political, 

but it seems that the more good legislation that this government 

has, the only thing I’ve heard from the opposition is whining 

and crying. And I didn’t want to say that. 

 

But I have a problem with that. I mean we have a good system 

here. And I would ask the member from Arm River to go out 

and talk to his fellow neighbours, the fellow farmers that he’s 

around, that has this problem. Because I know that in your 

constituency you have many farmers that are very innovative 

and are looking at new machinery and new agricultural 

implements all the time. If you would talk to them and ask them 

which, right or wrong, is it our process that’s wrong or is it your 

ideas that’s wrong, and I think you will get the answer. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 

section 3 the member from Arm River was asking about the 

agriculture implements and you were saying they were defined 

in the regulations. Can you give us that list of what the 

definitions, which ones are in the regulations right now. Can 

you table it today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  There is. . . the only thing that’s in the 

old Act right now is the . . . and it’s “2(1)(b) ’agricultural 

implement’ means a vehicle designed and adapted exclusively 

for an agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising 

operations.” 

 

Period. There’s nothing else, you see. And this is our problem 

now. What does that mean? What that will mean under the new 

Act is that regulations will be developed to fill in the gaps 

because agricultural implements is changing so fast. I mean you 

could put something in the Act that wouldn’t make sense or 

couldn’t be determined down the road. If you read the Act as is. 

 

That’s our problem, and that’s why we’re trying to clean that up 

so that in fact we can start putting some meat to the bones, I 

guess. So that we can  we, you and I  will then know what 

an agricultural implement is. 

 

(2015) 

The division bells rang from 8:15 p.m. until 8:25 p.m. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  21 

 

Mitchell MacKinnon Shillington 

Tchorzewski Johnson Kowalsky 

Crofford Renaud Trew 

Lorje Teichrob Nilson 

Cline Stanger Murray 

Langford Wall Kasperski 

Sonntag Jess Thomson 

 

Nays  8 

 

McLane Draude McPherson 

Belanger Bjornerud Julé 

Gantefoer Goohsen  

 

Clauses 4 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we had 

indicated in the debate on this Bill, we will propose an 

amendment at this time, Mr. Chairman. Let’s see now. I move 

that we amend the Act as follows, clause 8 of the printed Bill, 

amend clause 8 of the printed Bill: 

 

Clause 8 of the printed Bill is amended, by adding a new 

subsection 70(2.3) immediately following subsection 

70(2.2) as being enacted therein, as follows: 

 

“(2.3) No owner or driver-operator of a self-propelled 

agricultural implement, and no driver of a vehicle 

transporting or towing an agricultural implement, on 

secondary highways and municipal roads within the 

province between sunrise and sunset shall be liable for any 

damages arising out of such transportation provided that 

they are driven or trailered in compliance with the rules 

normally applicable to the operation of a licensed motored 

vehicle on a provincial highway, in so far as those rules 

may apply.” 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we hope that the Minister will take serious 

consideration of this amendment, as he has said he would, and 

we’ll put it to the test to see if he really wants to do something 

about helping farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I 

have a problem with the amendment, and I think when you look 

at privileges to a certain group in regards to liability, it doesn’t 

matter if it’s farmers or whoever, it just isn’t right. I mean 

liability is liability, and I think if someone is liable then that 

should be the case. 

 

To say that a certain group, whether it’s farmers or whether it’s 

some other group, truckers or whatever, should not be liable 

would . . . is not right, and liability certainly would be 

determined by the courts or whatever. Police certainly would  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

determine the fault of a situation in the case of an accident. 

 

But certainly to say that someone should not have liability I 

don’t believe is what should be recommended in this Act. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, one 

of the other members poses a good question here: what’s the 

alternative then? 

 

At the moment we have a dilemma in this province. We have 

the dilemma that farmers who move farm machinery have really 

got their entire farm operations on the line every time they go 

on to a road because there’s no clear definition as to how they 

might be breaking the law or not breaking the law. 

 

There is no way for them to be able to define when they are in 

the right or when they’re in the wrong except to take the chance 

that the courts will be merciful on them when they hit there. 

And it’s not if or when they will hit the courts, it’s only a matter 

of time. Because eventually it’s going to have to happen 

because there’s nothing defined in the law. 

 

So what’s your alternative to this? How do you alleviate this 

problem? You gave a very nice speech to us about how you 

wanted to clean up the highway Act and bring in an Act that 

will pull everything together, make it all workable and take out 

a lot of the redundancies and a lot of the old-fashioned things 

and put everything up to date and get everything going great. 

Well here’s a problem. How are you going to solve it? 

 

We’ve got instances that we’ve given you for examples. We’ve 

had written letters about people who have gotten into problems 

this way. What more proof do you need that there is a problem 

out there that needs solution? 

 

Now I’ll grant you that perhaps our amendment, done in a lot of 

haste, might not be the exact legal wording that you would have 

to use, but obviously you have the disposal of government at 

your fingertips and at your beck and call. So tell us what you 

propose to do to alleviate this problem in place of what our 

suggestion has been. 

 

And if you can give us a logical, reasonable approach then we 

will let this slip away and die a natural death as it’s naturally 

going to do. And hold you to your word though, that you will 

come up with some answer. But until you come up with that 

answer we’re not going to let you off quite so lightly yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think farmers in Saskatchewan do 

not want to be treated any differently than anybody else. They 

understand that people have to obey the laws of the road. And 

farmers are good citizens at that. They do a good job at that. 

Certainly at harvest time there’s more machinery, but I think 

generally farmers obey the law and follow the rules of the road. 

 

And I don’t think they would want . . . in fact I think they 

would be very disturbed with the amendment that you’re 

proposing because in fact farmers do not want to be treated any 

differently than anybody else. And I think we have to realize  

that. They now take precautions to follow those rules and they 

will continue to do that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think you’ve lost 

contact with all of the reality of rural Saskatchewan because 

this is not considered to be a special treatment of rural 

Saskatchewan; this is considered to be something that needs to 

be done in order to have fairness. 

 

Your government has seen fit to bring in no-fault insurance to 

SGI which brings in a lot of questions about fairness and how 

people are treated reasonably in this province when you’re 

injured. All kinds of people out there are questioning this. And 

when we ask you to specify what a farmer can do or can’t do, 

when he is breaking the law or not breaking the law, we’re not 

asking you for special treatment, we’re asking you to show us 

what the rules are, show us what the regulations are, show us 

how we can protect ourselves. That’s what the farmers want to 

know. 

 

They want to know that if they can move their farm machinery, 

that they can in fact move it without having the fear of having 

litigation brought against them by perhaps somebody that 

comes roaring down the road, speeding, or doing whatever, and 

suing them. And if you can have no-fault insurance that protects 

the rest of society and protects SGI from having to pay out, then 

obviously you should be able to write a simple little law that 

will protect people from being sued when they are moving legal 

equipment down a legal road. 

 

And so, Minister, I don’t think that you’re on the right 

wavelength here. I think when you say that we’re talking about 

giving people special treatment, that in fact that is not what 

we’re doing. We are asking you to bring about fairness with 

definitions so that we know and understand what our position is 

in the country. 

 

If you’re going to say that farmers are legally responsible for 

the damages to anybody else’s vehicle when they move farm 

machinery  and that’s what you’re saying by not acting  

then you are treating everybody else in the country that drives 

on the roads as special. They have a special right to sue any 

farmer they choose to decide to run into. And right now, if you 

happen to be a farmer  and I know you’ve had some farm 

connections  and you’re moving a tractor with a cultivator, 

and because you’re in politics, and some good Conservative 

comes down the road and says, I’ll get that guy, and drives into 

you and sues you, that’s all it takes. He might have a grudge 

against you and he can sue you because he drove into you 

deliberately. 

 

Now that’s the kind of thing that you don’t want to allow to go 

on. And that’s the kind of thing that can happen  by accident 

or by design  as the law stands now. And we’re asking you to 

clean that up. It’s a very simple thing that we ask. Straighten out 

something that’s not right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well again I want to tell the member that 

the roads in Saskatchewan, the highways in Saskatchewan, are 

for all road users  farmers, businessmen, school teachers, 

even politicians. And everyone is expected, and expects, to  



498  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

follow the rules of the road. And if you’re not aware of those 

rules, I’ll certainly send them to you. 

 

We have pamphlets that might be helpful, that will let you 

know those rules. 

 

Farmers are not automatically liable because they’re a farmer, 

and the member knows that. Farmers may be liable and may not 

be liable. Certainly I’m not here to judge one particular instance 

against another. I mean that will be determined, but you’re not 

liable because you’re a farmer, that’s for sure. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, I’m not going to allow this to 

get into a shouting match because we have to talk about this in 

a rational way, and the rational way of course is to try to tell 

you that your law simply is lacking. It may not be your fault; it 

may not even be your law. I don’t even know when the law was 

written. It might have been written by the last administration or 

two administrations back or five for all I know. But I do know 

that we have had an example of a situation that has come up 

where people from your department have said to us quite clearly 

that the law does not cover this. 

 

And so you . . . I challenge you  send me those materials that 

you’ve got. Because you don’t have them, according to your 

own officials. You don’t have materials that tell us definitively 

when a farmer is liable or is not liable if he gets hit on a road 

when he’s moving farm machinery. And that’s what we want 

from you, is a law that will protect the farmers and allow them 

to move their equipment. 

 

So if you’ve got a law that protects them and it shows them 

what their rights are, then you present it to us and give it to us 

now and we’ll be quite happy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well the law certainly is very clear  

that if you’re responsible for the damage of another’s vehicle, 

that you’re liable for that damage. And then the law is very 

clear on that. And it’s under 86(1) of The Highway Traffic Act: 

 

When any loss, damage, or injury is caused to a person by a 

motor vehicle, the person driving it at the time is liable for 

the loss, damage, or injury if it was caused by his negligence 

or improper conduct, and the owner of the motor vehicle is 

also liable to the same extent as the driver unless at the time 

the motor vehicle had been stolen from the owner or 

otherwise wrongfully taken out of his possession or out of 

the possession of a person entrusted by him with its care. 

 

So I think the Act is very clear in this regards. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, the Act is very clearly . . . 

stated that for motor vehicles . . . Are agricultural implements 

motor vehicles now? They don’t have to be licensed and they’re 

not covered by insurance under licensing, so therefore they’re 

not motor vehicles. So your Act does not cover motor vehicles 

that are in fact not motor vehicles, they are farm implements. So 

. . . (inaudible) . . . person, so I’ll take quarrel with you on the 

word responsible  who determines responsibility? 

 

Yes, if I’m responsible for an accident, I should pay. Am I  

responsible because my implement is over eight feet wide? No, 

you say, because you’ve already said farm machinery can be 

moved on the road. 

 

So we have to have a little more definition then of what these 

things are, or else you have to simply say farm implements 

being drawn down the road, as we’ve put in our amendment, 

should be exempt from liability. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’m looking for the section here to the 

member opposite. It’s under 2(1) of the Act. It says: 

 

“motor vehicle” means a vehicle propelled or driven by 

any means other than by muscular power; 

 

And the: 

 

“vehicle” means a device in, on or by which a person or 

thing is or may be transported or drawn on a highway and 

includes special mobile machines and agricultural 

implements but does not include vehicles running only on 

rails or solely on railway company property; 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  All right, Minister, then when a farmer is 

moving a piece of equipment down the road and it’s wider than 

half the width of the road  and we have a lot of roads like that 

in Saskatchewan and we have a lot of machinery like that  is 

he responsible if there isn’t room for somebody to get by him 

and he gets hit? Who’s responsible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I will answer the question. I guess it’s 

under a different Act. It’s under the highways Act and it states 

here in section 5: 

 

(2) Farm equipment that exceeds a dimension prescribed in 

clause 4(1)(a), (r), (s), (u) or (v) may be driven or towed 

without a permit between sunrise and sunset on or over a 

public highway other than a designated highway. 

 

 (3) Farm equipment that exceeds a dimension prescribed 

(in the same clauses) . . . may be driven or towed without a 

permit between sunrise and sunset on or over a designated 

highway mentioned in subsections (1) except where it: 

 

(a) extends past the centre of the main travelled portion 

of the highway and protrudes into the opposite driving 

lane; or 

 

(b) extends or protrudes into the extreme left driving 

lane of a highway designated as a one-way highway by 

signs on, erected or posted along the highway directing 

traffic to proceed in only one direction; 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, I think if you will talk to your 

learned friend right beside you very carefully, you will find that 

you have not answered the question. And I don’t think there is 

much to be gained by my showing the inability of yourselves to 

be able to interpret laws that you don’t have to work with to 

interpret. 

 

So you need something in this law. I think you know that; I  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

think I’ve made my point. And having done that, I think I’ll rest 

my case and hope that you have the wisdom to try to tackle this 

problem and to resolve it. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

(2045) 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m just wondering on clause 8, when we’re 

talking about loads of things like gravel, if somebody is going 

. . . if they’re . . . I know there’s a chance that gravel can be lost 

out of the back of the truck. Are you expecting that people in 

construction businesses will then have to tarp the loads or will 

there be additional costs involved in ensuring that it can’t be 

lost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  They do not have to tarp but they have 

to take a reasonable precaution that gravel is not flying out or 

off the truck or they could be charged. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

The Chair:  Clause 9, we do have a House amendment from 

the minister to clause 9 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 119(1)(b.1) of the Act as being enacted by 

clause 9(b) of the printed Bill by striking out “contr” and 

substituting “control”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to amend 

clause 10 of the printed Bill because, Mr. Speaker, after the 

discussion on Friday took place, and again tonight, we’re 

talking about the regulations, talking about approving 

something that we don’t know what it’s going to mean or what 

it’s going to be. And therefore, if we could: 

 

Clause 10 of the printed Bill is amended by deleting 

subsections (1) and (2) and substituting the following: 

 

“This Act comes into force upon consideration and 

acceptance by the Committee of the Whole of regulations 

proposed pursuant to this Act.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well again, I think the amendment, what 

it does is take away the decisions by the farm community, by 

the people that are affected, by the dealers, by the people that 

will be consulted with, and puts it into politicians’ hands only, 

and I have a real hard time with that. I think what we need to do 

is consult with these groups of people. 

 

We will allow the opposition certainly to have input, talk with 

the dealers, talk with the farmers, talk with the people that in 

fact are inventing these new agricultural implements and then  

certainly bring the regulations forward. And at that point in 

time, the politicians can have a go at them. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the Minister 

is looking at this from the wrong side of the window. 

 

What this does is it opens up the process as I talked about 

earlier, and your government, your Premier, is talking about 

looking through his window, looking into the future into the 

new century and making changes that the people want to see. 

This is one of them, Mr. Minister, where you can actually break 

new ground and cause a process to be in place that the people 

of Saskatchewan want. In this particular case, it’s what the 

farmers and it’s what the machinery dealers want to see. 

 

If you go out and gather your information from those very 

people, put it into the regulations if you must, bring it back, and 

let us have a look at it. And we’ll compare and see if what 

we’re being told is the same as what you’ve got in your 

regulations. You seem to be looking at it backwards. You want 

us and the farmers of the province to accept the Bill, put it 

through, and then at your discretion go out and gather the 

information and put it in however it might suit you. 

 

Now what we’re asking is to go out and gather the information, 

bring it back here  be open about it; it’s very simple  and 

let us talk about it and debate it in here. And then we’ll decide 

if it’s what the farmers and the machinery dealers and the 

people of the province in general want. 

 

So I think you need to look at it from a little different angle, Mr. 

Minister, and I would hope that . . . and I was sure that you 

would be open-minded enough to do that and would initiate 

some sort of change, a new process in the new era, into the new 

century. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I appreciate the point of view by 

the member opposite, but I think maybe he misunderstands here 

a little bit. 

 

We could go out and consult. And as I mentioned to the 

member before, it’s a huge problem, and it’s not easily fixed 

because . . . like I mentioned about the truck at Prince Albert, 

you know, the one that has the tank on the back and it’s got the 

big tires, and it spreads manure for the farmers, that truck, and 

then also the bale wagon situation. And it’s not an easy problem 

to solve, and so what we want to do is consult with those 

businesses, with farmers, with the dealers, with, you know, 

people across Saskatchewan to determine what those 

regulations should be. 

 

We would like to do that prior to whenever the House sits 

again, because if in fact those regulations are not ready by the 

time the House ends this session we will have to wait again; 

and farmers will have to wait again; and then I will have to 

blame that on the opposition and I don't want to do that. And I 

think farmers would really like to move forward with this. 

 

And so I would think that the process that this government is 

saying . . . is using is to do this as quickly as we can with as 

much consultation as we can, so that in fact we have something  



500  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

in place so that farmers and entrepreneurs in the farm sector 

know exactly where they stand. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think there was a lot of 

farmers born at night but they all weren’t born last night. And, I 

think, neither were those machines that you’re talking about 

built last night. Many of those machines have been around for 

years and years and years. So where was the process over your 

last term of government? Where was the minister then  out 

seeking information from the farmers of the province to see 

what they needed to be changed? 

 

Now all of a sudden it seems like there’s an urgency to get out 

there and bingo, do it right now, regardless of the effect that it 

has on the farming community and the machinery dealers. So I 

think you just would have to admit that you’re just a little bit 

behind on this thing, and so in order to try and rectify your 

problem, you want to speed it up and do it through regulations 

that nobody else has a chance to debate and discuss. 

 

The proper thing to do, Mr. Minister, would be to go out and 

say to the people, we’re going to consult with you; we made an 

error. We brought a Bill forward, we’d like to hold up the Bill, 

stop it now till we’ve done our consultation, then we’ll take it 

back into the House and debate it along with the regulations as 

it should have been done to begin with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think that’s the openness of this 

government. The concern came forward and we’re dealing with 

it as we should. And I’m surprised that the member opposite 

didn’t bring this to our attention earlier if he seen it as a 

concern. And so, I guess, the urgency and the need to do this 

does not come from politicians but it comes from the farm 

community, the agricultural community. And we believe that 

they have some legitimate concerns, and we want to react to 

those concerns, and we want to react to them in a speedy 

manner. 

 

To delay it to another legislative session, or sometime into the 

future, is not acceptable by this government. We want to in fact 

deal with the diversity of the agricultural sector, and the 

innovation of the farmers out there, and move forward as 

quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, what 

the member from Arm River is trying to get you to do, Mr. 

Minister, is in fact set up a consultation process. You are 

obviously opposed to that because I think you’ve been trying to 

tell us you already have one, and so could you explain how it 

works and who’s involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No. I can tell the member opposite it 

will be better than the federal government. I know their 

consultation . . . I know that they didn’t really consult us that 

well in regards to, you know, C-101 and rail line abandonment 

and changes to the Crow and those kinds of things. 

 

So we want to do it differently. We want to actually go out and 

talk to farmers and farm groups and dealers, and in fact as I 

mentioned earlier, if you have any ideas please send them over. 

Once we get the basic regulations that seem to make sense,  

we’ll certainly send them over and ask you for your points of 

view. 

 

I think what we want to do is be open and honest and certainly 

consult. Because I think you can say you’re going to consult, 

like the federal government has on, for instance, airports, but 

really the decision was kind of made before. Well we don’t 

want to do it that way. We want to do it the open and honest 

way. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m 

not sure then if the consultation process that you’re proud of is 

one where you close 52 hospitals and let the people know by a 

Premier’s address, or many other things that you’ve done. 

 

What you didn’t answer was in fact what the consultation 

process for that  you have in the regulations  was. You’ve 

spoken many times here this evening on the farmers that you’ve 

consulted. Could you table a list of the farmers and farm 

organizations that you’ve consulted with to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  What I did tell the member is that we 

were going to consult. Certainly the issue has been brought to 

our attention by farmers and farm groups that are caught in this 

situation. People that in fact have invented . . . And I don’t 

know if the member wants me to go through the story about the 

fertilizer spreader again, but I could do that. 

 

But that’s one example where the farmer, the business man in 

this case who is in basically in the agricultural sector, and he 

takes manure and he spreads it in farmers’ fields; and he 

invented this implement and it’s being treated as a highway 

vehicle rather than an agricultural implement. This is the 

problem and this is what we have to address. And so what we 

. . . this problem has been brought to our attention by farmers, 

by entrepreneurs in the agricultural field, and by dealers, people 

that are very innovative in Saskatchewan, and they want to 

move ahead. 

 

Now we will consult with those people, with other people that 

have the same problem that haven’t brought it forward, and 

then list a list of regulations. How do we determine what an 

agricultural implement is? And certainly the member from 

Wood River is a farmer. Certainly I’m sure he has some ideas, 

and we would appreciate that. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I think it’s more 

than your example that’s out there spreading some of this 

manure. 

 

The fact of the matter is, I’ve been asking you if you could table 

a list of the people you’ve consulted, not just somebody 

spreading some manure wherever they’re spreading it, but in 

fact can you table who you’ve consulted with, or in fact if 

you’re still going through some consultation, can you tell us 

whether you’re going to do it through the mail, or through 

phone banks, or town hall meetings? What process are you 

going to choose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Those all sound like an excellent idea. 

As I mentioned earlier, we have not consulted with a large  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

group at this point in time. The issue has been brought forth to 

the department, to myself personally, by a lot of people out 

there and we believe that they have a real good point. We 

believe that we need to look at what is in fact considered an 

agricultural implement and so we’re going to do that. And we 

are going to consult. I can’t give you names of who we 

consulted with when we’re going to consult. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Just tell us how you’re going to consult. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We will consult and we will talk; we 

will have the department . . . maybe we’ll have town hall 

meetings. Maybe you could give us some suggestions on how 

you think we should consult. Certainly we have a very good 

reputation with the farmers out there, we have a very good 

reputation with the dealers and the ag community, and we will 

be consulting. Whether it’s by telephone or personal visit, I 

don’t know at this point, but certainly there will be 

consultation. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, can 

you give us some idea of what we can expect that your 

department will spend in this consultation process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, how could you set up 

a consultation process when you’re talking about perhaps 

accepting mail, phone, or town hall meetings, and you haven’t 

budgeted for it at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That’s a process that we will determine 

as we move along in the regulations. 

 

And what I would urge the member opposite is to, instead of 

spending a whole lot of time on the method of consultation, if 

he could help, I’m sure as a farmer he would know what he sees 

as an agricultural implement. And I know that there are other 

farmers on your caucus that certainly would give us some ideas. 

We want to bring these regulations forward as quickly as 

possible but we need to consult with the community and we 

certainly would like your ideas as well. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, have you hired any 

consultants to look at these regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No we haven’t. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, do you intend to 

hire consultants in the near future to look at these regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Not at this time. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, then how on 

earth are you going to go out and consult if you . . . first of all, 

you don’t have a budget. You don’t intend on doing mailing, 

phoning, town hall meetings, and nor do you intend to hire a 

consultant. So now we’re back to just what is it that you plan to 

do? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’m not sure exactly where the member 

wants to go. I noticed in question period the other day in 

regards to health care he didn’t want us to hire consultants; now 

he thinks we should hire a consultant. Well we don’t believe we 

need consultants. We believe that our reputation with the 

agricultural community and with farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that we certainly will get the input. 

 

You see one thing that the member seems to not understand is 

this is not government led, it’s farmer led, and it’s agri-business 

led. And it’s those people that are suggesting to us that they 

need some regulations to clarify what an agricultural implement 

is. And I don’t think that the members opposite are really 

against farming in this province of Saskatchewan, though it 

would tend to . . . you know, I sort of could maybe hear that in 

the questions that are being asked but I don’t think that’s true. 

 

And so I guess we just want to get on with the process of 

consultation and talking to farmers, whether it’s the department 

staff that does that or whatever, so that we basically get a line of 

regulations that makes some sense to the farm community. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, if this was 

initiated by the farmers then can you tell us which farm groups, 

and when in fact the farmers, approached your department and 

your officials and asked for these changes. And if you could 

perhaps table a list of those farmers or farm organizations so 

that we may be able to contact them ourselves and discuss some 

of the regulations that are upcoming. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I don’t have a count on the 

representations but there is a Mr. Sand, north of Prince Albert. 

You should maybe give him a call. He’s the guy with the tanks 

on a truck with the big tires that spreads manure . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that’s right, Sand’s Septic. 

 

And presentations have been made on numerous occasions to 

my office and to the department, and we believe that they have 

a legitimate point. And I would hope that you would agree with 

that. 

 

I’m not sure if you’re innovative on your farm and thinking of 

new . . . you know, of something different that you in fact can 

invent yourself. But there are a lot of farmers that do that, and I 

think they deserve some consideration. I mean why . . . you can 

buy a farm implement from a manufacturer like a large 

corporation that manufactures a particular piece of machinery, 

and it’s considered a farm implement. But yet a small 

entrepreneur, perhaps a farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan, invents some type of agricultural implement, 

and in fact no one considers it an agricultural implement.  

 

Well I don’t believe that’s right, and I would hope that you 

would agree with me. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, can you go 

beyond the one fellow with a manure-spreading truck north of 

Prince Albert? Because what you’re asking for is legislation to 

be passed, and you can’t tell us what the process is that you’re 

going to have in the upcoming months. You have no budget. 

You have no plan to go anywhere with it. And all you can do is  



502  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

name one farmer with a manure-spreading truck. I’m sure that 

you wouldn’t bring in the changes to legislation because one 

person phoned and asked. There must be more to it. 

 

And you see the whole problem that you’re having here. . . we 

would fully support having this Bill go right through, and in 

fact most Bills are going to go that route. But you see, these 

regulations have caused you a lot of trouble as they did with a 

former member of this House, Louise Simard, when she wanted 

to close down hospitals. And you want to do everything through 

regulations. And all we’re trying to do is not oppose what you 

want to do as government but in fact aid you with the problems 

that are before you. 

 

And one of the ways that we can aid you in this whole process, 

or the whole legislative structure that we have, is to help you 

create a process where in fact the arguments that people have 

against your government are brought forward and the 

regulations discussed here as well. I guess I can’t say it much 

clearer than that, and you’re opposed to that. I have no idea 

why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think the member should ask the 

member from Arm River, who’s seen some pictures, and I’m 

not sure if you were in the House at that point in time. But the 

pictures were of several different pieces of equipment that have 

a similar problem to the one I mentioned earlier. And so if 

you’d just maybe turn and ask him, he could clarify that 

because in fact he did see them. So it’s not an isolated issue. 

It’s in . . . there are many of these situations out there, and so 

maybe you could consult with him. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, just one more point. And I’ll use 

another analogy for the minister so that he can maybe better 

understand what his legislation and the regulations are like and 

then most of the legislation that we’re going to be forced at 

looking at without seeing the regulations . . . is that I would 

relate it — and then he keeps talking about the farmers — and I 

would relate it to a farmer going to the implement dealer and 

asking to buy a piece of equipment. And we can say a tractor, 

for example. And the dealer has the tractor that the farmer 

wants, and so the farmer says, I’ll take that tractor. The dealer 

says, sign right here. Farmer signs, and the dealer says, come 

back in a couple of weeks and I’ll tell you what the price is. 

 

Mr. Minister, that’s exactly what’s happening here with 

legislation and going out behind closed doors . . . or with 

legislation, and going out behind closed doors and talking about 

the regulations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’m not sure if there was a question 

there, but I want to reiterate to the member that what we are 

going to do is consult with the farmers, the entrepreneurs in the 

agricultural sector that in fact invent new types of agricultural 

implements to help the farm economy. And we are going to in 

fact  and I’ve made the offer  ask the members opposite for 

their input. 

 

Now I don’t know what more they want. Please give us your 

input. Please tell us what you think an agricultural implement 

should be or should look like or what . . . in fact should it be  

tire size or should it be speed or should it be something else. 

Please give us your input. I know that some of you are farmers 

and you would have some knowledge about that. 

 

We will await that information. I mean we will consult. But we 

don’t expect that next year you will come and say, well we 

think it should be this when in fact it’s something else. So I 

think what you have to do is respect the consultation process. 

Respect the farm community. Let agriculture move; that’s 

where it wants to go. It wants to diversify. It wants to value add. 

It wants to move into the 21st century. Allow it to do that. 

 

Mr. McLane:  As we move into the 21st century, Mr. 

Minister, I know that you will want to support this amendment, 

and that’s what that does. It’s a new and innovative idea. It 

moves ahead, lets you go out and consult with the farmers and 

the machinery dealers and these innovative people in the 

country, the ones that are working to value added that you talk 

about. 

 

So you go out and do your consultation process, come back 

with what you’re going to put in the regulations and sit down 

with us, and we’ll go through this very quickly and approve the 

legislation. So I know you’ll want to support this amendment 

and I’ll not further delay the process. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:11 p.m. until 9:21 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division 

 

Yeas  6 

 

McLane Draude McPherson 

Bjornerud Julé Gantefoer 

 

Nays  20 

 

Mitchell Shillington Tchorzewski 

Johnson Kowalsky Crofford 

Renaud Pringle Trew 

Lorje Teichrob Nilson 

Cline Murray Langford 

Wall Kasperski Sonntag 

Jess Thomson  

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 28  An Act to provide for the Establishment, 

Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

my left is Maureen Woods, the Provincial Librarian. Directly 

behind Maureen is Joylene Campell, who is the director of 

public libraries. And seated to her right is Dean Clark, the 

director of the heritage branch of Municipal Government. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 

welcome Madam Minister and her staff here this evening. I 

appreciate them to coming out this hour of the night. 

Unfortunately the Minister of Highways held up the previous 

Bill, or we could have been at this one a little bit earlier. 

 

I just have a couple questions, Madam Minister, on this. We 

just talked about regulations in the previous Bill and the lack of 

them and the lack of the consultation before the legislation was 

proposed. And I would just ask you to take a look at my copy of 

the Bill. And I would . . . or I’d like to send it across to the 

minister to see. 

 

And I would just like to ask her if it’s on page 18 and 19 that 

she is planning on doing the regulations and that’s the reason 

that the pages are blank or if she’s trying to hide something 

from me on this Bill. So if you take this across, Madam 

Minister, and have a look at that and reassure me that there’s no 

plot there to deprive me of any information that should be on 

those pages. 

 

Secondly, Madam Minister, I think it would be helpful if we 

could just ask you if you wouldn’t mind giving us a brief 

overview of this Bill and what’s entailed in it. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the hon. 

member opposite, in the interests of open and honest 

government, we would never, never presume to add things to 

the Bill on the blank pages after its passage. The Queen’s 

Printer must have gone slightly awry. If you want my copy, I’d 

be glad to provide it to you. 

 

I’ll just make a few comments. We did talk in second reading in 

detail about the provisions of the Bill and what it’s set out to 

accomplish. But basically it lays out the framework for a public 

library system to carry us into the new century. 

 

This Bill is the result of broad consultations conducted by a 

ministerial advisory committee appointed to review the Act and 

provide some recommendations for changes to the Act and 

regulations. Basically The Public Libraries Act, 1996 responds 

to what we heard in the consultations from the public library 

systems, from a number of interest groups from the education 

community, and people that were engaged in the extensive 

consultations. 

 

Basically it acknowledges that the whole is greater than the sum 

of its parts, and the Bill sets out the purpose of a provincial 

public library system — to ensure equitable access to basic 

library services to all of the residents of Saskatchewan. It 

addresses all of the 10 library systems and provides for a regime 

which will bring more efficiencies into the electronic networks 

and strengthen the public library system overall, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I’d also like to welcome your department officials. 

We just have a few questions on the Bill itself, and one of the 

main ones I have is how will this new Act restructure the 

funding formula, or will it restructure the funding formula for 

libraries? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, funding is not 

addressed. The funding issues are not addressed in this Bill. But 

in fact the consultations did indicate to us that funding formulas 

for libraries are a high priority and we will be asking the 

Provincial Librarian to make a full review of library services 

and funding issues a subject of a study and report to us during 

the 1996-97 year, the fiscal year that we’re contemplating now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I just 

have a question on this because I’m thinking back of the 

complete turnover in health services that the province has 

experienced and many other things we’ve experienced where 

we didn’t have a lot of answers. 

 

So I have got a question, and it is: can we be assured by the 

minister that this Act will not discriminate against rural areas in 

that the charge for the services to rural areas will not be more, 

much the same as where rural areas have to pay more for 

Internet and SaskTel long distance rates? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in answer to the 

question by the hon. member, I would say that this is the 

contrary, really. It is designed to make access to all of the 

library systems in the province, and in particular rural areas, 

more accessible than they currently are, and it is entirely 

voluntary. There is nothing mandatory. 

 

But this is something I expect there will be movement, because 

all the different components of the library system, their 

representatives, were involved in the consultation process. This 

is something . . . this enabling legislation is something they’ve 

wanted for a long time, worked very hard to achieve, and we are 

expecting that they will take advantage of the provisions that 

are contained in this Act to enhance library services to all parts 

of Saskatchewan including rural areas. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, the answer to the 

question before when I asked about funding sounds awfully 

familiar, because we just got through one that we were asked to 

pass a highway Bill without knowing a lot of the parts that were 

to it. And I think we’re being asked the same thing again 

without knowing how the funding formula will be set up, so I 

guess we’re getting used to that. So therefore I’ll go on to my 

next question because I probably won’t get an answer anyway. 

 

The next question I have, Madam Minister, is with the arbitrator 

to be set up for the boundaries; who is going to pick the 

arbitrator? Who will be the person or the people that will set the 

arbitrator in place? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in reply to the 

hon. member’s question, his reference to funding, is that the 

answer wouldn’t be contained today because, as I explained 

previously, funding was identified as a high priority. And we 

have said that a study will be undertaken in the coming fiscal 

year, ‘96-97, to address any changes that might be desirable. 



504  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

On the boundaries dispute resolution process, there will be a 

process outlined whereby, for instance, a municipality that’s on 

the boundary between two regional libraries might want to 

move to another one. That process is lacking now so this Act 

outlines a method by which that can be achieved, and in the 

case of an arbitration, or the dispute-settling mechanism that’s 

contained in the Act, each party to the dispute would agree on 

an arbitrator and then the costs would be shared by the parties 

that are in dispute. They would each contribute equally to 

whatever costs were incurred in that process. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  That’s quite satisfactory. If they both have 

input into picking the arbitrator, I think that’s a very good way 

to go. 

 

Do we have any idea of what this would cost, though, to set up 

an arbitrator and go through this process? Is there any study 

been done on that? Like I’m wondering how much money will 

this process cost? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  To the hon. member’s question, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we haven’t conducted that kind of a study but 

it is contemplated that this dispute-settling mechanism would 

be engaged at the local level. We’re not talking about 

high-priced people from afar carrying large briefcases and 

invoice books. It is expected that the costs in dollar terms would 

be minimal. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, as 

I said in the opening, we’ve just went through a Bill discussing 

many of the problems that are related to hidden regulations or 

lack of regulations. Under interpretation, under 2(a) where it 

states: 

 

“basic library services” means those library services that 

are described in the regulations as basic library services; 

 

has “basic library services” been defined in the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member 

opposite, this would be part of the . . . the subject of his 

question would be part of the review which will ensue after the 

passing of the Act and in the context of developing the 

regulations. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, it really 

eludes me. I have difficulty with trying to understand why Acts 

are passed before in fact there’s clarification of regulations and 

so on for the general public. It makes it very difficult for them 

to know what’s going to happen. And I would just ask why 

some of these Acts your government insists on passing . . . 

before there is clarity for the public? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  In reply to the member opposite, I 

would simply say that this is the normal, traditional practice; is 

that the legislation, the Act, provides the framework, the 

background, and then the regulations that follow are pursuant to 

that framework. So this is the normal and accepted practice of 

the development of legislation and regulations. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The one thing  

that I can’t quite pick out of the new Bill here is that our local 

librarian, out in the smaller libraries out in the small 

communities . . . is there going to be a change in their 

qualifications they need to do this job? Or are the same people 

quite qualified under this Bill to do the job they’re doing now? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer to the 

question posed by the member opposite is that there would be 

no changes to the qualifications of librarians in the system. The 

qualifications refer, in that section of the Act to which he 

directs our attention, to the director of the library system, of the 

10 library systems. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, if 

I could, I’d like to go back to the regulations again if I could 

and in response to your answer that that would be part of the 

process, so what you’re telling us is that there has been no 

regulations whatsoever designed for this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said in reply 

to the colleague of the member opposite, that the regulations are 

developed within the framework of the legislation. The 

legislation sets the parameters, and then there’s the regulations 

pursuant to. So you can’t have the regulations until they flow 

from the Act and they will be developed as part of the 

continuing consultations. But the Act sets out the parameters so 

that makes it quite clear  the framework in which the 

regulations have to fit. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So Madam Minister, the answer to my 

question would be no. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, as part of this 

process, what normally is the case is that the legislation is 

developed following consultations as a framework, then the 

regulations are developed again with consultations. And in this 

particular case, as often happens, the Act will not be proclaimed 

until the regulations have been finalized. So we do see it as a 

complete package before the process is complete. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Madam Minister, would you give us a 

commitment then that we would have a chance to look at the 

regulations and debate them in this forum then before this 

legislation is passed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the usual 

practice is that the regulations are developed in the course of 

public consultations. In this case, the consultations and the 

references to the regulations would include representatives from 

the many groups that were involved in the original 

consultations. 

 

Normally the process is not for regulations to be debated in the 

House. The legislation, which sets the stage for them, is; the 

regulations are seen to be administrative. After they’re 

developed, they go to the Legislative Review Committee and 

then on to cabinet. But regulations are not in the normal manner 

of business debated in the House. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. I understand what the 

process is. I guess what I was asking is, would you make a  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

commitment, in light of your preparing-for-the-new-century 

commitments by your government and the Premier  that you 

want to do things differently — would you make a commitment 

to this House that you would be prepared to set the regulations 

and let us have a look at them and debate them and discuss 

them in this forum before the legislation is passed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the interests 

of open, honest, and accountable government, we have had an 

open, long, public consultation process. We have developed the 

legislation which is now before you. Regulations will be 

developed, again in consultation pursuant to this framework. 

After the whole package is complete, then at that point the Act 

can be proclaimed. 

 

It’s much the same, I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a board 

of directors and an administration. The board of directors, as a 

parallel to the members in this House, sets the policy 

framework, and the administrators then put the detail to it. And 

that’s the way the process works. That’s the parallel that I 

would offer to you. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Madam Minister, the problem is that 

you’re asking us, as legislators and elected people, to pass 

something where the detail is in the regulations, and we don’t 

know what it will be. So we’re really just rubber-stamping this. 

We may as well just say, “let her fly” to all 100 pieces or 

whatever amount of legislation you’re bringing down, and let it 

go, because we don’t know what’s in the detail. And so we’re 

just approving something here that you’re putting before us and 

with terms in that we don’t know what the definitions of it 

would be. Would you make that commitment that we would 

have a chance, so that it’s a meaningful process that we’re 

going through here. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something 

that, if the member would read the Bill carefully, he will see 

that the legislation in the Bill provides clear parameters within 

which the regulations must fall. And the Act is very detailed. It 

talks about the purposes of the Act, boundaries, duty to provide 

library services, use of public libraries to be free, Provincial 

Library continued, the role of the Provincial Librarian. And you 

know, I could go on and on: existing municipal libraries 

continued; meetings, quorums, staff, agreements for library 

services, annual mill rates, estimates. The Act itself contains 

great detail. 

 

And the regulations that flow from it are limited in their scope 

by the framework provided by the legislation. So it’s open, 

honest, accountable. Members opposite have nothing to fear. 

They are free to ask. On the basis of any of these provisions, it 

would be quite easy to contemplate what sort of regulations and 

what sort of authorities might flow from this. 

 

So this is open. It has had extensive consultation. And I think 

that it is a very positive piece of legislation and relatively easy 

to understand. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Madam Minister, could you then possibly, in  

consultation with your officials, give us some idea of what a 

basic library service might be. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in answer to the 

member opposite, that is one of the things that is changing. And 

technology is really overtaking the library system where, at one 

time, we might have thought as a library being a place with lots 

of shelves of books to borrow and take home and read and 

bring back. And now we have, as you know, the electronic 

information access system and many, many, many services, a 

wide range of services  information services, communication 

services  that libraries provide. 

 

So this is one of the reasons why this legislation is so important, 

is that it is bringing libraries, and the legislation that governs 

the way they are able to operate, into the 21st century. And I 

invite you to be positive about the legislation and come with us. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Madam Minister, I appreciate the 

changing times and how libraries are changing along with 

everything else, and I totally agree with that. And that exactly 

makes my point . . . is that . . . what is the problem with us 

having a look at your definition of basic library services? And 

so that we will feel comfortable with the people that we consult 

with . . . have the same opinion as the people that you’re talking 

to. 

 

And so I don’t see a problem with it. I think we’re wanting to 

attain the same thing, and yet it appears to me that the 

government’s a little reluctant to be open with the process. Put 

it up front and when we pass this legislation, we will all know 

exactly what a basic library service is. And if I agree with it, I’ll 

stand up and support it and say yes. 

 

So I’m not sure what your problem is with that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess the 

problem I have with it is that what defines basic library services 

is at this point in our history very fluid. It changes as we speak, 

as people get on to the Internet, as more networks are built. 

 

And so I think that the member should have some faith in the 

librarians that provide the service throughout the province, in 

that they will want to serve their clients into this century and the 

next in the most modern, comprehensive possible way that they 

can. And in consultation with them, we have developed this 

framework and we will develop the regulations in concert with 

them. And I know that their . . . I’m confident that their goal is 

to provide the very best and most modern and comprehensive 

library services to the people of rural and urban Saskatchewan 

that they possibly can. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  One question I’d like to know. We’re not 

sure of how the funding is going to work, but out in the small 

communities and actually for that matter in the cities too, who 

actually owns the libraries that are out there? I’m not talking the 

books, but I’m talking the buildings and the equipment such as 

furniture and stuff like that. Who actually has ownership of 

that? 



506  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I’m very glad that the member 

opposite asked this question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we 

have a large variety of libraries. As you know, this framework 

attempts to bring together 10 different library systems and 

network them electronically so that each one of those 

collections will be accessible, through using the principle of the 

interlibrary loan, by any other library user in the province. 

 

So now, as you will be aware, there are libraries that are owned 

by municipalities. Municipalities have built the buildings, and 

they establish a mill rate on their municipal assessment to 

operate them. 

 

There are some libraries even in communities that have been 

built by service clubs and others. Usually the operating costs are 

by the municipalities. Then you have the regional library 

concept with, you know, the mobile and they are owned by the 

regional library as sort of a corporation which is owned and all 

the member municipalities contribute to the operating costs 

through a levy. 

 

So there’s a wide range of ownership really, but I would say 

that the largest percentage of the capital and operating would be 

contributed by municipalities of all sizes. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay then, Madam Minister, then reading 

no. 75 here, where the minister has access to the records. And if 

the local municipalities actually are the main contributor or 

contributing most of the money, why would the minister have 

access or be able to ask such things as required information 

respecting organization, equipment, cost, maintenance finances, 

and use made of the library? Use I have no question about, but 

the rest of the things within that no. 75. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the member 

opposite would know from his experience in local government, 

the same way that there is a requirement of local government at 

all levels to submit a consolidated revenue and expense 

statement to the provincial government for purposes of analysis 

to establish averages and that sort of thing, public libraries . . . 

and there is public funding too, towards the operating costs; 

provincial dollars do go towards the operation of libraries. It’s 

simply for reporting purposes so that the standards can be 

monitored. And perhaps it’s this kind of information, and the 

variations in the information received throughout the system, 

that help to emphasize the need for the kind of cooperation and 

the kind of system that’s contemplated in the legislation that’s 

before us. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, then that goes on to 

another question then. Who is actually responsible for the 

liability in the library itself then? The municipalities involved, 

are they solely responsible  the municipalities that are 

funding? I noticed in . . . I don’t know I’m sure if it’s in this 

Bill or the next one, they’re very similar, but the fine has gone 

from $25 to $250 for rowdiness, so I think we’ve got that under 

control. But I think the liability end of this thing, I’d like to 

know if the minister has the right to go in and do this. And I 

think they should have some responsibility for the liability end 

of it too and I’m just wondering if just the municipality has 

that. 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve frequented a 

large number of libraries in my life and probably they’re about 

the least rowdy place that I’ve ever . . . much less rowdy than 

the legislature at times I might comment. 

 

But usually the . . . if you’re talking about liability of people 

being injured on the premises or that kind of thing, or if a 

library is running a deficit for example, that the liability would 

rest in most cases with the municipality or municipalities that 

would own it. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 

Minister, I just have one question on part VIII on the aboriginal 

peoples, and I’m wondering why they’re specifically mentioned 

in the Act. It says in here that it would allow them to 

accommodate aboriginal participation in the provincial public 

library system. Do you need this Act to allow them to be in the 

system or why was it put in? 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the member to please put that 

question when we get to the part, please. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  Seeing the length of the Bill and the amount of 

the clauses and that, is it agreed by the committee that we do it 

by page? 

 

Clauses 5 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Clause (3), Madam Minister, it says: 

 

On receipt of a petition that requests the establishment of a 

municipal library and that is signed by at least 15% of the 

electors in the municipality . . . 

 

Where did the 15 per cent come from? To me, as my 

experiences with municipalities, 15 per cent is a terrifically low 

number to create the municipality having to go through the act 

of forming possible by-laws. Where did the 15 per cent come? 

It just seems kind of low to me. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in reply to the 

question from the member opposite, this clause and the 

percentage contained in it is meant to be . . . it is consistent with 

the rural municipal and urban municipal Acts with respect to 

petitions. So for the sake of consistency, the same percentages 

are used. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 13 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

Clause 22 

 

The Chair:  On page 11, we have in clause 22, a House 

amendment by the minister, and I would get her to put that 

forward now. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in clause 22 of 

the printed Bill I wish to move a House amendment. It is to: 

 

Amend Clause 22 of the printed Bill by striking out 

subsection (2) and substituting the following: 

 

“(2) On receipt of the estimate made pursuant to 

subsection (1), the municipality shall, unless it elects 

pursuant to subsection (5), make a special levy for the 

purpose of raising the money stated in the estimate or any 

part of the money that may be approved by the council, to 

be known as the library mill rate”. 

 

And I . . . if the opposition doesn’t have it, a copy; do they have 

a copy of the House amendment? They do; okay, I was going to 

offer to send it over. 

 

Just a note of explanation. Upon reviewing the words in 

subsection (2) it was determined that the wording in the Bill 

could be interpreted as forcing a municipal council to raise the 

entire amount that a library board submitted in their annual 

estimate. The House amendment will clarify that the municipal 

council retains ultimate authority in determining the amount to 

be raised and paid to the municipal library boards. The 

amendment reflects the current practices so there’s no change. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Would that same one . . . number 22(5), I 

have a question with, Madam Minister. 

 

Notwithstanding subsections (1) to (4), where the sum 

required by a municipal library board in any year does not 

exceed $2,000, the sum may be paid out of the general 

funds of the municipality without the imposition of a 

library mill rate. 

 

I’d like to know where that figure came from and what happens 

if it exceeds that? Then they have to go back to the municipality 

and have the mill rate raised? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the numbers in 

this clause and the intent is to be consistent with the current 

practice. This is contained in the previous Act or the Act that 

stands now until this one takes force so there’s no change. This 

doesn’t reflect a change. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 23 to 65 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2200) 

Clause 66 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 

Minister, I was just wondering if you could answer my question 

on part VIII regarding the aboriginal peoples. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I thank the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena for her question, and I’d provide in 

response that there is no authority of the public library system 

to operate on reserve, either in the North or the South; therefore 

there needs to be a provision for the public library system or 

parts of it to enter into agreements to provide services on 

reserve or vice versa. 

 

Clause 66 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 67 to 83 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 84 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the 

minister would be prepared to make a commitment that before 

the Bill is passed that she would indeed have the regulations 

tabled for us to look at and to discuss in this forum. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not the 

normal practice for regulations to be tabled in the House or to 

be debated. As I described earlier there are extensive public 

consultations, and the regulations then are approved by the 

Regulations Review Committee. I’m sure that the regulations 

will be available and the libraries in the area of the member’s 

constituency of Arm River will certainly be in touch with him 

about the nature of the consultations and how they feel about 

the result. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister, for the answer. And I 

realize what normal procedure is. I guess I’m . . . Again, as 

we’re talking about preparing for the new century, we’re talking 

about doing things differently, and I just wonder what the 

reluctance of the minister is not to go through that procedure. 

Be innovative and start something new. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an 

extensive public consultation, and consultation with all of the 

interested parties that were named in the original consultations, 

and this is . . . these are members of the public that the member 

opposite represents. And I’m sure that in exercising their good 

judgement in electing their local MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), they can exercise similar good 

judgement in developing and advising on the development of 

regulations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you for the confidence, Madam 

Minister, in the members opposite. That’s exactly one of the 

reasons why I got elected, was the people of Arm River . . . I’m 

sure as was your electorate out there sent you here to look after 

their interests. 

 

And that’s all we’re asking for, is an opportunity to ensure that 

with what’s in the . . . what the people out there want to see and 

their best interests is achieved here and is scrutinized by the  



508  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1996 

people that they elected. And I am one of them. 

 

So I once again would ask you if you would consider to start a 

process of doing things differently as we lead into the new 

century and take the initiative as the first minister to allow this 

to happen? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is one 

thing that we do not want to do in the interest of efficient and 

smaller government, is to make this kind of procedure more 

complicated and more protracted. 

 

And this is why there is a standing . . . the Regulations Review 

Committee is a standing committee which meets regularly all 

throughout the year and is constantly based on representations 

from the public and from people who are interested in good 

legislation and good regulations responding to those requests on 

a continuing basis throughout the year. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one 

question left for me. How many RMs (rural municipality) are 

not involved right now in any library or taking part in funding 

of the library system right now? Is there a large number or not? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Since 1982 it’s been pretty well 

constant that there are about 95 per cent of municipalities that 

participate in regional libraries. 

 

Clause 84 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 85 and 86 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 29  An Act to enable Co-operation among all 

Types of Autonomous Libraries for the Provision of 

Library Services 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that all 

members of the House will be very happy with this legislation. 

This is The Libraries Co-operation Act, 1996 which establishes 

the framework for a multitype library system in Saskatchewan. 

And this will establish a network of autonomous libraries and 

information providers including universities, schools, public 

and special libraries, to share services and resources. 

 

And I know that as I go around the province listening to people, 

this is one of the things that comes up most often, is the 

question of why libraries don’t cooperate more with each other 

and why there aren’t ways in this electronic age that they can 

pool their resources for the benefit of their clientele. 

 

And this is a very good Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s all about 

cooperation. And I know that the members opposite are all in 

favour of cooperation, as are we, and so I’ll be pleased to 

entertain any questions they might have about this particular 

Bill. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  . . . question, Mr. Chairman. Do we know  

at this time what the cost of setting up these multitype boards 

will be? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cost of the 

board  and there’s been considerable study on this  it will 

vary from year to year because it will depend on a number of 

factors such as the number of times they meet, the number of 

members appointed, the distance they need to travel, and so on. 

But the estimate is that the cost will be more than 5,000 but 

unlikely to exceed 35,000 in any year of even fairly heavy 

activity. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Ms. Draude: — I notice that the minister is going to be 

appointing the board members to this board and I’m wondering 

if you can . . . it also tells me in here that the honoraria is 

something that’s going to again be established by regulations. Is 

this something . . . can you explain this to me, the cost that 

you’re expecting to be paying for the regulations for the 

honoraria? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 

regulations that govern regulations, and there are already 

existing regulations that cover the per diem and travelling 

expenses for boards and committees in the public service and 

these costs would be consistent with those regulations that exist 

for other boards and commissions. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 

Minister, once again on the reimbursement and honoraria, I 

didn’t quite understand your response so could you clarify that 

for us, please? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the costs that are 

approved for reimbursement of members of boards and 

commissions appointed as part of the public service are 

established from time to time and . . . like I can’t say exactly 

because mileage rates change as gasoline prices change and so 

forth. But the costs have been very standard for many years and 

are across the public service in most boards and commissions. 

 

Mr. McLane:  But, Madam Minister, it says in section 10: 

 

Members of the board who are not members of the Public 

Service . . . (Commission): 

 

(a) are entitled to be reimbursed for reasonable expenses 

. . . 

 

I’m wondering what’s the reimbursement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 10 would 

refer to people who are perhaps salaried people. Like if the 

Provincial Librarian, for example, went to attend that kind of a 

meeting or a hearing, she’s on salary, so she wouldn’t get the 

public service per diem on top of the salary. She would just be 

reimbursed for whatever expenses might be reasonable outside 

the scope of her salary like mileage or like an overnight  



March 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

stay in a hotel if that was required. That’s what that section 

means. 

 

Mr. McLane:  On the same, in clause (b) then: “if provided 

for in the regulations . . .” 

 

Will it be provided for in the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

regulations will be consistent with other Acts and regulations 

where it’s contemplated that members of a board or a 

committee might be a mix of salaried people, public employees, 

and private citizens who will be then reimbursed in different 

ways that are consistent with the practice across government. 

 

(2215) 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 3 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. McLane:  Just another question, Madam Minister. It 

says, if provided for in the regulations, the honoraria is set, 

established by the regulations. I guess I’m having a problem 

with not knowing what we’re going to be paying for this type of 

an honorarium or the number of meetings that are held or the 

amount of money that might be paid to the chairman. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, again the 

regulations that will be pursuant to this framework will be 

consistent with the regulations and the per diems and expenses 

accounted for, with that is across government in other boards 

and commissions and committees that the hon. member may be 

familiar with. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 11 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased 

to have the opportunity to discuss this Bill in Committee of the 

Whole and to entertain questions on it. 

 

This is the first amendment I might say, or the first change, to 

the archives legislation since it was established in 1945. And I 

think we have a number of very positive provisions in The 

Archives Act and I would be glad to answer any questions. 

 

I think there are a number . . . well a few provisions that I 

would like to draw the members’ attention to. One of them is 

that the board will be constituted by order in council, which is 

not the case now. Now the universities simply name who they 

want their representative to be. 

We are adding some provisions with respect to the security of 

the donations to the archives and the access to them. I think that 

this is long-awaited legislation and is very positive. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

since you raised it, what was the reasoning behind the changing 

from the old process to the people being appointed by the 

cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  To the member opposite, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The previous . . . the 1945 legislation provides that 

members to the board will be named by the universities and that 

the term shall be two years or until a successor is named. And 

so it tends to, because there’s no finite end to the term, sort of 

tends to go on and on. 

 

So we want to have finite terms. We’re making provision to 

bring in people who have an interest in the use and the 

modernization of the archives, which is meant to collect, 

preserve, and preserve the integrity of, and to make available to 

users of the archives, the records of the province of 

Saskatchewan in good order. So we feel that this is a 

modernization of the archives. 

 

Again the archives a lot of people think of as a place to store 

things and there’s all manner of media is used there now in 

microfiching some papers that don’t have to be retained in their 

original form. 

 

We’re also very concerned with maintaining the integrity of the 

archives. Our provincial archives is one of the few that attracts 

donations from private collections and it makes it very valuable. 

In a lot of cases private donors will not make bequests, for 

instance from estates, to provincial archives because they have 

some trepidation about the security. And in our case that’s 

never been true. We have attracted a large number of private 

papers. 

 

And in order to preserve the integrity under the new structure 

we contemplate appointing, as members to the board, an officer 

of the legislature, perhaps previous retired officers of the 

legislature  the people who have a clear understanding of 

what is involved in maintaining the integrity of the archives in 

such a way that private collections will continue to be received 

by them. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I think you answered in part my next 

question, is what process will there be for the cabinet to follow 

in appointing these people to ensure that the quality type of 

people that we need there are indeed appointed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the case will be 

that each university, the University of Regina, University of 

Saskatchewan, continue to put forth a nominee and their 

nominee will be appointed. We contemplate, as I said, 

appointing an officer of the legislature. It has been the practice, 

because of the space requirements of the archives, to have a 

public servant  the legislation specifies, I think, two public 

servants  one would be, as has been the practice, someone 

representing the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, and then, as I said, there are like other interested  



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Murray ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 491 
Tchorzewski ................................................................................................................................................................................ 491 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

Renaud ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 487 
Goohsen ............................................................................................................................................................... 487, 490, 494, 496 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................... 487, 492, 494 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 490 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................. 490, 492, 494 

  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 499 
Recorded divisions................................................................................................................................................................. 496, 502 
Bill No. 28  An Act to provide for the Establishment, Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 502 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 503 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 503 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 503 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 506 

Bill No. 29  An Act to enable Co-operation among all Types of Autonomous Libraries for the Provision of Library 
Services 

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 

Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 509 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 509 

THIRD READINGS 
Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

Renaud ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 510 
Bill No. 28  An Act to provide for the Establishment, Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 510 
Bill No. 29  An Act to enable Co-operation among all Types of Autonomous Libraries for the Provision of Library 

Services 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 510 

Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act  
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 510 

 


