













































June 5, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2199 

 June 5, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 

of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 

respect to closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the signatures are from Melville, from Yorkton, and some 

signatures from Regina as well, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The communities the people are from that have signed the 

petition are Esterhazy, Tantallon, and Bredenbury, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayers 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Kamsack, Weyburn, White City, Pilot Butte, Avonlea, and the 

large majority are from Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are primarily from 

the city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 

Moose Jaw, Frontier, Esterhazy, Stoughton, Bengough  all 

over Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

today to present petitions from concerned citizens regarding the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reading as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many, many 

concerned citizens from the constituency of Arm River, namely 

the communities of Craik and Davidson. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities such as Assiniboia, Tugaske, Simpson, and a 

number of them from the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they 

are from Regina here; they’re from Avonlea, from Milestone, 

from Carnduff, from Wilcox, from Oxbow, from Moose Jaw, 

from Estevan, from Midale, Weyburn, Pangman, and from all 

throughout the land, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 

 

  



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today and the people all throughout Saskatchewan, 

and in fact throughout western Canada, as we’ve found by 

presenting many petitions with western Canadian names on 

them. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition that I’m holding today 

 pages and pages of them  are all from the Regina area and 

Regina Albert South, Dewdney, Elphinstone constituencies, in 

particular. I so present. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Today I am presenting nine pages of petitions from individuals 

concerned about budget cuts to the Saskatoon Family Support 

Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the Department of Social 

Services of the province of Saskatchewan to reconsider the 

decision to reduce the programs of the Saskatoon Family 

Support Centre, and to return the programs of the 

Saskatoon Family Support Centre to their previous level of 

delivery of service. 

 

And is in your duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These individuals are not only from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re also from Punnichy, Martensville, and other small 

communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received: 

 

Petitions of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reconsider 

closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Petitions of citizens petitioning the Assembly to urge the 

Department of Social Services to reconsider the reduction 

of parent education and support programs. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to my 

colleagues in the Assembly, a group of people from Melfort, 

Saskatchewan. They’re a group of 38 students, the grade 6 

students from Brunswick School which is located right behind 

my home, so I see these young people regularly playing and 

raising Cain with the teachers who are with them today. 

 

Mr. Gordie Manz and Mr. Denis Masurat are with them as 

teachers, and chaperons Jackie Rogers and Lynne Selkirk. 

 

I would ask the Assembly and all my colleagues to extend to  

these young people and their chaperons a warm welcome to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce to the Assembly, a group of 22 grade 

7 and 8 students, and five chaperons that came in from 

Endeavour, Saskatchewan today. Their principal, Rod Steciuk, 

and chaperons Adeline Mills, Debbie Blender, Neil and Elfreda 

Fenske, all came from Endeavour, and I’m delighted to see you, 

and I hope you’ll learn lots today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal 

of pleasure that I rise to introduce an important person to the 

tourism industry in Saskatchewan, but really right across 

Canada. Last night I had the opportunity, along with you, sir, to 

attend the Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council third 

annual certification recognition dinner which awarded to a large 

number of people from across the province, certificates for their 

training that they have done in providing excellent tourism 

service in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Attending the meeting with us last night was Ray Davis, who is 

the executive director of the association of professional tourism 

from across Canada. And Ray is seated in your gallery. And I’m 

sure all members will want to join with me and welcome him to 

the Assembly and wish him best in his endeavour of improving 

and encouraging tourism, one of our largest industries in the 

country, right across the country. Ray. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 

to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature, a young man seated in the Speaker’s gallery. This is 

Greg Nesbett. He is a student at F. W. Johnson Collegiate. He’s 

in grade 11 and he’s spending the day being my shadow, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s job shadowing to see what kind of day an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) has. 

 

We’ve already actually done some very exciting things today, 

meeting many of our government members, and we’ve also met 

with the opposition and the third party. I’m looking forward to 

spending some more time with him later on, and I would ask 

you to join me in extending a warm welcome to Greg, please. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Scott Collegiate Remains Open 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

commend all the people in Regina who are working together to 

save Scott Collegiate. News that the Regina Public School 

Board was considering closing Scott Collegiate sent shock 

waves throughout the community. Many parents, students, and  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

teachers were worried that the unique educational programs for 

youths in north central Regina would be lost. 

 

Scott’s curriculum offers a unique aboriginal perspective for the 

majority of its students. It has unique programs that highlight 

native culture, like native history and Indian art. Scott also has 

special re-entry programs like a day care and other services that 

offer incentives for students who would not otherwise be able to 

attend. 

 

Last night the public school board did commit to ensuring that 

Scott Collegiate’s doors will remain open in the fall. It was 

wonderful news to the dozens of people who have been 

lobbying the board to keep the school open. 

 

I would like to commend all the people in north central Regina 

who have recognized the value of the ground-breaking program 

that Scott offers and who will continue fighting to preserve this 

valuable resource for their future in north central Regina. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with 

my colleague and friend from Athabasca in encouraging the 

people from north central to continue to work towards 

maintaining Scott Collegiate. And the fact that Scott Collegiate 

is in my constituency and is named for Saskatchewan’s first 

premier, I think tells you something about the longevity and the 

service to students and families in Regina. And because it’s a 

landmark in our educational system and especially because it 

now offers some unique programs and features to the 

surrounding neighbourhood, I’m pleased to work with, and 

support . . . and the support it has received in recent days. 

 

I want to congratulate the public school board for meeting with 

and listening to the community groups, the parents, students, 

staff, who are in fact determined to keep the school open. 

 

In making its decision to keep the school open for at least 

another year, as announced last night, the board recognized the 

value of the school to the north central community, and the 

board members are to be commended and encouraged for that 

decision. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the parents and students who 

have pulled together in that community, as they do in many 

issues and on many occasions, to make this happen. This is an 

excellent example of cooperation and partnership between 

community and the school board, both of whom who have the 

first principle as the best interest of the students at heart. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Third Annual Shorebirds and Friends Festival 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Communities 

sometimes fail to recognize the potential tourism attractions in 

their own area. This is not the case in the Quill Lakes. This area 

has an abundance of species of birds and wetland animals  

which the towns and the RMs (rural municipality) of the area 

are promoting. Recently their third annual Shorebirds and 

Friends Festival doubled its attendance from last year with 

crowds of tourists from Saskatoon, Yorkton, Moose Jaw, and 

the local area. 

 

They participated in planned activities and celebrated nature’s 

bounty. The two-day event featured activities such as the 

monster marsh hike, nature tours by Kerry Holderness of Quill 

Lake, bird house building, and photography workshops. Those 

in attendance also were treated to a performance by the Fishing 

Lake First Nation Na-Ka-way singers, and dancers from the 

Pow Wow Trail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this weekend was another success story of rural 

Saskatchewan residents promoting a natural attraction and 

volunteering many hours of labour to promote a successful 

event. I would ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

the people from the Quill Lakes area who helped organize this 

event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mine Safety Award 

 

Mr. Ward:  Mr. Minister, as the Hon. Minister of Labour 

said on Monday, this week is Occupational Health and Safety 

Week. The theme of the week “Don’t Learn by Accident, Set A 

Goal For Zero Accidents in the Workplace” is something that 

has been taken to heart by the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, Rocanville mine. 

 

Rocanville has won the Canadian Institute of Mining’s national 

safety trophy for having lost no time due to accidents in 1995. 

The Hon. Minister of Energy and Mines presented the award to 

mine general manager, Dale Jackson, at a banquet this past 

weekend. 

 

This is the fourth time that Rocanville has received the top mine 

safety award in the country. It has also received two regional 

and two special safety awards. The mining industry in 

Saskatchewan has earned an excellent reputation regarding 

safety in the workplace. Statistics from the Saskatchewan 

Mining Association indicate that provincial mines have only 

one lost-time accident per 100,000 hours worked. 

 

I would like to congratulate management and the employees at 

the Rocanville mine for their commitment to safety in the 

workplace. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Community School Coordinator of the Year Award 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much for 

recognizing me, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great pleasure today 

to bring news to the Assembly that my friend and my 

constituent, Fay Stupnikoff, has received the Community 

School Coordinator of the Year Award for 1996. This award 

was presented to her earlier this month in Windsor from the 

Canadian Association for Community Education. 

  



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

Fay has been with the Queen Mary Community School in 

Prince Albert for 16 years and her dedication and hard work 

definitely have paid off. The students, teachers, and parents not 

only admire her and respect her, they also depend upon her to 

make learning enjoyable. Fay has always believed the objective 

of schools is to achieve academic success as well as teach 

students how to be happy, productive members of society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she’s also taught members of this legislature that 

adequate funding for community schools is a prerequisite to 

seeing all of these good things happen and she was very pleased 

to see an increase in this year’s budget for community schools 

in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, students of Queen Mary 

Community School and indeed the people of Prince Albert are 

fortunate to have her as a member of our community, and I’m 

pleased today to join with them in offering her my 

congratulations on this achievement. Good work, Fay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Govan Ram Test Station 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 

Agricultural Sciences Month in Saskatchewan, I want to 

mention a little-known but valuable facility in my constituency 

which is making a valuable contribution to a valuable sector of 

our farm economy. 

 

In Saskatchewan there are approximately 80,000 sheep. 

Saskatchewan contributes meat and wool to the local economy 

and is exporting increasing amounts to the United States and to 

Ontario. Farm cash receipts are averaging approximately $4 

million a year. 

 

The ram test station at the community of Govan has been 

involved since 1989 in improving the quality and profitability 

of this product. Established under the direction of the 

Saskatchewan Sheep Breeders Association, the station runs 

strictly controlled tests which measure the weight gains and 

physical soundness of young breeding rams and then offers 

them for sale at the annual Grasslands Exhibition in Assiniboia. 

 

This facility is owned and operated by Mr. Ward Mortenson, a 

member of the Saskatchewan Sheep Breeders Association board 

of directors and a commercial sheep breeder-producer for 40 

years, along with being a grain farmer and livestock producer 

for 50 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across our province there are people like Mr. 

Mortenson who are making their contribution to strengthening 

and diversifying our economy, people who seldom get the 

recognition they deserve. I am happy in a small way to correct 

that oversight by recognizing a contribution by Mr. Mortenson 

and the ram test station at Govan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Swift Current Scholarship Winner 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

would like to congratulate a student from my constituency,  

Julie Ann Gibbings of Swift Current, who recently received a 

scholarship from the American Junior Quarterhorse 

Association. 

 

There were 13 scholarships awarded by the association in 1995, 

and Julie Ann was the only Canadian who received one. She 

graduated from Swift Current Comprehensive High School last 

year with an average of 85 per cent and is now attending the 

University of Saskatchewan. This year she is also president of 

the Saskatchewan Junior Quarter Horse Association. 

 

I would just like to say congratulations and wish her the best in 

her future endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding for Providence Place 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Health. It is yet another day and yet another 

meeting will be taking place to protest this government’s cuts to 

health care, this time in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, tonight, 

community groups and the public will gather to discuss this 

government’s decision to break its promise of separate funding 

for the geriatric unit at Providence Place. 

 

In attendance will be many people who committed both time 

and money to make this unit a reality, only to discover this 

government won’t make good on its commitments. 

 

Organizers of this event said they will gladly let the minister or 

the member from Wakamow speak if they come and tell 

everyone present they will honour their commitment of separate 

funding. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you attend the meeting this evening and 

make it clear to everyone that you’ll make good on your 

government’s funding promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow will be attending the meeting tonight, 

and I’m sure he will be willing to speak. 

 

But I want to say to the member, as I’ve said before, that what 

is lacking here is an operational agreement between the district 

board and the Providence Place board with respect to this fiscal 

year. And there is only one way that this issue can really be 

resolved, Mr. Speaker, and that is for the parties to sit down in 

good faith and talk about the issue. 

 

And the two boards have not yet had an opportunity to sit down, 

but I think a solution will be found at the local level, Mr. 

Speaker. I believe there can be a GARU (geriatric assessment 

rehabilitation unit) at Providence Place, but I do believe that the 

parties have to talk to one another. And I’ve been directing my 

efforts through officials at trying to get the parties together. 

 

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

And I understand some progress has been made, and it’s my 

hope that discussions will occur quite soon between the district 

and Providence Place boards. And I believe that that is the way 

to resolve the dispute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the minister doesn’t 

intend to keep his promise. He wants to blame everything else 

but his government’s funding cuts. Worse yet, Mr. Speaker, he 

wants to avoid taking responsibility just long enough that 

people give up and the geriatric unit staff leave on their own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who donated millions to build this unit 

deserve better. They deserve an apology from the minister. 

Many generous people gave of themselves because they 

believed the government would keep its commitment. 

 

I have a letter I’d like to send over to the minister right now. It’s 

a letter of apology to these people. It says, and I quote: 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I apologize 

for failing to live up to our promise of secure operational 

funding for this unit. I recognize that in doing so we are 

also failing to live up to our commitment to promote 

wellness and provide quality care to our seniors. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you at least do the honourable thing and sign 

this letter of apology so I or the member from Wakamow can 

deliver it on your behalf to these generous residents whose 

dreams you have so shamefully stolen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, I believe 

that the Providence Place board and the district health board 

will be committed to having geriatric assessment in Moose Jaw. 

 

And while the member is talking about commitments and 

broken promises, I’d like to remind the member that this year, 

as a result of federal Liberal cut-backs, if we had applied, if we 

had applied the cut-back, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals 

imposed to the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District, we 

would have been cutting the district by about $2.1 million. But 

we back-filled for the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. And the district 

does have a tight budget; there’s no question about that. But we 

back-filled to the tune of about $1.3 million for the Liberals. 

 

And I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that the 

resolution to this situation is for the parties to get together, 

negotiate in good faith, and come to a resolution. And I’m 

confident that people acting in good faith will do so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve questioned the Minister of Health on a number of 

occasions in the past few weeks about Saskatchewan residents  

who’ve contracted hepatitis C through no fault of their own. 

 

In particular I have brought to the attention of this House a case 

involving Bonnie Soerensen whose six-year-old son is one such 

victim of this life-threatening disease. The minister has 

indicated during questioning that Ms. Soerensen should await a 

response from the department. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Soerensen received a response 

yesterday, and we’ll hand this out to cabinet members and I 

guess to the third party. She received a letter from the minister 

which essentially tells her if she wants any form of 

compensation she should sue the government. Mr. Speaker, this 

is the ultimate insult. What kind of a government makes such an 

arrogant statement? 

 

Will the minister explain why he is treating people who are in 

the midst of an emotional and financial struggle with absolutely 

no compassion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I would say to the member, as 

I have said to the member in the House repeatedly, that in cases 

where it is clear that a person was infected with hepatitis C by a 

blood transfusion, where there are serious medical problems, 

and where negligence is established on the part of the 

government, we will consider settling such a claim. And each 

claim will be considered on its merits. 

 

The difficulty here, Mr. Speaker, is that you have to determine 

what the medical result is with respect to a person who has 

contracted hepatitis C. There may or may not be a serious 

medical outcome. If there is, and compensation is warranted 

which should be paid by the province, I’ve made it clear that 

we’ll do that. 

 

I said to the member yesterday when he raised this question that 

if the member is so certain that compensation can be announced 

immediately, let the member say what the amount of the 

compensation is. He can’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because that 

cannot be determined at this point in time. Yet the member 

wants to say that I should do that at this point in time when it’s 

not possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, perhaps we shouldn’t expect 

an answer different than the one that the Health minister’s 

providing because yet he is a lawyer and can only see a legal 

avenue for a six-year-old boy with hepatitis C. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter that Bonnie Soerensen received from the 

minister yesterday states quite clearly that only if the 

government has been found to be legally responsible for the 

condition of hepatitis C victims, they will consider 

compensation. Does a government not have a moral 

responsibility? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only way a government may be found to be 

legally responsible is if the Krever inquiry makes such a ruling.  

  



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

The problem is it could take years for the Krever report to make 

its way through the court system. And time is one thing these 

people do not have the luxury of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker. these people are not looking for a pot of gold; they 

merely want a compensation package similar to that received by 

the HIV-infected (human immunodeficiency virus) 

hemophiliacs. Will the minister not stand in this House today 

and make such a commitment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have said to Ms. Soerensen 

that in cases where it is clear that infection was caused by a 

blood transfusion, that serious medical complications have 

arisen, and negligence is established for which the government 

of Saskatchewan is legally responsible, we will consider settling 

such claims out of court. 

 

We are not at a point, Mr. Speaker, where medical 

complications have arisen in any particular case with respect to 

which the Government of Saskatchewan is legally responsible. I 

don’t want to discuss the specific medical case of Ms. 

Soerensen’s son, but I think my answer, Mr. Speaker, has been 

fair and reasonable. 

 

I think what the member is doing, when the member himself 

cannot get up and say what the level of compensation should 

be, is admitting that at this point in time there is no way of 

determining the level of compensation. When that point in time 

arrives, Mr. Speaker, it will be dealt with in a fair and 

compassionate way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential Sale of Porcupine Forest 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

people in my constituency are concerned about the application 

by the Okanese First Nations Band for the purchase of land in 

the Porcupine Forest reserve. 

 

An official with the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management has said there is nothing to stop any of the 50 or 

more Indian bands in Saskatchewan from applying for land in 

the Porcupine Forest reserve. This has many of my constituents 

concerned, not because they don't want native ownership, but 

because they are afraid that access to their land will be limited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, trappers, snowmobilers, cabin owners, and a cadet 

camp all want guaranteed access to the forest. As well, water 

bombers need to fill up at Mann Lake if a forest fire breaks out. 

 

Will the Minister of Environment tell these people what process 

his government has in place to make sure a proper consultation 

occurs among all parties before a deal is made? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

hon. member for the question. This government is committed to  

settling outstanding treaty land entitlements. We are working 

closely with bands. We are looking at all applications. And 

people can rest assured that we are settling all third-party 

interests and working with people that use these Crown land 

sites that are chosen, and we’re dealing with third-party 

interests. 

 

And when third-party interests cannot be satisfied, the claims 

will not go through. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Bankruptcy Rate 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are for the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Minister, we raised the issue of a 76-year-old 

Regina business here in the city having had to go out of 

business because they claimed taxes are too high in the 

province and in the city. Well, Mr. Minister, you suggested at 

that time that this was as isolated event. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, the facts of course suggest otherwise, as we 

determined today. In the first quarter of 1996, total businesses 

and consumer bankruptcies were up 70 per cent over the 

previous year. There were a total of 532 bankruptcies in 

Saskatchewan through the end of March compared to 456 last 

year, according to Industry Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if things are as rosy as you claim, why are 

the number of bankruptcies in Saskatchewan continuing to rise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that on any one day, anywhere in Canada and 

in any province, members of the opposition could bring in 

companies that are not able to sustain their business. I mean this 

is not a very difficult role for an opposition member to do. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that when you look at 

reports coming out from economists, the predictions for 

Saskatchewan’s economy this year are in fact very, very bright. 

In fact even in the area of students’ jobs this summer, I want to 

report to you that a report carried on CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) TV indicated that employment this 

year, and I quote: 

 

That students might not have to look as hard for work. 

Employment offices across the province say that students 

looking for work are in luck. More jobs are available this 

year despite the bad weather in May. Saskatoon has 100 

more jobs for students than they had at this time in 1995, 

and the Regina office says that it’s doubled. 

 

So you can predict gloom and doom all you want. But the fact 

is, is that last year we had one of the lowest bankruptcies 

anywhere in Canada, and that record stands up against any 

Conservative government anywhere across the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

supplementary for the minister. The minister, Mr. Speaker, 

continues to ignore the facts. And of course he tries to diffuse 

the issue by talking about other issues that are not directly 

related to the problem. 

 

Bankruptcies in Saskatchewan, Minister, are up 17 per cent 

over last year. That’s a statistical fact. And it’s clear that your 

government is also bankrupt of any ideas that could help our 

economy. You totally ignore the fact that people are going 

bankrupt all around us. You ignore the fact that the reason is 

higher taxes, over-regulation, destructive policies like the 

union-preference tendering policy. 

 

These policies are driving businesses out of business and 

forcing up things like consumer and business bankruptcies. 

We’ve got a few minimum wage jobs that are available this 

summer. That hardly is a long-term solution, Mr. Minister. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to bring down the 

numbers of bankruptcies in this province so we don’t have a 

repeat performance next year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member talks 

about low-paying jobs. He may be referring to the 

announcement earlier this week of the synchrotron equipment 

being located in Saskatoon  75 or 80 high tech, world-class 

jobs that are being proposed for Saskatoon. You may be 

referring to the 200 jobs that ISM 2000 (Information Systems 

Management Corporation) is locating in Regina. 

 

But I don’t know where that member is coming from when he 

talks so negatively about the province that both of us call home. 

The fact is, last night, in dealing with tourism in Saskatchewan 

— the fastest growing industry in the province; 40,000 people 

now employed in a billion dollar industry. 

 

Look around you, man, and you’ll see thousands of jobs being 

created by small business. I say again, you just have your 

blinders on and I ask you to look at those businesses that are 

being successful and get onside. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Proclamation of Bill 93 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Justice. Last night’s news reported that a sex 

offender in Saskatoon has chased and tried to grab an 

11-year-old girl, and this same man has been hanging around an 

elementary school ground staring at the kids. The police have 

been notified but unfortunately all corrections can say is that 

they have heard of the man and that he is meeting parole 

requirements. 

 

Mr. Minister, this man has a history of sex offences, yet 

corrections can’t release information about him because of the 

status of The Public Disclosure Bill. Bill 93 received Royal 

Assent over a week ago but you have yet to proclaim it. At the  

same time, other Bills given Royal Assent on the same day are 

already in effect. 

 

Mr. Minister, the opposition allowed this Bill to be passed in 

just eight days because we thought it was an urgent issue. What 

is the hold-up? Why hasn’t Bill 93 been proclaimed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d like to thank the member for that 

question. The Bill is, as you say, in process and ready to be 

used. In this particular instance we have not received any 

request from the city of Saskatoon police. It’s my understanding 

that this matter is not in the category that is being contemplated 

for this particular legislation. 

 

The situation is that the police have been dealing with this 

matter and we are being kept apprised of it. Our concern 

obviously is the concern in the community and the . . . I assume 

that the legislation will be proclaimed at the next opportunity 

when the Lieutenant Governor is here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing that 

that Bill has to wait around for the next opportunity. It doesn’t 

take much of an opportunity to sign a person’s signature and get 

things into action. According to the Queen’s Printer, they have 

received no notification of Bill 93 being proclaimed by the 

Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you immediately, and before something else 

goes wrong that you may have to take responsibility for, make 

an exception and allow corrections officials in Saskatoon to 

release whatever information they feel necessary to the 

elementary school and the parents of the children affected by 

this sex offender? Will you do that and do it today, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

member for the further question. There is absolutely nothing 

preventing the police from making public notification if they 

deem it to be necessary. The legislation that we have provided 

provides a mechanism for advice to the police. And in the 

interim, while we’re working with this matter, it will be dealt 

with by the police, and we will work together with them. 

 

The proclamation of this Act will take place at the appropriate 

time and we will . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Saskatchewan Oil Exploration 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

week the Prime Minister was in Fort McMurray to announce a 

major expansion of the Alberta oil sands project. Officials in the 

oil industry say this expansion could create up to 44,000 jobs 

across Canada over the next 25 years. 

 

All of the billions of dollars of investment will take place just  

  



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

kilometres away from several communities in northern 

Saskatchewan, including Garson Lake. Can the Minister of 

Northern Affairs tell me if this government is considering any 

plans that would help northern Saskatchewan also benefit from 

the incredible oil sands expansion in Fort McMurray? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, what we are doing in 

northern Saskatchewan . . . the member may be worried about 

what’s happening in northern Alberta. He’s looking at the 

tremendous mining development where we are world leaders in 

that development, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at the situation 

in northern Saskatchewan on gold and gold mining as well as 

uranium mining where 50 per cent of the people in northern 

Saskatchewan are hired in those mines, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When we look at the contracts, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Tories were around, there was approximately 

$12 million worth of contracts for northern businesses. This 

past year, Mr. Speaker, there was $47 million  400 per cent 

increase on contracts to northern businesses, Mr. Speaker. And 

those businesses even come from his own community, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that’s a tremendous plus for the 

development in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In regards to what happens in northern Alberta, we know that 

the Liberal government made a mess of the development in 

Alberta during that time, and that’s why they were kicked out of 

there a long time ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Northern Alberta 

will be reaping in the benefits of billions of dollars in 

investment in the oil sands project creating thousands of dollars, 

and this very government told us that eight companies was 

exploring for natural gas within northern Saskatchewan area. 

 

Meanwhile, just across the border around Garson Lake, people 

are suffering from staggering unemployment and many live in 

crowded, poor housing conditions. And the one thing they ask 

for is a road, a road that could possibly open a lot of 

opportunity to oil industry in northern Alberta because oil exists 

in northern Saskatchewan. Now it is time for the government to 

tap into some positive economic growth for northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the minister commit to making the development of the 

Garson Lake road a priority so we have some opportunity and 

some possibility of benefiting from the oil exploration 

happening in northern Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, again the commitment of 

this province is one of the best across Canada in regards to 

development, especially in regards to roads. I’ll have to remind  

the member, Mr. Speaker, that Cumberland bridge, the $6 

million bridge, is going up. We have to look back to 

Grandmother’s Bay road, Mr. Speaker, there was no road to that 

community before. That road is being done. 

 

In his own constituency on the . . . Athabasca road is going to 

go up. In regards to the area, in the forestry area section around 

the Canoe Narrows, the road is being improved. There was five 

kilometres started in regards to Garson Lake put in by the 

province and not a penny by the Liberals. Mr. Speaker, this 

province is committed whereas the federal Liberals are lagging 

far behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Business Credit Checks 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I asked the 

Minister of Economic Development a very straightforward 

question to which, of course, I did not get a straightforward 

answer. So today I’m going to give him another chance, but I’ll 

just simplify the question enough so he can understand it. 

 

Firstly it has to do with regulations for businesses, and secondly 

it concerns businesses who want to move here, as well as 

existing businesses. Mr. Speaker, if a credit check is undertaken 

by a firm like Dun & Bradstreet, the business owner can never 

find out who has requested the financial information. And they 

can only find out what information was given if they pay a 

substantial fee. Even the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government in British Columbia has removed these oppressive 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Minister, will your government take the first step towards 

the cut-backs in government regulations promised in your 

Partnership for Growth and remove these regulations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, if I could quote 

from a document here today. I want to say that the title of this 

article is: “Saskatchewan businessman paints rosy economic 

future”. This is a small-business lobbyist by the name of Dale 

Botting, and I want to quote. I want to quote what Mr. Botting 

says about the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

“I believe we’re on the verge of great and glorious things,” 

Botting told 80 people at a diversification seminar in 

Moose Jaw on Thursday. We’re about to claim our place in 

the sun. 

 

And he goes on to say that Botting said there is an 

entrepreneurial revolution in small business, referring to 

Saskatchewan. With 103,000 self-employed people here, all of 

our 8,000 new jobs created since 1992 have been created by 

small business. 

 

So I want to say to you, Ma’am, even Dale Botting, my friend, 

is supportive of our plan. Why can’t you get onside? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 

 

Ms. Draude:  I look forward to seeing what answer the 

minister will give me tomorrow on the very same question. 

 

The Minister of Economic Development has made a number of 

promises in the Partnership for Growth, one of them being the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc. to develop 

export potential for this province. It will cost the taxpayers over 

$2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few days ago the north Saskatoon businessmen 

association signed an agreement that will accomplish the same 

goals and will cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan nothing. A 

businessman from Guadalajara, Mexico, says it is encouraging 

to witness a well-organized mission to Mexico from private 

business organizations without direct government involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what tangible goals have you set for this STEP 

(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) program that 

will give the people of this province confidence that it is the 

right way to spend their money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 

member opposite to understand that the Saskatchewan Trade 

and Export Partnership is not a government agency. It is an 

agency of a partnership between business, partially funded by 

business, and the movement of our trade development agency 

out of the department of government and over to a hybrid 

organization made up of private and public sector people. 

 

It’s supported by people like Robert Hawkins from Humboldt, a 

private-sector person who has trade connections around the 

world; Milt Fair, with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, former 

CEO (chief executive officer), has been directing for two years 

the establishment. And it’s based on recommendations from the 

private sector, including the good folk from the chamber of 

commerce and the business community in the community we 

refer to — of Saskatoon. 

 

It’s exactly what you are proposing: a private sector-driven 

trade organization. So we finally agree on something; only you 

misunderstand what we’re doing in economic development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

ask leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Legislative Assembly 

here today, some 46 people in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from 

Assiniboia. They’re here today, the seniors, on a mystery tour,  

and what better place to come on a mystery tour than to the 

Saskatchewan legislature on a day when some of the events are 

occurring. 

 

I ask that the Assembly welcome them here and give them a 

warm round of applause. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Request for Commission of Inquiry 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

pursuant to rule 46 to ask leave of the Assembly to engage in a 

debate of urgent and pressing necessity. And I have the motion 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. If it’s acceptable to the member, 

I think there was another member who wishes to request leave 

to introduce guests. Would it be permissible to acknowledge 

another member and then recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition? 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  With permission, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, through you and to you to 

other members of the Assembly, it’s a great pleasure that I have 

as guests today 11 grade 9 students from the Bjorkdale School. 

Accompanying them are Gwen Hebert, teacher, and chaperons 

Diane Berger, Francis Tremblay, and Deanna Whitford. 

 

And I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve ever been to 

Bjorkdale, but it’s a beautiful community. It’s located in a 

valley, very picturesque, in the best part of the province: the 

north-east part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that you will enjoy your visit. Make your questions very 

easy for me this afternoon and have a safe trip home. So please 

join with me in welcoming our guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Request for Commission of Inquiry 

 

The Speaker:  I will recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

and ask him to advise the House as to the reason he believes 

that priority of debate should occur and to advise the House as 

to the motion he wishes to introduce. Order. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion that I  

  



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

request leave to debate is . . . I have it. Do I have leave to read 

the motion, Mr. Speaker? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the government and 

particularly the Minister of Justice to recommend to the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council that an order in council be 

approved appointing a member of either the Saskatchewan 

Court of Appeal or Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench 

for Saskatchewan, such member to be selected by the Chief 

Justice of Saskatchewan, to act as a commissioner for a 

commission of inquiry to inquire into and report on the 

fund-raising and closely related activities of the registered 

political parties of Saskatchewan, together with any 

informally connected or informally related organizations 

which have assisted the registered political parties in such 

activities during the years 1982 through to and including 

the present; 

 

and further, that the terms of reference for the commission 

of inquiry should be as shown in schedule A of this 

resolution; 

 

and further, that the commissioner be authorized to engage 

the services of such counsel, accountants, clerks, reporters, 

assistants, technical advisers, and other experts as are 

necessary or advisable to aid the commission in carrying 

out its responsibilities; 

 

and further, that all political parties who have been 

registered under The Elections Act during the period of the 

inquiry have standing at the commission of inquiry; 

 

and further, that authorization be given for the payment of 

reasonable travel and sustenance expenses in accordance 

with the tariff of travel and sustenance expenses approved 

for employees of the public service, and that authorization 

also be given for the payment of the costs of the inquiry, 

including the expenses of inquiry counsel and counsel to 

the registered political parties with standing at the inquiry; 

 

and further, that the Department of Justice be authorized to 

pay honoraria and expenses of the commission, and further 

that the terms of reference set out in schedule A of this 

resolution be subject to amendment upon the 

recommendation of the jurist appointed as commissioner. 

The terms of reference, Mr. Speaker, the commission of 

inquiry, will have the responsibility . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The terms of reference aren’t part of 

the motion. The Leader of the Opposition . . . Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  What is the member’s point of order. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  The point of order being that the terms of 

reference in this particular case are part of the motion. 

 

The Speaker:  I thank the Leader of the Opposition for  

providing me a copy of his written motion so as to be able to 

follow. And the motion is signed below the part that he’s just 

completed presenting to the House, and therefore I find the 

point of order is not well taken. 

 

The . . . Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition has given 

notice to the House for the rule 46 motion he wishes to present 

and leave is required to proceed to debate. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. All hon. members 

will come to order. All hon. members will come to order. Order. 

The Chair was unable to hear the Clerk being able to call the 

order, and I’ll ask for the cooperation of the members. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 

resume my debate on a number of issues facing northern 

Saskatchewan, and certainly the motion that we have before us 

is contrary to what we feel is proper business of government. 

And therefore I think it’s important that we take the time to 

understand the implications of this particular motion and to 

really challenge the intent of good governance. 

 

When I last left the legislature, Mr. Speaker, we were speaking 

on the fact of a social health effort, a social and mental health 

plan, planning problems of northern Saskatchewan, and 

certainly the density of the population in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I go back to a point that the situation with the density in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s 2.4 per cent of a 

person per square mile, so you can see the tremendous amount 

of land that’s out in northern Saskatchewan and the small 

population. And you look at some of the significant problems 

happening in many of the communities, and then you begin to 

wonder where the relevance of this particular motion fits into 

good governance and spending the time to understand the issues 

of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I bring you to some of the other problems that we 

need to work on as government, as opposed to going through 

the motion, is the fundamental belief that as an MLA you have 

 and certainly as a Canadian citizen  you should have the 

fundamental right to express your opinion. I think that’s very, 

very important. 

 

And when you have motions of this nature, expression of 

opinion is contrary to good governance and certainly contrary to 

trying to get as much of a cross-section of Saskatchewan 

people’s concerns and issues addressed through this Assembly  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

. . . And unfortunately that isn’t allowed in this particular hall. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the House a very special person in my life. I just 

recognized her moments ago in the gallery  my aunt, Ruth 

Fauser. 

 

Aunt Ruth was one of the women who helped to nurture me, 

and I’m hoping — in my youth — and I’m hoping that all the 

members will recognize what a wonderful job that she did over 

the years that we interacted together. 

 

So I ask all members to give my aunt a very warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again in reference 

to some of the discussion we’re going to have in reference to 

northern Saskatchewan problems, I think the key thing as 

government is people look to governments of all stripes to try 

and make a difference in their lives. 

 

And the key thing here is we must get away from the political 

agendas and the political games that are being played in order to 

serve the people that elect us to do so. And a motion of this 

nature certainly is, I feel, contrary to what the intent of good 

governance is all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I bring a few things in northern Saskatchewan, a 

few of the population stats that we spoke about earlier. In 1991 

my home community of Ile-a-la-Crosse led the province in 

growth for all villages. It had a 256-person increase. And what 

that signifies, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that northern 

Saskatchewan communities have a great number of young 

people, a great number. 

 

And when you have one community leading the whole province 

in growth for villages, that goes to show you that the trend in 

northern Saskatchewan is actually having more children born in 

some of these smaller communities. So basically we have to 

address these issues before we could go into any other area. 

 

So in reference to the large population of northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we look again at the situation of  

housing. And I wanted to explain to you, there was a study 

commissioned several years ago speaking about housing and 

the study indicated that they were at least 600 units behind. The 

study was initiated by the Provincial Metis Housing 

Corporation. We got some information  it really wasn’t a 

formal study; it was more or less just an assessment, Mr. 

Speaker  and what that shows you, Mr. Speaker, is you have 

a totally young population, very many kids, and you have an 

economic situation that the North has and you complicate the 

matter by the lack of housing. 

 

So you can see that the housing situation is certainly not 

appealing nor is it supportive nor is it conducive of good 

governance when you’re not providing service and benefits to 

the people that elected you. 

 

So in reference to housing, the three areas we talk about is the 

value of housing in northern Saskatchewan — I spoke earlier 

how the markets in northern Saskatchewan do not support a 

market-based system in terms of housing delivery. A person 

that is working simply cannot get the banks to come into the 

North to build houses for them. It’s considered high risk. 

There’s no sales to indicate any kind of housing market. 

 

So again the working people are being severely penalized. And 

as well, the people that are supposed to be cared for under the 

social programs are also being penalized because governments 

have not been taking a long-term approach to planning for 

housing needs, Mr. Speaker. And I feel that this is what 

governance is all about, this is what government is all about. 

But certainly they’re shying away from that particular 

responsibility as a result of this motion. 

 

So in reference to the housing situation, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

short, significantly short. La Loche is one community that is 

suffering a tremendous amount of strain because of this 

particular problem. And we all know when we have a 

breakdown of control and we have a breakdown of support, 

naturally people are beginning to wonder, you know, where in 

the heck is their government. So La Loche is one particular 

community that really significantly could benefit from a very 

exciting and innovative strategy when it comes to northern 

housing. 

 

And this is the reason why I spoke this morning about the $4 

billion industry in the oil patch in Alberta and its close 

proximity to Garson Lake and La Loche, is the fact that perhaps 

we could tap into the natural gas market and perhaps we can get 

some of the benefits to flow from the oil exploration 

possibilities and therefore the social program . . . the social 

safety net wouldn’t be the only thing that we’ll look at for 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I think the housing situation, aside from Buffalo Narrows where 

they have some sales  and of course, you know, you have to 

really to congratulate the community for trying to fight back, to 

set up a housing market — is in general a lot of the northern 

communities are really trying hard to find ways of delivering 

houses. And the innovation and the work and the determination 

of many northern leaders in trying to get the housing situation 

resolved is certainly not being matched by government. 

  



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

When you have motions of this nature for extended hours for a 

simple political purpose, you really begin to question what’s the 

value of governance and why aren’t they listening to what 

people are saying out there. 

 

So again housing and the situation in northern Saskatchewan, 

there’s a need to do a thorough assessment, Mr. Speaker, of 

how our elderly people are living. Many of them are living in 

homes that shouldn’t be lived in. 

 

And I make a reference to a particular gentleman in Buffalo 

Narrows, Alex Shatilla. He’s an elderly man; he’s worked most 

of his life. And he’s bound to a wheelchair, Mr. Speaker. And 

he’s got to put insulation in his windows in the wintertime 

because of the cold air. He lives on fixed income and also he 

has to be in close proximity of his oxygen tank. He’s on oxygen 

on a constant basis. 

 

(1430) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, being an elderly, disabled individual, Mr. 

Shatilla has seen very little support from the housing situation. 

And he’s very concerned about that, Mr. Speaker. He’s went so 

far as to suggest that the government do a thorough examination 

and inspection of these houses to make sure they were properly 

built in the ‘60s and the ‘70s, and if they weren’t properly built 

in the ‘’60s and the ‘70s that this problem should be rectified 

right now. 

 

Because Alex, like many other seniors in northern 

Saskatchewan, they live on fixed incomes. They try and help 

out their family as best they can. But to have senior citizens live 

in dilapidated houses and houses that aren’t kept in very good 

shape and houses that aren’t insulated properly, it really begins 

to wonder where was our compassion gone. You know, where 

is our sense of being, and certainly where’s our sense of 

responsibility as a government when you see types of this 

action take place in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from the single persons, from the working 

persons, from the elderlies, and from the family people, we can 

see housing is one enormous problem  one enormous 

problem, Mr. Speaker. And really I think it’s high time that the 

government put the housing problems and the housing situation 

of northern Saskatchewan on the front burner and start coming 

up with some very solid recommendations and some very solid 

directions in conjunction and in cooperation and certainly with 

the blessing of the northern people and northern leaders so that 

we can begin to solve this problem over the next 5, 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things we have to look at too in terms 

of how can the North benefit more from development and how 

could the North help with the housing situation, with the 

highway situation, with the social and economic situation, with 

all the situations that we speak about, one of the biggest things 

that we’ve been asking for for many, many years — and the 

northern leaders should be commended for that  is revenue 

sharing, Mr. Speaker. We see that a number of mines are 

opening up in northern Saskatchewan, a number of mines, and 

they talk about the $8 billion of potential mine happening in 

northern Saskatchewan  McArthur River mine. You begin to  

wonder. $8 billion  that’s a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then you ask yourself, as northern residents, where is that 

money going. Well, Mr. Speaker, it comes south, Mr. Speaker. 

It comes many times with the companies, and a portion of it I 

admit does stay with some of the northern contractors. However 

the huge majority of that comes south, or it goes to the foreign 

companies where the . . . or foreign countries, where some of 

the companies are from, to be used elsewhere. 

 

But certainly, Mr. Speaker, northern leaders have, for many 

centuries it seems, have been asking the government for 

revenue sharing. This goes back to the Bayda inquiry and 

certainly also to the Mitchell inquiry in which we spoke about 

revenue sharing and the need to have more benefits flow to 

northern communities. 

 

So what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is we don’t want the 

welfare dollars coming back to the North as a form of revenue 

sharing. Mr. Speaker, we want some exciting economic 

planning. Mr. Speaker, we want some innovate social program 

planning. And, Mr. Speaker, we want some control and say 

over some of the northern dollars that are developed at the 

expense of Northerners and for the rest of the province. 

 

So one of the things that we looked at certainly was the 

Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account. From my memory 

and from my recollection, I believe that the Northern Revenue 

Sharing Trust Account was set up in the early ‘70s to do exactly 

that  to take a portion of all the revenues from the North and 

put it in the one common pool, and then the northern 

municipalities would access this pool for infrastructure needs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 

Account is certainly still in existence today, but there are certain 

limitations on that, Mr. Speaker. I know from my municipal 

background that if you wanted to buy, say, perhaps a grader, 

you’d have to first of all put this in a five-year plan in terms that 

one community wants to buy a grader. Now that a community 

has decided that, you got to submit this plan to a municipal 

department and the municipal department has to look at it and 

make sure everything is okay. Then they write back and said, 

get three quotes and make sure this is right, or do you need it, 

and all these questions. 

 

So in essence, the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account 

should be . . . instead of being so constrictive and so restrictive 

to just simply capital projects, they should start adding to the 

whole pile and start putting more money into that so they can 

start expanding into social development, into economic 

development, into infrastructure needs, and so on and so forth. 

 

I think the key thing here with the Northern Revenue Sharing 

Trust Account, Mr. Speaker, is that the northern communities 

and northern leaders, and certainly the northern people in 

general, want to have access to more control over some of the 

dollars that are being channelled into northern Saskatchewan so 

we can find innovative and better ways to look after our 

highways, and certainly build houses and certainly create jobs 

and certainly create a social planning process. 

 

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

So in essence, just to give you a quick history, several years ago 

the provincial government announced that they would be taking 

$8 million and putting that into northern water and sewer 

projects, Mr. Speaker. Well  lo and behold  this was not 

any new money they found. They simply used revenues, the 

dollars, that were saved up in the Northern Revenue Sharing 

Trust Account that was used to fund these water and sewer 

projects in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But somewhere along the line, we forgot about Stony Rapids. 

So not only did the provincial government use revenues from 

northern Saskatchewan that they said would be used as a capital 

planning of the communities or the capital projects needs, but 

they then went back into the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 

Account, took $8 million out of there and said we are 

announcing brand-new water and sewer expansion plans for 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Well on the surface, Mr. Speaker, that looks great, and many 

people applauded that, and many people said that was great. 

However, Mr. Speaker, what the people of the North also knew 

is that $8 million that they took here actually came out of the 

Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account, an account that they 

had no control over, an account that was set up for them. So in 

essence, the northern people did set up the water and sewer 

systems on their own, and certainly the provincial government 

took credit for it. 

 

I think the key thing here, in reference to the Northern Revenue 

Sharing Trust Account, I think that the people of the North want 

to have more say on that, Mr. Speaker. They want to have more 

control on that, Mr. Speaker. They’re hoping that they’ll be able 

to have a wider role in terms of how northern revenues are 

being allocated, how they’re being collected, and certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, what the intent of some of these dollars are. 

 

And some of the other perspectives we look at in reference to 

northern issues and northern lands, we can talk about housing. 

We talk about the population growth. We talk about the 

Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account. 

 

The other thing that was quite incredible, Mr. Speaker, was 

when the government announced the fact that we are committed 

to the North. Here is $4 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, $4 million 

to 32,000 people that are having severe economic and social 

development problems actually adds up to roughly about $60 

per person. And, Mr. Speaker, there is very little that you can 

do to come up with any kind of economic and social planning 

for $60 per person. No community, no community and no 

department of government, can ever do anything with $60 per 

person for a bunch of small communities. 

 

So how do you expect northern leaders and how do you expect 

any Metis or first nations’ leaders to do anything of any 

significance if they haven’t got the dollars or the commitment 

from government to do so? 

 

The biggest thing in northern Saskatchewan that we’ve been 

talking about for years has been land, Mr. Speaker. And the 

government’s economic strategy . . . they spoke about economic 

strategy. They said, we are setting up CREDOs  

(community regional economic development organization) in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I believe that CREDO stands for 

community regional economic development authorities or 

associations or organizations. And what the intent there is to 

have two or three communities get together and we would fund 

you so many dollars per year. You guys devise a plan amongst 

yourself as to how you want to get an economic project under 

way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the northern people and northern leaders 

decide to look at this and try and work with it. But they knew in 

their hearts and their minds that there’s going to be very little 

funding, there’s going to be very little government involvement, 

very little commitment to it. And so they say, okay, what have 

we got to work with? We’ve got  what  $12,000 here to 

start off with, to get this thing all set up. That’s going to be a 

significant cost. That’ll help. And next we have $40,000 to hire 

a staff and perhaps get an office somewhere, and this person 

will work for all three communities and we’ll try and do things 

as best we can collectively and together. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously it didn’t work because some 

people are trying it, and I sincerely admire their fortitude 

because, you know, they’re bound and determined to do 

something on their own because they know government is not 

going to do it for them, so they’re using this very small tool to 

try and get this economic planning going. And I kind of have 

the analogy that it’s like giving somebody a wet noodle to take 

off a boat. You know it’s just not going to work. No matter how 

tight you tie that noodle to pull off that boat, the noodle’s going 

to break. 

 

So in essence, you look at the CREDO’s perspective . . . and 

CREDOs are of no value, Mr. Speaker, unless you have 

significant dollars. And the second part of the equation, Mr. 

Speaker, is if you have access to land. Because land holds 

resources, land holds opportunity, and land of course holds a lot 

of potential for things like tourism, like fishing, and like 

forestry development, and so on and so forth. 

 

So really the whole issue is in reference to land. And as long as 

you have CREDOs as the answer to some of the solutions to 

northern Saskatchewan, well I’m sorry, the wet noodles aren’t 

going to help us solve the problems, and certainly aren’t going 

to help us fix the bolts of the economic machinery that is 

lacking in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, and when we talk about land and the 

Metis perspective, for many, many years, if my memory serves 

me correct, to the Manitoba Act of 1875  and I could be 

corrected on this date  there was a lot of negotiations in 

which they agreed to set aside 1.4 million acres or hectares of 

land for the Metis people. That was part of the Manitoba Act, I 

believe in 1875, and this was bound in writing, and it was all 

determined that that was going to happen. 

 

And for many years ago, what happened at that time was many 

Metis people did get scrip. They did get scrip in terms of the 

land that was in, kind of, the agreement process to be 

transferred to the Metis people. And of course this scrip was 

certainly gobbled up and purchased by a lot of land speculators,  

  



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

and as a result the Metis people in those days were totally used 

and certainly they were not aware of the ways of the land 

speculators. And as a result, much of the land was taken back 

from them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from the Metis perspective, 1.4 million acres 

of land was set aside for them in the Manitoba Act of 1875; 

today, Mr. Speaker, there is no Metis land. There may be a few 

little patches of a few hundred acres, but that’s it. So in essence, 

when you talk about land, Mr. Speaker, the Metis certainly have 

a lot of perspective and a lot of leeway and a lot of legal 

avenues in which they can pursue to try and get some of their 

land back. 

 

And this is the key thing, is if you’re going to have a people 

develop themselves, you certainly have to have access to land, 

and control of land is one of the key components of any plans to 

try and redevelop their economies and certainly help their social 

needs. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1445) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see we have 

some 42 students from the Coronach School in the east gallery 

today, and I’d like to welcome them here today through you and 

to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

They’re grade 5 and 6 students, and with them we have teachers 

Michelle Olson and Kathy Hiltz. And I believe later on today 

we will be having some photos and drinks and a bit of 

discussion as . . . what they’re viewing here today in the 

Legislative Assembly. I ask that all members welcome them 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So going back to 

my earlier point about the Metis perspective is we must 

understand the historical perspective if we’re to understand 

what the Metis Nation and the Metis people are fighting for. It’s 

not an issue again of us looking at the issue of saying, well the 

natives, all they want is land. See the direct relation, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that you’ve got to have land to do anything. 

 

It’s much like being a farmer. If you just have a farmhouse, 

then that’s going to give you severe limited opportunity to  

become a very successful farmer. Well northern communities is 

the same; if you haven’t got access to land and all you have is 

the farmhouse, in many respects what the municipalities, you 

know, might be compared to here, is the fact that you don’t 

have no access and control of land outside of your farmhouse 

and naturally you’re not going to have much of an opportunity 

to develop a brand-new economic future for yourself, for your 

family, and for your people. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we again add insult to injury when 

we talk about the Metis perspective and certainly the Metis 

people and the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan when we hear the 

government of the day talking about revenue sharing in terms of 

the gaming situation. 

 

Again we’re seeing that the Metis people are getting 

significantly less than any other organization in the province. 

Not only do they have to wait extra months for their revenues to 

flow in to keep their operations alive, but they’re really at the 

control of government. And that’s not fair to the Metis people, 

not fair to the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan where they got to 

continue waiting on governments to provide a service and 

provide their operations. I think it’s an insult to the Metis 

people. I don’t think it’s very fair to them, and I think this 

government’s got to start being more professional and more 

accountable to the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

If they say that they’re going to be in the pamphlet, and the 

pamphlet certainly talks about commitment to the Metis people 

and to the Metis cause . . . and yet we see that a lot of the action 

that they’re doing is contrary to supporting the Metis cause. So 

I urge the government to clean up their act and get things 

straightened away and start doing your job of respecting the 

Metis people, you know, and that’s the whole thing. It goes 

down to land. It goes down to accountability. It goes down to 

all the avenues of just the simple, basic point of respect. They 

talk lots about what the actions should be, and the member 

across is calling me and asking me different questions. The 

point is that they know; they’re aware of this situation. They’re 

aware of how ill-treated the Metis have been in the last several 

decades. 

 

So in reference to the point of the Metis Nation, begin to look at 

them not as a cultural group, Mr. Speaker — certainly they’re 

proud of their culture and they’re proud of their history — but 

more so look at them as also as a government, because they 

have governing aspirations. They have self-government on their 

block of, you know, all the negotiations that they want to begin 

with this government. 

 

And why I’m referring to that, Mr. Speaker, is when you see 

motions of this nature calling for extended hours so you can 

ram business through without dealing with the issues I speak 

about today, then really we’re not governing properly. We’re 

not being a solid government. Government is here to serve the 

people; we must get through our heads. And at times I wonder 

just how thick our skulls are when you can’t hear the message 

time and time again. 

 

So really begin to deal with the Metis on an even perspective. 

Begin to deal with them on a respectful basis and talk about  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

government. They are a government, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

trying very hard to develop their own governance. And when 

you throw in the aspect of financial support, throw in the aspect 

of control of land, you throw in the aspect of respect in terms of 

government to government, you’re throwing in the fair and 

even treatment to these people, and then you will see the 

imagination and the strength, Mr. Speaker, that the Metis have 

to really develop their own systems. 

 

They’re much as capable as the first nations people in doing so. 

So what you have is you have two aboriginal groups that are 

doing really well for their people and eventually become a 

self-sufficient, proud nation. And this is what they’re trying to 

accomplish, Mr. Speaker; they’re trying to accomplish that. 

 

And for the life of me, as government, I don’t know why we 

keep delaying, delaying, delaying. And the question we ask is 

why. Why do we wait? And that’s a question we’ve been asking 

ourselves for many, many years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Metis perspective  land, government to 

government, respect and pride, and all that thing  it’s all in 

there. And they’ve met time and time again. So if the 

government says they’re not aware of it, then really I think they 

should be ashamed. The fact is they should be aware of it and 

they should start taking action and start getting serious. 

 

The other point of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is in northern 

Saskatchewan the dynamics of the community, I guess the 

demographics of the community as well, see that many of the 

communities outside of the reservations and certainly the other 

land that the treaties are going to be getting, most of the 

communities are Metis people. 

 

And many of these Metis people of course become mayors and 

they become councillors or they become business people, they 

become teachers, they become lawyers, and they become . . . 

many of them have become doctors and businessmen as well. 

 

In fact a Metis classmate of mine, Mr. Speaker, is now a brain 

surgeon in Calgary. And certainly there’s also a couple 

classmates of mine have become teachers and one has become a 

very successful businessman. And I was the least educated one 

in the whole bunch so I became a politician. 

 

But the thing of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is what the situation 

clearly shows is that if you challenge people and you recognize 

their ability and you recognize their limitation as a 

compassionate, intelligent government, you will then put in 

long-term solutions with their cooperation and come up with a 

new plan, a new strategy that can change the current direction 

that we’re on  a direction of dependency, a direction that has 

no pride, and a direction that just counts on government for 

every answer. 

 

Governance is not about power, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 

empowerment. And this is the common message and the 

common theme that many, many people of northern 

Saskatchewan and certainly many people from the Metis and 

the first nations side speak about. 

 

So in reference to the Metis and first nations and all the 

different, individual groups out there that are of aboriginal 

ancestry, they’re asking government to have a fresh perspective. 

They’re asking government to do differently, do things 

differently. Treat them differently. Treat them with respect. 

 

And that’s the whole key thing that we’re asking for here, Mr. 

Speaker, when we’re talking about northern Saskatchewan, and 

the reason why motions of this nature are contrary to good 

government, because it’s more politics than business. And this 

is why we’ve got to get over this stuff, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again in northern Saskatchewan, some of the scenario that the 

people have been looking at . . . And we know that the 

constitution is involved with the Metis and is involved with the 

treaty and the Inuit. Well the constitution recognizes those 

distinct three aboriginal groups  the Metis, Inuit, and treaty. 

 

Well the Inuit issue has certainly been settled significantly and 

so has the treaty. But, Mr. Speaker, again the Metis is being 

kicked back and forth between a provincial and federal issue  

well it’s a federal issue; or it’s a provincial issue. 

 

And we hear the Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs saying, 

well we can’t deal with them because we’re in the courts, and 

we can’t deal with them because it’s a federal issue and here 

they’re stuck in limbo. So in the meantime, what do we do? 

 

As a province, I believe we should become aggressive. We 

should say, okay, it is a provincial responsibility, we’ll try and 

get some federal support and federal dollars to address these 

issues. We will take the first large step. We’ll become 

aggressive. We’ll address these issues. 

 

And this is what they’re asking, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 

asking us to talk about motions of this nature to try and prove 

our point of power and government in control. 

 

So again the Metis perspective: give them land, give them the 

opportunity to develop themselves, and you will see, Mr. 

Speaker, they will certainly rise to the occasion. They know 

self-government means a lot of responsibility. They know that 

self-government means setting the highest standards for 

themselves. They know that you cannot hide your weakness 

behind self-government. You must show your strength if you 

want to self-govern. And that’s the whole process and the whole 

theory and the thinking behind many Metis people, Mr. Speaker 

 along with self-government comes a great amount of 

responsibility. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the key thing here is that we must not forget 

— and we’ll never forget — the Metis perspective in terms of 

the aboriginal issues. 

 

The third matter, Mr. Speaker, we need to speak on that could 

have some immediate impact to the northern communities is the 

community development scenario, and we talk about how the 

dynamics of a community is affected by certain actions. And I 

don’t want to keep going back to any particular community 

because many northern communities are the same, but when  

  



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

you have a community that’s situated and located in northern 

Saskatchewan, relatively isolated and no employment  

unemployment’s quite high  and you have social problems 

and you have economic problems and you have all these 

problems all milling around in a certain small section of 

property, what you see happen, Mr. Speaker, is you got to look 

at each individual effect on that community to determine what 

their role is in terms of the growth of the community. 

 

And when the governments come in and they say, well we’re 

going to have the government deliver all kinds of services, 

social services, justice, health care, education, we’re going to 

develop . . . we’re going to deliver all these systems to you 

guys, what that immediately does, it disempowers people to 

make decisions over their own lives, and as a result, it’s not 

their system. So they kind of sit back and they wait for the 

government to try and do everything, and the government 

knows that they’re not going to do everything, and they can’t do 

everything. 

 

So when you look at the community development scenario that 

we often speak about in northern Saskatchewan, what we’re 

saying is, give us more and more control over those institutions. 

Gradually if you will, gradually start empowering people, 

setting up their own local police force, setting up their own 

educational system, setting up their own justice system, their 

own economic system, and their own social system. 

 

And a good perspective I always use, Mr. Speaker, when I talk 

about community development, is again, several years ago there 

was a study to determine exactly how much money La Loche 

actually was costing the province. And I don’t say it, Mr. 

Speaker, to try and penalize the community, because lord 

knows, they need as much help as they can get. But they went 

so far as to say, to police the community, to provide social 

services, and to provide housing and to provide justice and to 

provide health care to the people there, you’re looking at about 

17 or $18 million per year  a significant investment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well the question we have, Mr. Speaker, or I have, is after 15, 

20 years of 17 to $18 million invested into the community — 

that’s almost $200 million — and why is it, after 10, 15, 20 

years, Mr. Speaker, why is it that we still have the economic 

problems that we have in that community today. And the simple 

reason, Mr. Speaker, is that the people at the local level are in 

no way, shape, or form in charge of the allocation nor control of 

those dollars; that the local people have no control or in charge 

of any of the land surrounding these communities. 

 

So in essence you’re tying the northern people’s hands by not 

recognizing their abilities and certainly not hearing the 

aspirations of many Metis leaders, many first nation leaders, 

many of the women and the children that are involved in these 

communities, and certainly many of the people in general. 

 

So when we talk about community development, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s really doing a comprehensive planning  a planning, an 

economic plan. That is not taking place at this point in time. 

There’s a few communities, I must add, Mr. Speaker, Buffalo 

Narrows being one of them; Beauval being another one of  

them; La Loche is trying to get into it as well. So there are some 

communities that are really trying to do the community 

development planning in which they want to say to themselves, 

okay, we’re here now in 1996; where do we want to be by the 

year 2000? 

 

Well really they’re starting the whole process on their own, Mr. 

Speaker, and I really admire their efforts. Because they realize 

they’ve taken the bull by the horn and they said the government 

is not going to do this for us. So with their meagre amounts of 

dollars that many municipal governments get, they are trying to 

really get the system going. They’re practically trying to pull 

themselves up by the bootstraps, Mr. Speaker, but this 

government doesn’t even give them the boots. So that’s the 

whole thing. 

 

The key thing here, Mr. Speaker, is when you look at the 

community development scenario, you say, what ways and 

shapes and forms can we raise revenues? Because obviously 

you need revenues to operate a government in. And if you don’t 

have those extra revenues, then basically you can’t do anything. 

 

So they look at the business opportunity, they look at the 

taxation issue, they look at the land lease issue, they look at 

expansion, they look at the government, they look at all these 

scenarios, and it’s a tremendous challenge, Mr. Speaker. These 

people are people that come from their own families; they got 

jobs, and yet councillors and mayors got to leave their families, 

leave their jobs, to travel and to try and design and develop a 

future for their communities. For what? For a lot of headaches 

and no support. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the surprising thing I must say to you  and 

it’s an inspiration certainly to me and should be an inspiration 

to all of Saskatchewan people  in spite of the many problems 

and in spite of the fact that they have no support, many 

elections in these northern communities you often see and hear 

19 to 20 people applying or vying for six council positions. So 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, there is no apathy when it comes to 

aspirations of many northern people. 

 

(1500) 

 

And these competitions, being involved in three of them since 

becoming involved with the municipal politics, I can tell you 

that they’re pretty competitive. No mayor  hardly any mayors 

 get in by acclamation. It’s really . . . it’s always a race and 

it’s always a horse race. People are just back and forth, saying 

this is what we should do, this is what we should do and so on 

and so forth. And the vision of many of the northern mayors 

and northern leaders is just incredible because they really are 

committed to the process. 

 

So when we talk about community development, Mr. Speaker, I 

go back to the earlier reference — that you’ve got to empower 

the communities more. They’ve got to be able to have the tools 

and they got to have the support of government. They got to 

have the environment to exist to really make a change in their 

lives. 

 

They have the most to invest. They have the most to win. So  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

they’re the ones that are going to work the hardest and commit 

the most to this process, not governments, and it’s time the 

governments start accepting that responsibility of turning more 

control over to the people. That, Mr. Speaker, is the message 

when you talk about community development as a whole. 

 

The other aspect affecting the community development 

scenario, Mr. Speaker, that we often hear about is in reference 

to education. And I hear the Education minister saying that 

they’re spending $27 million in northern Saskatchewan. It’s a 

significant budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s a significant effort. 

 

And I think in reference to education, I really can’t say anything 

negative about education because the people there . . . a lot of 

local people are in charge. And the only thing that we’re afraid 

of is, as long as they don’t start tinkering with the system too 

much. Because if you start forcing amalgamation on some of 

these northern schools and some of these northern educational 

boards, then you’re taking away the very element that we’ve 

been asking for in justice. You’re taking away the very element 

that we’ve been asking for in social services and economic 

development and planning and so on and so forth. 

 

So really the school systems always could use some 

improvements, but you don’t improve anything by forcing 

amalgamation or cutting back budgets. This is, Mr. Speaker, a 

human challenge in all of us, to see if we could really do 

something differently for the North. And educational efforts in 

that regard is certainly appreciated. And we must look at the 

situation of actually turning more and more control to local 

people and in every regard. 

 

So I really flag the concern that amalgamation, when it comes 

to education, is not acceptable. It’s going to be challenged 

because all you’re doing is you’re taking control away from the 

northern people, and that’s not what they want. They clearly 

want to be more empowered to do things for their future and for 

their children. 

 

And I speak about different graduations that I’ve attended and I 

see a lot of hope in the parents, Mr. Speaker. But really, you 

know, are we misplacing that hope in saying that education 

could be our saviour? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, education is power. And if the government 

is really, truly bent on empowering people, then they will not 

tinker with the education system. They’ll leave it as it is, if not 

improving it to have more local control and have more 

educational plans to have some of the kids go out to 

post-secondary opportunities. Which leads to the next issue, 

about post-secondary opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many years ago when the mining sector first came in northern 

Saskatchewan, they had Justice Bayda, I believe, travel 

throughout the various northern communities talking about the 

potential impact of some of the Cluff Lake mine and some of 

the other mines that might happen. 

 

And at that time, Mr. Speaker. they said, do Northerners want 

these mines? And I can remember I was 13 years old at that 

time attending such a meeting in a town hall in Ile-a-la-Crosse  

and I was sitting in the back with a bunch of other kids. And I 

could hear them saying, if the North wants these mines, it will 

come out and there’ll be a lot of opportunity, if these mines 

happen. You guys will see better things, better days. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at that point in time as a 13-year-old lad, I 

knew that they’re building the road and fixing up the road in 

our region for the specific purpose of that mine. They were 

punching a hole through to the Cluff Lake mine. 

 

Now it was an insult to the northern Saskatchewan people to 

have them think that we didn’t know what the plan was. And if 

every Northerner said no, those mines would have still 

proceeded. 

 

So again, we’re not saying that we’re against development. I’m 

certainly pleased to see the employment opportunity and the 

revenues generated as a result of the mining activity in northern 

Saskatchewan. That’s not the point here. The point is, that don’t 

insult the northern people’s intelligence because they know 

what’s going on. 

 

The other important . . . When they spoke about the 

opportunities of the mine, they talked about the post-secondary 

opportunities, that they would develop an institution, a northern 

educational institution, that could teach all the people the 

different sciences that they would need to apply for these bigger 

and better jobs at the mine site. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that institution and that educational 

institution was never built. It was never built, Mr. Speaker. And 

I go back to the points of Buffalo Narrows. The Westside 

Community College is losing funding on a constant basis in 

spite of the increase in mining activity. 

 

So you can see where the sceptical attitudes comes from Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve seen this process before. We’ve been there 

before and we’re aware that if you make a promise, you must 

follow through. You must follow through with your 

commitment. 

 

Had that institution been built as per the recommendations of 

the Bayda inquiry to have that institution built somewhere, the 

post-secondary institution, you would see not 50 per cent being 

forced on the industry by this government. You wouldn’t see 19 

per cent being an acceptable ratio from the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government in the early ‘80s. What you would 

see, Mr. Speaker, is you would see 80 to 90 per cent of the 

northern people working at these mines. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

was a crying shame that we lost that post-secondary institution 

at that time. 

 

The other fact that we have to look at when it comes to 

education is we must try and amalgamate the northern 

industries with the southern opportunities in terms of 

maximizing our workforce, our skilled workforce  when you 

see the mining sector saying, well we need a technician or we 

need a lab tech. And of course to be a lab tech you’ve got to 

have your maths and sciences. 

 

And again we go back to the earlier point when we talked about  

  



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

the educational problems, that only 24 per cent of the kids that 

start out in kindergarten actually get to grade 12. So if you only 

have 24 per cent of the entire population that’s in grade 12, and 

you can’t take the ones that went off to school and went to work 

in other fields, you see a very small amount of people that are 

actually eligible for the higher-paying jobs that need the arts 

and sciences in the mining field. 

 

So as a result, what you see is that the 50 per cent that the 

government speaks about and brags about openly really is a 

concerted effort on behalf of the mining companies. They’re 

really trying hard to do this. But the other aspect of the problem 

is that the government should start doing some serious thinking 

of their own about putting in a post-secondary institution 

somewhere in the north-west and somewhere in the north-east 

to really hit hard on the arts and sciences, and to continue 

pushing that through year by year by year, and not taking an ad 

hoc approach to training our people and our young, educated 

graduates to a point where they are able to take over these jobs. 

 

So is that possible, Mr. Speaker? Well yes it is possible. 

Distance education and the technology that has been introduced 

in the recent years, everything is possible, Mr. Speaker. We 

now have televised degree and certificate credit courses that 

could be delivered through satellite. And we have something 

like 12 centres in northern Saskatchewan that now deliver 

satellite educational programs and then you could see that the 

opportunities are there. So we have . . . from the technical 

perspective, it’s certainly possible. From the employment 

perspective, it’s certainly possible. 

 

Now the next part of the equation is the mining sector appears 

to be wanting to try and employ as many northern people as 

they can. So what does that leave? It leaves the government 

now to put in comprehensive, long-term educational planning 

that is status-blind, that is status-blind, Mr. Speaker, to try and 

match the graduates coming out of these schools, the very small 

number of graduates coming out of these schools, to put them 

into high-paying, well-paying jobs at the mining sector, the 

forestry sector, and the tourism sector, and so on and so forth. 

That’s the strategy. The only component missing here, Mr. 

Speaker, is the ad hoc approach by government when it comes 

to the post-secondary training of many of our young graduates. 

 

You look at the other . . . When I mentioned status-blind, Mr. 

Speaker, and the reason I go back to the training, also to 

community development, is in northern Saskatchewan you have 

wide-ranging interest in terms of the different people that live in 

the community. You have your Metis, and then you have your 

Bill C-31, and then you have your status, and then you have 

your non-status, and really all these people have different 

headings. And then you have your non-aboriginal population. 

 

Well when we talk about educational efforts, we’ve got to make 

sure that these educational efforts are status-blind. Because 

many times when you have somebody that has just been 

reinstated as a treaty, many times the band itself cannot take 

these people in because they haven’t got the adequate revenues 

to care for that person. So many times the Bill C-31’s  the 

people that are trying to get their treaty status, the status that  

they rightfully deserve to get back  they try and get that back  

and there’s no way that they’re able to do so. 

 

So really you look at the status situation, Mr. Speaker, and the 

non-status situation, it’s really unfair treatment of people. And 

in the North, if you’re going to do anything with economics or 

social development or educational planning, then you must 

make sure they’re status-blind and make them community 

based. Because in essence, what you’re doing is you’re treating 

all people in the northern communities, the aboriginal 

communities, on an equal basis. If they choose to live in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse most of their life, then they should be 

considered an Ile-a-la-Crosse resident. 

 

And this is where it goes back to the point, is there are certain 

issues where you should have your aboriginal ancestry 

confirmed for the purpose of rights, and certainly land claims. 

But certainly on the effort of community development, it should 

be a status-blind effort. 

 

The other particular aspect we’re talking about when you look 

at the educational aspirations, is recently in our region, the 

Athabasca area, we had six Head Start programs that were 

started, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what Head Start programs, from what my memory serves 

me, if it serves me correct, is what they do is they take these 

preschool kids into a learning class, and they’re with their 

parents. And they spend more time with these young kids, 

talking about responsibility, talking about caring for 

themselves, respecting the teacher, being aware of the 

challenge. 

 

And although it’s a bit too early to determine the exact success 

of some of the Head Start programs that the federal government 

is initiating and supporting in our particular region, what we can 

determine, Mr. Speaker, from other sources and other studies, is 

that this Head Start program offers a significant advantage to 

young kids entering kindergarten. And that’s exactly the intent 

of the name, Head Start, is it gives these young preschool kids a 

head start into educational opportunity. Give them a chance. 

Make them realize that the badness out there, in and around 

them, should not affect their attitude, and the challenges of 

going to school every day are simply challenges that they have 

to overcome. 

 

And I will certainly share the results with the House once the 

findings of those six particular groups of Head Start programs 

have on the impact and effect and the success of the educational 

efforts of the northern teachers and certainly the board of 

educations that try and deliver education in the North. 

 

So in essence, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Head Start 

program, the federal government recognizes that this has a 

tremendous opportunity. And I urge the provincial government 

to match that initiative. 

 

And we talk about cut-backs from the federal government to the 

provincial government; well in the same essence we ask them to 

do what they’re doing as well when it comes to Head Start 

programs. Look at the whole-case scenario, Mr. Speaker. 

Because when you have a child that’s a young, impressionable  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

child and he’s living in a crowded house, and his dad isn’t 

working, and there’s other problems in the community, it’s so 

very easy for him or her to go on the wrong track. This Head 

Start program is putting dollars directly to him or to her to tell 

her that look, a lot of this isn’t your problem; don’t let this 

affect your attitude. 

 

And the Head Start program is, I think, going to be one of the 

more positive approaches to northern Saskatchewan. And it is 

only a trickle, Mr. Speaker, of what is needed to really begin to 

address the social development problems of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I guess the other point we speak about in terms of 

education is you must make the effort to look at the challenges 

of not incorporating, but making our educational system more 

flexible in its approach. You have to try and get a new and 

exciting way to deliver education in northern Saskatchewan, a 

way in which people can learn about community development; 

a way in people can learn about business development; a way in 

people could learn about social development; a way that people 

could learn about electricity, about plumbing, about carpentry, 

about auto repair. You know, you should make it a 

wide-ranging list of opportunities for many of these students 

that go into our school system. 

 

(1515) 

 

If it’s kindergarten to 12 with the standard type of curriculum, 

then of course the trends will continue. Just look at the outside 

of the school system  you have housing problems, you have 

poverty, you have a lot of social problems, you have a lack of 

control, a lack of empowerment of the people. Naturally you’re 

not going to feel good about yourself. 

 

So in essence you talk about the whole process of trying to 

incorporate every child into the school curriculum and making a 

definite advantage of saying, all 300 or all 400 of these students 

that are entering my school system, we’ll have a place for them. 

We’re not going to outline their life. But if you could see that 

they’re not geniuses in Hamlet, then obviously they could be a 

very excellent carpenter. Let’s use that ability. Let’s incorporate 

their talents into ensuring that we maximize their opportunity 

and certainly educate them along the way. 

 

And it is our strong belief in the basic perspective that 

community development has the simple philosophy that in 

every woman, man, and child there’s a special gift that that 

person could use to contribute to the community as a whole — 

whether that child or that woman or that man is gifted in 

speaking or is gifted in writing or is a good hockey player or is 

a kind person. 

 

Like we all have different qualities about us, and this is what 

the intent of the community development scenario is, is to try 

and use all the goodness of people to build a brand-new system. 

And once the goodness of people are flowing, then you can see, 

that if you give them control and access to all the resources and 

opportunities around them, all that positive energy of people 

will come together as one solid force that could change that 

community within the 5-, 10-, 15-year period if not sooner. 

So the perspective here, and the attitude that they must take, 

Mr. Speaker, and the attitude that they do share  but 

governments don’t share  is that there’s nothing that you 

cannot fix in northern Saskatchewan communities if the 

communities put their mind to it and the government makes a 

commitment to do so. And that’s the common bottom line when 

it comes to community development. 

 

And the other factor, Mr. Speaker, in education is that there’s so 

much more that we could become and there’s so much more the 

government could do. Not with cutting back or amalgamating 

these schools. Not with forcing more rules and regulations. Not 

from excluding the history of the Metis and the history of the 

aboriginal first nations people, and certainly not by showing 

them no respect in this day and age of 1996. Housing is a lack 

of respect. Lack of water and sewer is a lack of respect. Lack of 

respect for the Metis is prevalent. And all these problems 

certainly hit home, and they do have a drastic effect. 

 

And I make out the earlier point, Mr. Speaker, is that northern 

Saskatchewan people, be it if they’re German, if they’re Polish, 

or if they’re Metis, if they’re in first nations, these are 

Saskatchewan people. These are Saskatchewan people. We 

mustn’t look at them as native people. These are Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

They vote in provincial elections and many of them contribute 

to the tax base. Many of them have children, they have 

grandparents, and they have hopes and dreams and aspirations. 

They’re much like you and I. 

 

And I still can’t for the life of me believe why this province and 

this government, and certainly ourselves as an Assembly by 

playing silly rules and motions of this nature, cannot make a 

concerted effort to help out 3 per cent of the provincial 

population that occupies half the land mass of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s not an insurmountable challenge, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very 

easy task. And you go back to the point, as life goes on, many 

of the native people, they count on their elders. The elderly in 

the northern native communities are so valued for their opinion 

because they see where they’ve been and they sometimes lose 

hope. But they never show that they’ve lost hope, because they 

want their grandchildren to do well or they want their children 

to do well as well. Every elderly in Saskatchewan and Canada 

want to see their child or their grandchild do well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the native people and the northern people of 

Saskatchewan have the same dreams and the same aspirations. 

And how could you kill a dream? Well, Mr. Speaker, you can 

kill a dream by providing no housing. Mr. Speaker, you can kill 

a dream by providing no respect for the Metis and Indian cause, 

and certainly by no respect and support for the native people of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

You know in the whole situation, we ask, is how much longer 

can we take this madness? And like any other culture, and like 

any other race and like any other peoples, we do have our bad 

apples. There are certain occasional people that really don’t 

respect the native way; don’t respect life in general. And we’re  

  



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

not immune to that as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we ask the people of Saskatchewan and certainly the 

government to not judge the people in general on the actions of 

a few. There are many people that have made some impact on 

northern people’s life. There are many positive people. 

 

I cannot begin to give you the names of the thousands of 

women or the thousands of volunteers in these northern 

communities or the thousands of names of the men that have 

volunteered for hockey, that have volunteered for bake sales, 

that have gone up and supported the person that may have lost a 

loved one. They’re all good, kind, compassionate people. 

 

But does the media pick up on that? Does the media show a 

kind person helping somebody out by giving them a pie when 

he’s short of food? No, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see that. And 

when you get involved with politics, you are supposed to make 

an effort to change things for the betterment of the 

Saskatchewan people  all Saskatchewan people, including the 

northern native people. And you can’t do that by stifling the 

business of this House by motions of this nature. 

 

This is simply about politics, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about 

serving the people. And this is where the government’s got to 

get their act straight. They’re here to serve the people. They’re 

here to empower people. They’re not here to follow their 

political agenda. This is about people, Mr. Speaker. It’s nothing 

more than that. 

 

The other factor that we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is in 

reference to women in business. And in northern Saskatchewan 

this is an oxymoron. There’s not too many women involved 

with business. And I hate to use that phrase, Mr. Speaker, 

because really in northern Saskatchewan the two groups that 

need a lot more support are the business community and 

certainly the women as well. 

 

Women are the strength in many northern communities, 

especially the grandmothers. They’re the ones that I used to go 

to when I was mayor and I made a mistake. And I’d go see 

them, and they’d say, oh you’re human. You know, don’t do 

that again, or else I won’t vote for you  that type of thing that 

you always see. They give you strength. And we need to begin 

to recognize and appreciate that strength, not by constantly 

using it when we need it, by giving them back some of the 

support that we’ve taken off them for many, many years. 

 

That’s the important thing, Mr. Speaker, is to understand the 

power of women in many of these communities, because that’s 

one force that you cannot mess with. And a good example of 

that, Mr. Speaker, is when I was mayor of my home 

community. I tried to say, well I believe we need to be a 

healthier community, so I’m going to cut back on the bingos. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I bumped into a bunch of women that were 

quite concerned on the issue. And to say the least, certainly this 

mayor backed off. And I backed off pretty fast because they 

said, unless you can provide some other alternative of 

entertainment and support system, then you leave our 

entertainment system alone right now. 

 

So you know that there’s power there. There’s organization. 

And I think in essence that all the women really are in control 

of the community and the men are just along for the ride. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And the second point, Mr. Speaker, is at least 

at that point in time as mayor . . . and I guess the point I’m 

trying to make here is we did allow debate, we did allow 

consultation, and we did realize we were wrong. And we knew 

that if we said no, we’re going to do this and that’s it, that we 

weren’t serving our people, we weren’t serving the interest of 

those particular group of people. And this is where governance 

is all about. 

 

It’s time that politicians and government begin to realize that 

they’re here to serve the people. They’re here to make the world 

a better place to live. And if you’re not in this for that specific 

purpose, then you shouldn’t be in this building, you shouldn’t 

be in this building talking about things. 

 

I guess the other thing that needs to be addressed when you talk 

about community development  and I spoke about education 

and I talked about the Metis perspective on housing  is youth 

in sport. Mr. Speaker, when I was a young lad  I again refer 

to my background because I’m more familiar with mine  the 

fact that I had many of the older people saying, oh you kids are 

bad; you guys are not doing things right. Nowadays I’m saying 

that to many of the young people. 

 

And I believe the young people . . . that we’ve lost the young 

people. In today’s society we have been so consumed by other 

matters that we feel are pressing, that we’ve lost touch with the 

young people. And a community development model, a 

community development effort I speak about, would 

specifically address solid strategies that will just attack the 

problem. 

 

Why do you expect that the young people are doing what they 

have, you know, what they have been doing. It’s because that 

they lack the support at the community level. And you talk 

about family breakdown, you talk about the violence, you talk 

about the social problems, you talk about the lack of support, 

and above all else, Mr. Speaker, you’re talking about the lack of 

recognizing problems. 

 

And if we don’t put major effort and major strategies behind 

supporting our youth and developing an alternative for our 

youth, you can basically kiss tomorrow good-bye, Mr. Speaker, 

because tomorrow is going to be worse than today unless we 

begin to do specific measures. 

 

And this is not a liberalism attitude, Mr. Speaker, when I say we 

must work with these kids, because the only alternative we have 

for these kids at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, is jail or 

probation. There is no discussion on how to discipline these 

young people. There’s no aggressive young offenders program 

in which we can make sure that the ones that continue breaking 

the law are paying for their price, and the justice system has got 

to play a critical role. 

 

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

So the key thing here is an innovative approach again of 

governance. 

 

This government should have a youth protection Act that they 

want to put into place and that they want to speak about. This 

government should have a community development Act that 

they want to work on and speak about. This government should 

have a Metis Act in which you want to get these issues 

resolved. 

 

All these Acts should be for the specific purpose of serving 

people and coming up with exciting and innovative ways to 

govern. That’s what this is all about, Mr. Speaker, is trying to 

help the people who need help, not to help the ones who don’t 

need help. 

 

One of the key things when we talk about youth is, we have 

been working on a program back again in my home community 

of trying to get some of the young offenders in the community 

involved in this disciplinary program. And it works for some; it 

doesn’t work for others. Again, they’re all individual people. 

 

And what we asked was a bunch of former army people to 

come into our community and to work with these young people. 

And these army people were of course the Canadian Corps of 

Commissionaires. And they brought in three instructors and 

they talked to 12 young offenders. They said, from now on you 

guys have a choice; you’ve got to be with me or you’re in jail. 

And of course the young offenders took the army guys. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, after three months of those 

particular drills, they taught them respect, they taught them 

coordination, they taught them friendship, and they taught them 

discipline. And when the community . . . when they had their 

graduation, they had exercises outside the community hall. And 

of course we watched all that. And you can see these 12 

graduates marching in unison and doing all these drills. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we counted; we had over 300 people out that 

day to watch this drill and this accomplishment. And those 12 

young people, who were probably some of the worst people in 

the community, today now, Mr. Speaker, you can sit down with 

them. Many of them have become productive. 

 

So our point is, in reference to really helping out the youth in 

northern Saskatchewan and throughout the land, is to begin to 

stop paying them lip attention . . . or lip-service and start giving 

them real attention by programs that different youth can fit into. 

And never take, never take the situation, Mr. Speaker, that one 

size fits all, because certainly it doesn’t fit all, and we have to 

understand that. 

 

You look at the situation of sport, Mr. Speaker. Aside from 

sport, when we talk about northern development and 

community development aspects, sport also plays an important 

role. Because sport also builds discipline and also builds esteem 

and also builds a sense of belonging. And many young people 

really get involved with sports as a last effort to try and belong 

somewhere or do something. 

 

And in northern Saskatchewan, much like in many other  

northern communities, hockey and softball and volleyball and 

basketball and curling and all these sports, they have many 

young people involved. And that, to a large extent, Mr. Speaker, 

has also been a saving grace. 

 

So in reference to sport development in respect of the sporting 

system again, you look at what’s being committed to the sport 

development in these northern communities and I can almost 

guarantee you that it’s a very, very small percentage of many 

towns’ operating budget because they simply haven’t got the 

money. 

 

So you talk about community development, you identify where 

the youth are active in, and they’re active in sports. So try as 

you might, Mr. Speaker, you cannot figure out what the young 

people want. They know what they want and you have to do 

that. 

 

(1530) 

 

So in essence, as government I think they should start 

introducing Bills to deal with youth, they should start 

introducing Bills to deal with women’s issues, with business 

issues, and sporting and cultural issues, and certainly all the 

other issues that go along with governing, as opposed to 

wasting time on matters of this nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are tired of waiting for governments to do 

things for them. They’re trying their very best to go on their 

own. But they need a government with compassion to 

understand these issues. And this is what this is all about, is 

re-energizing and realizing once again what governance is all 

about. It is about compassion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, going back to some of the points that I want to raise 

and share with the House in reference to the justice system, Mr. 

Speaker. You look at an article here, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to 

share with any of the members opposite, and it talks about 

“Early releases frustrates judge.” And this is an April 9, 1996 

article in the La Ronge Northerner, and where a provincial 

judge has publicly expressed his frustration with the crumbling 

credibility of the justice system last Thursday. Now this is a 

provincial judge talking about the problems of, you know, the 

justice system in the North. 

 

Because we know, because we know, Mr. Speaker, there is not 

enough effort in northern Saskatchewan and because we know 

that we’re not doing enough about community development, 

then you can see even the judges are frustrated because they 

know they have to put these guys in for a certain amount of 

time, and then they have to be released early because there’s no 

room for anybody else. 

 

So instead of going through the constant basis of throwing our 

youth into jail and having to release them and reoffend in the 

community and then going back into the jail as soon as a bed 

opens up, and the system just goes round and round and round 

and round . . . And then you have a provincial judge getting up 

and saying openly and publicly that he’s frustrated by the early 

release program because it’s not effective in terms of 

rehabilitating these young people and showing them that they  

  



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

do belong. 

 

And I can hear the member opposite calling on me to say 

something extra. Well let’s see what else I can say about that. 

 

If you want, and I quote: “If you want shorter sentences and 

fewer people in jail, just don’t ask for more time behind bars.” 

 

You know that’s the whole thing, is what he is saying, that 

basically fewer people in jail doesn’t really mean that you’re 

going to save the justice system a lot of money. It just means 

that you had to put the money elsewhere in more proactive 

plans and certainly to understand what the problem is. 

 

And that’s the whole point in my discussion here, Mr. Speaker, 

is I can’t for the life of me understand how this motion is going 

to help the governance of this province. For the life of me, I 

cannot understand how this motion is going to help the 

governance of this province when you have all these problems 

and all these situations that are not being addressed. It’s all 

about open and accountable government and it’s all about 

making sure that we do things differently. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the North and the northern 

people, and the northern youth especially, are very tired of 

going around and around in that circle. And in fact they got 

through the system so often that they don’t even respect the 

system any more. Going in front of a judge and getting a 

sentence is like going to pick up a loaf of bread, you know. And 

if anybody says, no, Buckley, we don’t believe it’s true,. well, 

Mr. Speaker, I share with you that as a member of a very large 

family, I have two brothers that are involved heavily with that 

system. 

 

And I can see what happens. I’ve lived firsthand in northern 

Saskatchewan and I’ve seen the bad situation. I’ve not come out 

of a $200,000 home and driving a $30,000 car and coming to 

work here. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been involved with these 

communities and I know what I speak about. I’ve lived there. 

I’ve lived that life and I know exactly what we need to do. And 

we need a government that is bound and determined to serve  

not a government that is bound and determined to play games to 

get through the politics of this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I go again to another 

commentary by Scott Boyes, who is also with The Northerner 

rather. And Scott says, “sentences do three things” . . . 

(inaudible) . . . And again quoting the article: “Protect society 

by imprisoning a criminal, deter the offender and act as a 

deterrent for others considering crime, and hopefully 

rehabilitate the person.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I really want to underline the point of 

“hopefully rehabilitate the person.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to put, do not rehabilitate the person because there is no dollars 

for that, Mr. Speaker. And we’re doing this in spite of the $8 

billion mine that is going to be happening in McArthur River, in 

spite of the $4 billion tar sand that’s happening right next door, 

about 40 kilometres from Garson Lake, and in spite of the  

forestry development and the tourism development and of the 

thousands of jobs created in Regina, Prince Albert, and 

Saskatoon at the result of the northern mines. 

 

And yet, what do we ask for, for 3 per cent of the people 

occupying half the land mass in Saskatchewan? Social and 

economic justice, Mr. Speaker. That’s what governance should 

be about and that’s what politics should be about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if any of the members across the floor wish 

to see copies of these, I can certainly share them with them. 

And this is a provincial judge. I don’t want to put anybody else 

in the predicament where we’ve hired a judge to do this for us. 

And that’s the key thing that we have to look at. 

 

Now as we continue along this path of understanding what the 

northern people are  and I only speak for the Athabasca 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. Maybe I’m wrong in assuming that 

province-wide, we should consult with people; we should try 

and do things every day in this House to try and make a 

difference in their life, to try and improve their road or fix up 

their health care problems, or we should do everything in that 

nature to try and serve the people to the best of our ability. 

 

Now that’s what I believe a politician should be and that’s what 

I believe this House is all about. Now if I’m wrong, then I’m 

obviously in the wrong place, Mr. Speaker. I should not be 

sitting here because certainly the aspirations of the people in the 

North are certainly, are trying to rely on having that particular 

job done. 

 

Now the other situation with justice, Mr. Speaker. You look at 

the way justice is being delivered in Saskatchewan. The judge, 

at this time that I speak about, flies into all these northern 

communities or drives in from Meadow Lake to sit in there and 

do, in terms of the justice system, do kind of an assembly line 

process. And he flies in with the Legal Aid lawyer, they come 

in together, they have lunch together, they go into the 

court-house and they go through the assembly process. Okay, 

you’re guilty, and on and on and on. 

 

So what happens there, Mr. Speaker, is the justice system is not 

being delivered properly when you’re trying to rush through 

one day; when the cost of delivering the justice in the North is 

really not being considered in terms of having a fair type of 

trial. Now we’re not saying that many of the people that do go 

to the court system are not guilty. A huge . . . many of them are. 

But the real thing is that we have to look at how the justice 

system interacts with the community, and certainly how the 

actions of some of the young people in these northern 

communities are impacted and affected by some of the housing 

and some of the social and economic problems of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Those that offend the law in northern Saskatchewan and those 

that offend people should seriously be made to pay back in 

some way, shape or form. We’re not suggesting that we be very 

lenient. I’m saying that we should have an effective justice 

system, Mr. Speaker: a justice system that recognizes that you 

can’t fly in and deliver justice one day a week and a justice 

system that really respects what the problems are in northern  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

Saskatchewan, and what the youth are going through in 

particularly, and certainly a justice system that does not force 

early releases because they haven’t got enough room for the 

other incoming prisoners. This whole system is frustrating and 

the whole system is maddening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the question we have is whether this 

government is prepared to spend $35,000 on incarcerating a 

young individual or whether the government’s prepared to 

spend $35,000 per person in these communities to try and 

develop a social plan and a social project to change the outcome 

of their lives. That, Mr. Speaker, is what it’s all about. It’s about 

good choices. It’s about good government. And it’s certainly 

not about business of this nature and motions of this nature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I spoke about how we need to have economic 

and social development work hand in hand when you look at 

the community. In La Ronge I understand . . . It’s a boom town, 

La Ronge; it’s doing, you know, quite well. And one of the 

problems that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

have there is many of the members won’t come in to La Ronge 

to replace members that are leaving in terms of transfers. And I 

think the problem there, Mr. Speaker, is a classic example of 

how you have to have social development interact with 

economic development because of the problems that can be 

created on the social development side. You know, you can 

have all the economy happening, all the jobs, all the money 

happening, but you’re certainly going to have a lot of the crime 

and the problems that usually follows some of these towns that 

start to boom. 

 

So in essence, northern Saskatchewan . . . And I reassert my 

earlier point, Mr. Speaker, is that you’ve got to have social 

development along with economic development under the 

auspices of community development to really build these 

communities from the ground up. And this is why we go back, 

and we always call for direct financing of local economic and 

social development agencies because if you direct finance these 

groups . . . many of these ladies’ and women’s groups in the 

North and the town, you know, they take the extra effort to try 

and change things at a local level with no support. 

 

And something as simple as this, Mr. Speaker, could really 

change the outcome of many youth, of many families, of many 

men, women, and children. So if they have the investment, Mr. 

Speaker, they will take the time to make sure that their people 

do well. And if it is not the government’s responsibility . . . But 

where the government is not helping out is by turning over 

control and giving adequate resources to do so. 

 

We all know  every single member in this House knows  

that unless you look at these scenarios and look at these issues, 

then nothing can change in many communities. And that’s right 

across the province. And whether you think that we’re right or 

wrong and how you go about it is, you know, certainly up to 

you to explain your position. But believe me, the people in the 

North believe that community development in terms of better 

control over our lives is exactly what they’ve been calling for 

and asking for. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the key thing here is that to understand 

again each of the communities’ perspectives and the impacts 

and the effects on the communities and the lack of the Metis 

recognition and some of the misunderstanding that happens as a 

result of government’s indifference to people. That’s got to 

stop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you get up and when you speak as a member of the 

Legislative Assembly, you’re speaking on behalf of your people 

and you must have that fundamental freedom to express your 

opinion. You don’t have to have agreement or consensus in the 

House, but if what you say is correct and what you say is, to a 

large extent, supported and substantiated with facts and what 

you say certainly is what you believe in, then shouldn’t we as 

government put these things into place? 

 

Shouldn’t we as government determine that we are going to do 

this in this fashion, and as government, we’re going to not even 

look at party lines? We’re going to simply do this to serve the 

people? 

 

This is what we’re speaking about, Mr. Speaker  about 

governance. Like, we’re here to make a difference to 

Saskatchewan people. We’re here to make a difference to the 

Athabasca people and to the Cumberland people and to all the 

people across the great land. But in order to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, we must have a government that understands what the 

people wants. 

 

And I refer to the situation of the last election where we only 

had a  what?  60, 70 per cent turn out just because people 

are tired of waiting for government to come up with creative 

solutions. They’re tired of the politics of the situation. 

 

So really, Mr. Speaker, there’s a huge gap of people out there 

that are really waiting for government to start coming up with 

some exciting and innovative ways to deliver services and 

benefits to those that deserve service and benefits  and 

especially to our elders, especially to the elders and the people 

that have built this province, Mr. Speaker. Those are the ones 

that we have to look at. 

 

And whenever I see an elderly person and I think about some of 

the things that they’ve gone through in life, well really, they 

sacrificed a tremendous amount, Mr. Speaker. The elderly 

people in this province sacrificed a tremendous amount, and 

have we got an elderly support program? Have we got programs 

specifically for the elderly to help them with the tax situation, 

with the housing situation, with any other health situation that 

they have, that we specifically targeted the elderly people? No 

we haven’t. 

 

And these people, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got stories from back home 

of how they sacrificed and how they endured many hardships, 

hardships you and I might not see for the rest of our lives. But 

the elderly people are really, Mr. Speaker, are the people that 

built this province and we cannot treat them any better than 

kings and queens of this land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know we want to make sure that . . . and this 

is some of the reasons why we are fighting on the situation in  

  



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

northern Saskatchewan  is many of the elders really are doing 

their fair share. Many of them are looking after their 

grandchildren and looking after a house. And how much more 

can we expect of elderly people to try and sustain our 

communities? 

 

(1545) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, motions of this nature do not substantiate or 

constitute good government, Mr. Speaker. Really good 

programs for the women, for the elderly, for the children, for 

the youth, and for the communities, and for the special interest 

groups we have in the North  that constitutes good 

government, Mr. Speaker. And this is why we have to make 

sure that we don’t play games of this nature to try and get 

through our political agenda and not serve the people, you 

know, in any shape, way, or form. 

 

I’ve got a quick little report I wish to share with the House, and 

I imagine they have a copy of this report. And it really talks 

about the far northern communities, and it talks about the high 

costs of life in the far northern communities I talked about 

earlier. And I said I’d have more facts for you guys today in 

reference to the barge service. 

 

Just to quickly, you know, give the rest of the MLAs a reminder 

of what I spoke about yesterday . . . is in 1997, the barge service 

to the Athabasca Lake communities, which includes Uranium 

City and Stony and Camsell, will not be getting service any 

more. And we have to make sure that there’s some way, shape, 

or form that this provincial government go up to the far 

northern communities and talk to them about how they can 

become part of the solution to make sure that the far northern 

communities  the five far northern communities of Uranium 

City, Camsell Portage, Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, and Black 

Lake  will continue having transportation of food, gas, and of 

supplies that they need to survive. In 1997, the last barge will 

be done its work in that region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And clearly, you look at the freights, the annual freight volume 

in terms of tonnes, and since 1989 the demand for freight has 

actually doubled. So we know that the population in the 

communities in there is growing. So if the freight demands in 

the far northern communities are doubling and then they’re 

discontinuing ferry barge service to the far northern 

communities in 1997, how are you going to make sure the 

people have access to food and to supplies and to heating fuel 

and what not? 

 

Really we haven’t been as proactive as we should be. And again 

goods shipped to eastern communities of Lake Athabasca as a 

percentage, 1985 there’s a 60 per cent; 1989 it was at 86 per 

cent. So you can see that also goods shipped are being 

increased. 

 

And certainly in terms of the freight volume  and if anybody 

wants to have a copy of this, I can certainly send it over  and 

growth of general merchandise, freight tonnage transferred by 

points north, freight forwarding, has actually increased from 

1987 from 1,232 short tonne to 2,176.9. 

 

So you can see as we go along, Mr. Speaker, the incredible 

increase of the goods and services that that are needed in the far 

northern communities. Yet 1997 is only a year away and we 

haven’t done anything successful, haven’t done anything 

innovative. We haven’t gone out there to talk to them to see 

how we can improve the service. 

 

And I guess to quickly explain why we’re cutting back in that 

particular area, Mr. Speaker, is in the fact that the Canadian 

Coast Guard will no longer be dredging the river on the Alberta 

side to make sure the barge gets through so they can deliver this 

good. They’re hoping to have a road built up from points north 

into Wollaston Lake. 

 

And what does the government contribute to that, Mr. Speaker, 

to this road? They contribute $1.5 million for a 150 kilometre 

road. I don’t know what kind of a road you can build for $1.5 

million, but really the people in the far North, we must not 

forget about them. We must remember the costs that they have 

to incur. And furthermore, you look at the fact of the situation is 

that they might even have their goods and services cut off 

because of the problem of not recognizing their special needs. 

 

So this is what government is all about, Mr. Speaker. It’s really 

about making sure that we have proper service, we have proper 

respect, and we have proper attitudes developed for the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It all goes back to my simple philosophical point that you’re in 

here to make a difference. You’re in here to speak on behalf of 

your constituents. You’re in here to compromise at times in 

terms of trying to get a consensus going. But the bottom line, 

Mr. Speaker, is you’re here to make sure that there is some 

voice and some reason and some logic and some understanding 

of what your constituency is about. 

 

And I’ve spoken on that for quite some time, and I’m hoping 

that today the priorities and the issues of northern Saskatchewan 

communities are understood by many more members of the 

House. And I know I could go on here for several more days, 

Mr. Speaker, but really I wouldn’t want to wear out my 

welcome because it’s not in my system to wear out my 

welcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just quickly on the Partnership for Growth 

document that we got from the government in reference to how 

we need to spend more time to consult with people. And you 

look at the motion. It’s contrary to what government should be 

all about. And even the Partnership for Growth, when the 

admission was made that there was no grand strategy for rural 

Saskatchewan, well, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t even the 

mention of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And then we talk about the $4 million that was allocated to 

northern development fund. You know the restrictions of the 

northern development fund, and the problems associated with 

northern development fund really has to come into question. 

 

And the reason why we need to go to local control, Mr. 

Speaker, is you’ve got to ensure that there’s administrative 

control when you talk about allocation of economic and social  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

development dollars, and you can’t control it from a regional 

basis as well as you can control it from a local basis. And I’ve 

got, you know, a background somewhat knowing how to get 

involved with regional efforts in trying to create a forestry 

opportunity, and I know the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 

is you’ve got to have good, solid administrative . . . and it’s got 

to be local control, so the local people have the final say in how 

you do things. Regional approaches do not work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in essence, the Partnership for Growth, you look at item 

number 16, “Maximize economic and employment 

opportunities for Aboriginal peoples.” You look at the whole 

thing about “. . . sectoral job training initiatives to prepare 

Aboriginal peoples to enter the work force.” 

 

Now what really is questioning to me, Mr. Speaker, is what 

exactly does that mean? It’s a nice fancy term; it got a lot of 

wide open-ended suggestions. But what it should say here is, by 

a certain day we as a government who are really supporting the 

aboriginal people will guarantee that we will have 3,000 people 

of aboriginal ancestry across 10 Crowns and 10 departments, 

and we will continue increasing that number  no number but 

just a general statement. And that’s what I mean about 

aggressive planning, Mr. Speaker, aggressive planning and 

taking the bull by the horn and being very innovative and very 

exciting. 

 

And I also talk about improving coordination of government 

economic development initiatives in northern Saskatchewan. 

And then it says, “Establish the Office of Northern Affairs to: 

. . . develop support networks for northern businesses.” Well the 

best support network you can develop for northern businesses is 

you take Uranium City and Stony Rapids and Camsell Portage 

. . . is first of all we would give them food, for example. And 

we could give them fuel, for example. And we could give them 

subsidies to have businesses get into construction, or other 

businesses that need subsidies, you know, to live. 

 

And I talk about $1.13 a litre for gas. I talk about 

$2-and-some-cents for a quart of milk. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s how you can improve plans for northern Saskatchewan, is 

you give them the support. But the amazing thing is I go back to 

the earlier example I use . . . is that you could use. You can buy 

a 40 ounce of whisky same price in Regina as you can in 

Buffalo Narrows, but you can’t buy the same price of a quart of 

milk in Regina that you can in Stony Rapids. It doubles. 

 

So where is the priority here? And this is what I’m talking 

about when you talk about governance . . . is really start 

thinking a lot with your heart as opposed to just with your 

wallet because all the cuts are doing is just devastating people. 

And the thing is that we haven’t talked about this thing for the 

last one or two years as northern residents. This thing has been 

going on for year after year after year after year. And granted 

there’s been some inroads made. Certainly I’m not saying 

they’ve been totally forgotten, but certainly we have to make 

sure that we don’t become complacent and that we forget about 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Because if there’s anything that you guys want to do as a  

governing body and certainly myself as an MLA, is to walk out 

of this building with a feeling of satisfaction that we were able 

to make a significant difference to 3 per cent of a population 

that occupied half the land mass and had an incredible amount 

of social and economic problems. We were able to provide 

some economic and social justice for those people and treated 

them as equals, in terms of meeting some of their housing 

demands, demands of fixing some of their roads, of talking 

about water and sewer for Stony Rapids, of developing a 

forestry and mining and natural gas industry, with their support 

and with their involvement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what it is all about  it’s about 

service to your people. And if you’re starting to forget that, Mr. 

Speaker, then what are we doing in this building? We’re here to 

express our opinion. We’re here to represent our constituents 

and we’re here to serve them. And that’s why it’s got to be 

really flip-flopped. We got to start thinking, who put us in 

power? It was not the policies. It was not motions of this nature. 

It was certainly not the powers that be out there that want to 

control people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this thing is about expressing your opinion, 

defending your constituents, and making a difference. And if 

you can’t do all three of those issues, then really we have to 

really examine what governance is all about, and certainly what 

our role is all about. 

 

And I guess in closing, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ve been up here long 

enough to try and explain to you what I think is necessary to try 

and educate the people in this particular building of what’s 

happening in northern Saskatchewan. The majority of the 

population, 97 per cent is in southern Saskatchewan. No 

question about that. And the economic might and the economic 

opportunities in northern Saskatchewan, we can’t forget about 

that as well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you look at the whole situation is that when 

government can use their economic might in a compassionate 

basis to try and make sure that they can serve the people of the 

north-west and of the North in general, then really you can 

sleep well at nights. 

 

And I think that’s the whole intent that I’m trying to do, is to 

make sure that anybody in the North that asks me, what did you 

do to try and serve us, is I explain to them, I hopefully educated 

them on what the role of an MLA is supposed to be. 

 

I guess the other point is I’d like to share with the House here is 

a plan, and again we look at the economic impact study and 

preconstruction technical engineering analysis for paving the 

runway at Points North Landing. Now what that is simply 

saying, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we’re going to develop the 

North more. And some of the things we look at in terms of the 

very economic opportunities I spoke about, when we talk about 

tourism, people say, well tourism, that has some limited 

opportunity. You know, why should we try and put money into 

tourism? There’s not much opportunity. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you look at the value of the Saskatchewan 

outfitting foreign earnings compared to selected Saskatchewan  

  



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

goods and commodities, okay? You look at almost $12 million 

a year. 

 

Annual value of Saskatchewan export  it beats ag machinery, 

canola oil, telecom and computer equipment, processed beef, 

mustard seed, and even flour. Saskatchewan outfitters really 

outperform those particular areas when it talks about the annual 

value of Saskatchewan export. 

 

So really tourism, Mr. Speaker, is something that we have to 

look at. It’s a particularly very exciting and a low cost option. 

You don’t need a pile of money to develop a lake and a bunch 

of streams . . . (inaudible) . . . they’re all out there. So in 

reference to the points we raised, you know, you really have to 

look at the opportunities. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I thank the Assembly for their time. 

I think the key thing here is that we want to make sure that they 

understood where Garson Lake was; that they understood where 

Camsell Portage was; they understood what the road issues 

were; they understood why we need the health care centres in 

La Loche. 

 

They understood about the Westside Community College in 

Buffalo Narrows, the tourism opportunities in Beauval, and the 

day care centre that the community built on their own. They 

understood about the Head Start programs, the Metis issue, 

about the land issue. That they understood about the housing 

issue, about the social and economic justice issues. So they 

understood about . . . oh, I forgot about five more. 

 

(1600) 

 

So the situation that we talk about in northern development, and 

again I’ll state the point, is that we as northern Saskatchewan 

residents do support the development of the resources. We 

know that there is a lot of rich deposits, but we ask the simple 

fact that we have more control and more revenues to finance 

our own dreams. 

 

And that’s the visionary government that says, yes, we will take 

revenues from the non-renewable industries operating in 

northern Saskatchewan, such as mining for uranium and mining 

for gold and mining for diamonds, and take a portion of those 

revenues to develop community-based economies in fishing, in 

agriculture, in manufacturing, in tourism, in forestry, so that the 

northern Saskatchewan people can develop an economy on their 

own. 

 

We’ll take a portion of that to talk about the social development 

issues so that the justice system and the cost of justice goes 

down, and that we’ll do more to empower them over the control 

of land. We’ll formalize the Metis Act. We’ll make sure that we 

coordinate our efforts in northern Saskatchewan and give them 

above all else a better say, more control, and really good, solid, 

long-term financial support to accomplish their goals. Because 

the biggest thing, Mr. Speaker, is empowerment of people, and 

some of these things I speak about will exactly do that, and 

some of the examples we spoke about, whether it be in housing 

or whether it be in transportation or business. 

 

You know, I urge every member in this House to go North, 

spend some time, and ask the members of various communities, 

what keeps you here? And they tell us, we’ve been here for 

many years. This is my home community, and we love the land, 

you know, and all our friends and families are here. So we’re 

not going to pick up and leave; we’re not going to have a bunch 

of ghost towns in the North. People are there to stay. 

 

So if they’re there to stay and they refuse to follow the path to 

urbanization that many people are, then respect them for their 

pride, respect them for their dignity and their staying power. 

Because this is where they want to live, that’s where they want 

to raise their children. So let’s give them the best of all worlds 

for where they choose to live. Because really where you live is 

really what you’re all about, and they’re aware of their 

historical significance and their historical past. 

 

And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that when time comes along I know 

that many ministers have travelled to northern Saskatchewan 

and have been involved with northern Saskatchewan and have 

visited northern Saskatchewan and have friends in northern 

Saskatchewan. Just ask them, are these problems? And the 

people will certainly say yes, these are problems. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly delighted to stand in 

front of you to discuss the motion proposed by the government 

regarding the extended hours. I’m sure the members opposite 

are equally as delighted to get my viewpoint. And you know, 

we’re certainly not here as individuals, we’re here as collective 

people trying to do the best to serve government. And this is the 

reason why we’re standing here today. 

 

And the big thing is, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that 

when it comes to northern Saskatchewan that the fundamental 

point of respect and the fundamental point of making sure that 

we realize that these are Saskatchewan residents is what we ask 

the government of the day to recognize. And this motion does 

not do that in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank you for your time. 

I’m going to end my comments here and I urge all members of 

the House to make every effort to educate themselves on not 

only the northern, but the native and Metis issues; to understand 

about the housing issues. And the list goes on and on and on. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to take a couple of minutes to explain the motion, Mr. 

Speaker, and the debate that’s before the House. 

 

It was on Friday that the Government House Leader proposed a 

motion to extend the sitting hours of the legislature from the 

usual sitting hours which ordinarily would be from 2:30 until 5 

p.m. and then . . . from 1:30 until 5 p.m. and also there are 

sitting hours from 7 until 10:30 on Monday and Tuesday 

evenings, but not on Wednesday and Thursday evening. 

 

And the House Leader proposed that the MLAs, as we get 

closer to the end of the session, that the MLAs would extend  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

themselves a little further and come to work earlier and work 

longer hours so that we could accomplish the debate and the 

work that’s necessary to bring the House to a close. 

 

We’re into day 66 today. Ordinarily a session would take 70 to 

75 days. And it was our estimation that we needed a few more 

hours, at the rate the debate was going, a few more hours in the 

day to carry this through. 

 

The hours used by MLAs at the early part of this session 

usually require considerable planning and meeting time. After 

about 50 days, pretty well the planning sessions and the 

consultations that are needed are usually done. And that is quite 

common practice, and has been common practice for this 

legislature to voluntarily extend hours. And this was asked for 

by the House Leader of the government and refused on the part 

of the opposition, at which time the motion was put. 

 

So right now the motion that we are debating really is the 

motion simply to extend hours so that the members of the 

legislature would come to work here in this room at 10 o’clock 

in the morning and work until 12:30, and then extend and 

maintain the same hours in the afternoon from 1:30 until 5, and 

then once again, from 7 till 10:30 in the evening, Mondays 

through to Thursday. And it would also extend the Friday hours 

from not just working in the morning from 10 to 1, but also 

from 2 till 5 in the afternoon. And this way the debate could be 

carried forward and completed in a reasonable time, keeping in 

mind that it costs about $30,000 a day to keep this legislature 

going, over and on top of the governance that’s done ordinarily. 

 

Now the members opposite had asked for time to debate health 

issues. I want to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that if you 

look at the proposed agenda . . . any member is able to get this 

agenda. The agenda that we have proposed here is, upon the 

passing of this motion, we would proceed directly to four Bills 

that deal with health: The Health Districts Amendment Act, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, The 

Health Facilities Act, and The Crown Foundations for District 

Health Boards Act. 

 

Those are in adjourned debates. Members can take as long as 

they want on there to debate, and if they want more hours, we 

could extend them probably, with leave, be willing to do that 

. . . followed by the estimates for the Department of Health. So 

the government is quite willing to proceed to offer a lot of time, 

all the time that is necessary to debate the specific topics that 

the opposition has asked for. 

 

And then there are, after that, there still are several items to 

pass. There are several Bills that are in Committee of the Whole 

stage, and there are several other estimates that need to be 

brought to a close, including the Minister of Finance’s 

estimates, including the Premier’s estimates, where the question 

and answer process can take place. 

 

The opposition members, however, have chosen not to debate 

those, by their action, and have chosen instead to debate a 

motion about the extending of time, which tells me they really 

do not want to come here early in the morning, like most 

Saskatchewan people, and earn their keep full time. I thank you,  

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I am delighted to stand here and talk to the Assembly, and 

I’m delighted to have the opportunity to tell why we want to 

debate this motion. And it’s not just so that we can . . . we’re 

afraid to get out of bed in the morning. I assure you we put in 

lots of hours, and we’re quite willing to put in lots of hours. But 

we want to talk about the items that the people in our 

constituency are asking us to talk about. We don’t want to 

spend our time looking at some Bills that don’t make any real 

difference to the people at all. There are health Bills that make a 

big difference to the people of this province that are going to 

affect us for very many years. 

 

I wish I had the gift of talking, like the hon. member from 

Athabasca, but I’m afraid you’re going to have to listen to what 

I have to say because I, like you, was elected by about 15,000 

people in my constituency, and they felt that I was the right 

person to be here telling you what their interests were. And I 

think that when you look at this chair you’re not supposed to be 

looking at me, you’re supposed to be looking at the fact that 

somebody out there thinks that there’s somebody that should be 

representing people in that constituency and bringing some very 

important items to this government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 

the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena. There are a number 

of members that clearly want to enter the debate. When the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena takes her place, others will be 

allowed to enter this debate. I ask members the courtesy of 

hearing the member’s debate. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the people of 

this province, they’re asking, are they truly represented by a 

government who is setting the agenda, right down to the very 

time of when we’re going to debate every Bill; how long we’re 

going to debate every Bill; and when they want to go home for 

the end of session? We are quite willing to sit here all summer 

if that’s what it takes to make sure the people of this province 

are truly represented, and what they have to say is being said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  I have to ask you if the government is . . . I 

have to ask if the government is actually scared of something. 

Why is an agenda set so tightly that we don’t have the right to 

bring up . . . to talk on the Bills that we feel are . . . have to be 

said. And there are lots of people out there that are banking on 

us to bring forward some very important items that this 

government has refused to look at. 

 

I think this government is trying to control every aspect of 

people’s lives, and especially their money. And I have to add to 

the list, the health and the education and the highways and 

every aspect of our province’s life out here. And I think that we 

feel like we are just puppets on a string. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this government either sees nor cares  

  



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

that there’s 16 of us on this side of the House not sitting here 

just because we like the chairs. We’re sitting here to represent 

people, and we want to make sure that the government knows 

what they have to say. 

 

Do you know that there’s 240,000 people of this province 

represented by the 16 of us on this side of the House? That’s 

one-quarter of the population in this province is actually 

represented on this side of the House. And why are you trying 

to ignore us? 

 

I don’t know if the people actually remember, that on election 

day last year only two-thirds of the eligible voters actually came 

out to vote. And that wasn’t because they were happy  that 

was because that they were so tired of what was going on over 

there, they just gave up hope. 

 

And if you do a little of bit of quick math there, and I don’t 

know how many of you can do this, so out of the 66 per cent 

that were elected, only 47 per cent of you voted NDP and that 

means you actually are governing with less support than the 

NDP are in B C. (British Columbia) right now. 

 

I think we have a government who thinks they should control 

the length of debate, the day of the debate, and the orderly 

passing of Bills that will affect the lives of everybody in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very sad day for me and for the all the other 

new MLAs who are elected and believe that we came in here 

thinking that we could really make a difference. I don’t believe 

that we can make a difference if we’re told that this is what you 

can do on this day and this is the amount of time that you can 

do it in. I don’t think that what’s the people of this province 

actually elected us to and that’s not what we’re paid to do. 

 

I think they actually thought that we could influence some of 

the decisions that were made in this House, and I haven’t seen 

that happen in the last 63 days or however many days we’re 

been sitting. We’ve come up with many amendments, we’ve 

come up with resolutions, we’ve came up motions, and it just 

depends if it’s something that suits the government’s idea of 

importance whether we get to vote them or not. 

 

Otherwise they’re voted down, they’re totally ignored . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. I know we all feel that we 

have much to say in this debate, and I again urge members to 

take their place in the debate on the conclusion of the comments 

from the member who has the floor right now. 

 

(1615) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chair. I guess I 

understand that the member from Athabasca had some very 

interesting points, some different information to give to the 

members opposite. The information that I have is from a rural 

aspect. But there are many of you on that side of the House that 

represent rural Saskatchewan and I think that you are now, 

through me, given an opportunity to say some of the things to 

the government that maybe you can’t say because you are part  

of government. 

 

We as opposition have to make sure that the government looks 

at every Bill and every estimate from every angle so we’re 

making the best use of every dollar of this province, so that we 

can be sure that we are governing people to the very best of 

everybody’s ability. 

 

I had one of the members opposite the other day tell me that 

good government took good opposition. Well maybe you don’t 

think we’re good opposition but we are trying. But we can’t be 

good opposition if we can’t have an opportunity to speak and 

bring forward the things that the people of this province want us 

to say. 

 

One of the big things in my constituency  I’m going to talk 

about many of them, but I guess my critic area of Economic 

Development is something that I’m going to leave to the end, 

because as a small-business person in this province, I think that 

there are many things that the Minister of Economic 

Development and I have differed on in the last many years, 

probably one of the main reasons why I’m standing here. 

 

But I think first of all I’m going to tell you something about the 

reason why I was elected or why I decided to run, and that was 

because of the health issue in this province. The hospital 

closures in this province, the 52 hospital closures, may have 

seemed like an insignificant number to you, but in rural 

Saskatchewan and in my constituency, it closed the hospital in 

Spalding, and closing that hospital meant that my parents 

moved to Calgary. That closure is the reason why I’m standing 

here today. 

 

Because I think of people that have built this province and gone 

away to war. They’ve done everything that they can to make 

sure this province grows in the world. I think if they can’t even 

spend their last years in this province and being looked after by 

our health care system, we’re doing something really, really 

sad. 

 

The Spalding Hospital was closed. Just last year we closed the 

Rose Valley Hospital. There’s cut-backs in Porcupine, and now 

I’m hearing about cut-backs in Wadena. And every day I get 

people sending me letters and asking, aren’t we going to be able 

to do something. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, this motion is something that bothers 

me because I think by passing this motion, the government is 

not going to allow us to bring forward some of the things that 

the people are asking us to do. I think that health care is the 

most important aspect of our lives in Saskatchewan, something 

that is out of our control when it comes to dollars. The 

government has to look after health care and education. And 

that’s the first thing they ruined in this province, and they 

started it four years ago and they’re still on the trail. 

 

On paper, closing hospitals may look like a fiscally responsible 

thing to do. However fiscal responsibility is not the whole issue 

and it’s not why we’re sitting here. We must remember there’s 

also a human issue when we come to closing hospitals. We’ve 

been told that in an emergency the very first hour is the golden  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

hour, which is vital to patients, yet the closure of hospitals, and 

ambulances having to travel further, is something that we have 

to relate to every day. 

 

Living in rural Saskatchewan, other factors have to be 

considered as well. There’s the distance from the hospitals, the 

conditions of the roads, which everybody admits is absolutely 

terrible, and we also have to consider the weather conditions. 

 

In the city, if there’s a blizzard in process, Emergency Measures 

and emergency personnel can still get out to help people and to 

get them to a hospital in a very short time. But in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chair, and in a total white-out 

condition, it becomes hazardous for people to even leave their 

homes, let alone get an emergency vehicle out to help people, 

travel the hour and a half, or however long we’re expected to 

take now before we can get to a hospital. That’s not fair. 

 

Many of our surgical procedures are done in city hospitals, yet 

we’ve been told that hospitals like the Plains will be closing  

a hospital which did surgical procedures and other medical 

procedures at a time when waiting-lists are growing in other 

hospitals. And now we hear that hospital is going to be closing. 

I don’t understand how we can say that we’re looking after our 

people in the health care issue when we continue to cut back on 

our medical facilities. 

 

Do we accept health care standards that tells the mother of five 

in my constituency, with children eight years old and younger, 

that she’s been placed on an emergency surgery list that could 

take up to a month before she’s called. And are we going to 

help pay for the person she has to hire to look after her children 

while her husband is out doing the spring work? This mother 

has her regular work to do and looking after her children, and 

she must cook for them and provide meals for extra men. And 

who’s going to help her out? Nobody cares in the cities, 

because in there it’s just a matter of getting somebody over for 

two or three hours a day. That doesn’t happen in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Closing hospitals and cut-backs is putting more stress on our 

health professionals who are doing the very, very best job they 

can under the circumstances. It’s ironic that Saskatchewan’s 

health definition is “a dynamic process involving the harmony 

of physical, mental, environmental, social, and spiritual 

well-being.” Health enables individuals and families and 

communities to function to the very best of their ability within 

their environment. Many health professionals are concerned 

that the personal aspect of health care in hospitals is 

disappearing. From the above description we can determine 

health is more than just administrating medicine; health is a 

sense of well-being. And that sense of well-being is being 

eroded in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the recovery, helped or hindered when our nurses 

don’t have time to listen when a patient needs someone to talk 

to? I think nursing care involves more than just giving them 

needles or giving them drugs. It also takes some talking to 

people to make sure that they’re valued as human beings. And 

with the health care cut-backs there are now, our nurses are 

little more than just robots. All they can do is just perform the  

actual medical duties and they don’t have time to treat people as 

human beings. 

 

Do we want a health care system where a family member has to 

be available to look after somebody when they’re in a hospital 

bed? In my constituency, a friend of mine had to take time off 

of work to  as a nurse  to look after her daughter who had 

just had a baby in the hospital. 

 

While her daughter was in the hospital, she bathed the mother 

and the baby, and checked the IVs (intravenous) and gave the 

medicine. Once the nurses knew that the mother was actually a 

nurse, they encouraged her to come and spend the whole day 

there and they even asked her to spend some of the evenings. 

After three weeks, her daughter was well enough to go home 

and that meant a two-week separation away from the dad. 

 

This constituent is upset because the lack of nursing care made 

it impossible for the mother to have a real relationship with her 

baby when the baby was first born. And I think that’s 

something that will have a detrimental effect to the mother and 

the child, and it’s not something that our wellness system is 

supposed to be encouraging. 

 

Recently the media carried a story about a report that found a 

trend to release mom and baby from the hospital 24 hours after 

a baby is born is causing problems. Moms are encouraged to 

breast-feed their babies but are being released before they 

understand what’s happening when it comes to breast-feeding. 

 

Many newborn infants are returning to hospitals because 

they’re dehydrated. Dehydration in infants and small children 

can occur very quickly and it can mean death. In our rush to 

close hospitals and cut the use of acute care beds, we are willing 

to sacrifice the lives of newborn babies. 

 

This is the kind of things that are happening when we don’t 

have a chance to bring the problems, the issues that are 

affecting people, right across the province to the floor of the 

Assembly. And that’s what we are taking this opportunity to do 

right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to make sure that 

every aspect of people’s lives in our constituency and in this 

province is brought forth to the floor of this Assembly. If that 

means we sit here till Christmas, that’s fine with me. 

 

Closure of hospitals has had a huge impact on the elderly within 

my constituency. Many do not drive and they are now an hour 

or more away from the hospital. If they don’t have a family, 

who’s going to drive them? Who will drive them on a daily 

basis if their spouse is in the hospital? Do we expect them to 

take a hotel or a motel room just so that they can receive the 

medical help that they need? 

 

In a discussion paper on the detriments of health prepared by 

the Saskatchewan Provincial Health Council, they state three 

broad areas determining health. First of all was the social 

environment consisting of family, friends and communities, 

health care, class, status and power, leisure, work, and 

childhood experiences. The individual consists of mental 

hardiness, genetic and biological characteristics, individual 

behaviours, values, and spiritual well-being. And physical  

  



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

environment of the naturally built environment. 

 

And how are we meeting the demands when we close our 

hospitals and care homes and force people to travel outside their 

community for acute care? If we look to the definition of health 

established by the Saskatchewan Provincial Health Council, are 

we actually meeting what the elders of our community are 

needing? I don’t think so. 

 

Closing hospitals in rural Saskatchewan will place undue 

hardships on seniors who must find alternative ways of getting 

to medical centres. Some towns do have transit buses to take the 

elderly and handicapped to neighbouring towns, but can they 

afford to use it? One town in my constituency charges $80 to go 

to the two larger centres which are only one hour away. 

 

Many seniors are just on old age pensions and they can’t afford 

these extra charges. What is their alternative? Are they going to 

have to leave their towns or villages they’ve spent their whole 

life in and move to a larger centre away from their family or 

friends? That’s what’s happening when we cut back on our 

health care and we don’t recognize the importance of it. 

 

Many of our rural hospitals that have been closed have changed 

to wellness clinics that open from 8 till 5. Once again in theory 

this may have seemed like a good idea, but in Spalding it 

proved that this is actually a failure. 

 

Spalding Hospital was closed and it was converted to a wellness 

centre with an observation bed and a doctor and a nurse on call 

24 hours a day, and then a lab tech that came in five days a 

week. 

 

But you know what? Many of the emergencies don’t occur 

between 8 and 5. A patient would have to call the centre, and 

then a call would be sent forward to an RN (registered nurse) 

who would assess over the phone whether the patient could wait 

until office hours or if they should proceed to the wellness 

centre where then the RN would have to meet them and then 

they’d call a doctor. All this takes time. 

 

Talking to ambulance attendants in my constituency who are 

faced with taking a patient to a wellness clinic, many opt to 

transfer them to the nearest centre where medical personnel are 

found on hand 24 hours a day. 

 

I heard a while ago that people were amazed that actually 

people weren’t using the small centres as much; they were 

going to the larger centres. I don’t find this surprising at all. 

Why would they bother stopping at a small centre when they 

know they’re going to have to wait for a couple of hours to get 

the attention they need, when they can go on to a larger centre 

and get help immediately? It’s a vicious circle that’s causing the 

closure of more hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The doctor has left the Spalding-Naicam area, and Spalding 

wellness clinic is no longer available for emergency care. It’s 

only open two days a week for laboratory services. This 

experiment in the wellness clinic was a failure. 

 

And yet now they’ve told Rose Valley to do the same thing. A  

special care home was closed on April 1, and the hospital was 

closed and we turned it into another wellness centre. I imagine 

that they mustn’t be learning from their mistakes, because this 

is only about 30 miles away and we’re going to be trying the 

same thing. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan is entitled to expect the same health care 

services as their urban counterparts. I have here a letter that was 

sent to the editor of the Star-Phoenix on February 29. It was 

sent from Ted Cardwell of Saskatoon. He talked about cancer, 

that it can be beaten; they did it in their family. And the health 

board doctors restored his vision: 

 

I am grateful for these services. (And) I am willing to pay 

what it takes to have them continued. 

 

But I want my friends and my relatives in rural 

Saskatchewan to have the same services in the same way 

our family received them. 

 

Government must fund the services to the point that 

Saskatoon Health Care Board does and not cut back 

anymore. The fat is already out of the system. 

 

The Saskatchewan way does not (mean closing) . . . rural 

hospitals and then refuse these families access to specialty 

services in Saskatoon. 

 

Our medical costs are not out of line. Our costs are well 

below the almighty Americans. And we have a health 

system that works. 

 

Keep it lean but (don’t keep it) . . . mean. Do not cut 

services and do not cut people. (There’s) enough (cuts) 

already. 

 

I do not want someone from North Battleford or elsewhere 

to have cancer and no nuclear medicine to find it nor to 

have a scared mom with a problem newborn and no 

medical geneticist to diagnose it. 

 

We can do better. 

 

Am I alone with these views? 

 

I think that he’s not alone, Mr. Speaker, and I think that people 

of this Assembly should realize the importance of the health 

care and what we are doing to the people of this province. 

 

I think that we must recognize that people are lost when they’re 

trying to figure out what they should be doing with their health 

care in rural Saskatchewan. I have a letter from the village of 

Fosston who wrote to the minister in September asking him to 

reconsider the closure of the Rose Valley Integrated Care 

Facility. 

 

The village of Fosston depended on the facility at Rose 

Valley for medical services as well as for long-term care 

for its seniors who can no longer be cared for at home. The 

village council realizes that cuts in health spending are 

needed in order to maintain a viable health care system.  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

The council feels that it is not in the best interests of the 

people needing level 4 care or for their families to be sent 

to care facilities in a community where they’ll be among 

strangers and cannot be visited by their family and friends. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we get these letters from all over the 

province, from people who are scared that what’s happening to 

them is going to make the last years of our seniors not happy 

years. I think that they have a right to expect more. 

 

The next problem that I see in rural Saskatchewan that is facing 

people who have to decide where they’re going to be making 

their homes is in the field of education. I brought up in the 

House a number of times the fact that Annaheim School is 

going to be closed, or they’re threatening closure of at least the 

high school this fall. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something that upsets very many 

people in our area, and I think that it’s something . . . another 

reason why the opportunity to speak here today and debate the 

motion about extended hours is very important. 

 

The people of Annaheim wrote to me, as they wrote to the 

Minister of Education with their concerns. And I’m delighted to 

take this opportunity to read to you some of these letters and 

make sure the Assembly understands what cut-backs to 

education is doing. 

 

Annaheim is the home of Doepker Industries that actually 

employs over 250 people. It is the lifeline of not only that 

community but probably for an area of 40 miles around it. 

Annaheim has never had a railway. They have had very 

industrious, hard-working people. And they have people that 

are looking to build a home out there, but they have to decide, is 

it something that’s going to be viable? And one of the points 

that they will be . . . in making their decision will be, can we 

raise our family here? 

 

Closing the school in Annaheim means that there will not be 

homes built in rural Saskatchewan. People will opt instead to 

decide to build in Humboldt or in Melfort, and drive out. That’s 

just another nail in the coffin of a small town in Saskatchewan, 

and I think it’s very unfair. 

 

I have a letter here from Pauline Holtvogt who says: 

 

Dear Mrs. Draude, I am writing to you in regards to the 

possible closure of the Annaheim school. Our high school 

is being threatened now, but its only a matter of time 

before the whole school . . . (will be) shut down. The loss 

of our school would be a real detriment to our entire 

community. I believe it would hurt (the) industry in (our) 

town and . . . (probably) even our store and (our) post 

office. I think we should be trying to save rural 

Saskatchewan, not crush it. 

 

I believe something could be worked out with the unit 

board if they’d . . . be willing to listen. Any help you can 

give us . . . would be very much appreciated. 

I have talked to the unit board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 

would love to be able to help this town, but they don’t have the 

money. There’s a saying that says, the golden rule  those who 

have the gold makes the rules. And it’s really true. And that’s 

what this government is. They are deciding where the money is 

going to be spent and I guess, maybe being that . . . giving them 

that little bit of power or a lot of power is what they’re asking 

for right now. 

 

I have a letter from a Bernarda Kunz at Annaheim that says: 

 

We are very concerned by the talk of closing part of our 

Annaheim School. . . . as grandparents and (as) taxpayers 

(I) think . . . we have a very good school system in our 

community. 

 

Our rural communities are struggling to stay alive and by 

removing part of our school children (taking children) to 

larger schools is only destroying all we have worked for 

(all our lives). 

 

Why does the minister of education through its 

superintendents and unit boards insist on bussing our 

students miles & miles away from (our) home? It only 

means . . . it’ll cost extra (tax) dollars and we can see no 

reason for . . . (it). 

 

Please accept your responsibility as our elected 

representative and . . . (see what you can do about it). 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what I’m trying to do. I want 

to make sure the Minister of Education recognizes what’s 

happening when we cut back funding to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Ken and Jane Junk from Annaheim also say: 

 

I remember as a young student in the 1960’s when the idea 

of “Bigger is better” became the policy of the government 

of that time. It meant the elimination of the smaller 

school(s) and bussing students to larger centers, nearly . . . 

(closing) the Annaheim community the loss of their school 

 that was called “Consolidation.” 

 

Today, in the name of “fiscal slashing” our Annaheim 

school is again the target of attack. One can’t help but 

come to the conclusion that the decision makers don’t 

realize the awful damage and frustration that they inflict on 

the community with their down-sizing policy. 

 

Ours is a very stable and progressive community and has 

every reason to be optimistic about the future. Quite a 

number of well-established businesses are located in our 

district (but we) require labourers, these are . . . always 

young families with children who are necessarily 

concerned about educational facilities, we have them now 

but are concerned about keeping them. 

 

It was through the efforts of the local boards and our 

parents in the 1960’s that we have the school systems we 

have today. Today it falls on us as parents and local boards 

to make sure (that) they remain intact. 

  



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

We have the benefit of hind sight to back to our demands 

 (of) what a mistake it would have been to destroy what 

. . . (is becoming) the most flourishing small rural 

communities in Saskatchewan by removing the most 

important component (of it, and that is) our schools! 

 

Thank-you for your consideration . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the Assembly should recognize that 

this is the kind of information that makes a good government. 

They have to be listening to the input from each person in the 

province because that’s why they were elected. People on this 

side of the House are bringing forward the other point of view 

to make sure that they are a good government. 

 

Mrs. Annabelle Frank from Annaheim says: 

 

I am writing in regards to Annaheim High School and 

Annaheim School in general. 

 

We have had a school in Annaheim since the early 

nineteen hundreds, and I don’t know why our children 

should have to sit on a bus for three to four hours a day to 

go to a school in a larger area, just so that they can build a 

new and bigger school there. (The facility we have in 

Annaheim is a good facility.) 

 

I feel that it (would be ) in the best interest of our children 

to keep them closer to home and in a smaller community, 

away from drug sellers in the school hallways, and a lot of 

other corrupt gangs . . . that are in larger schools. 

 

We are not paying seven to nine hundred dollars school 

taxes a year to have our children in that kind of 

environment. 

 

I feel the Teachers and Parents are not doing their jobs 

properly anywhere (else). 

 

Teachers . . . are getting paid too much for the teaching . . . 

and Parents should be teaching their children right from 

wrong. I do believe some children need a spanking now 

and then if they do not listen after a couple fair warnings, 

and if this doesn’t work, there should be other things to try 

. . . 

 

Thank you for your time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that even the grandparents are getting in on 

this debate, and people in rural Saskatchewan are out there 

because they want to be. Nobody’s making us stay in rural 

Saskatchewan. But the health care and the education is what we 

are expecting from this government. And I think that’s what we 

have a right to expect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jane Niekamp from Annaheim also says: 

 

I am writing to you in regard to the proposed removal of 

. . . high school grades in our school due to budget cuts. I 

feel the proposal will have a detrimental effect on our 

community. 

Without our school, who would want to stay in our town 

(and) or even want to move here if their children would 

have to ride a . . . bus for long periods of time mornings 

and afternoons to get to school in a larger centre. 

 

Our businesses would also suffer because no one would 

want to move here. Also no one would be (able) . . . to start 

up a new business in a town that has no school. 

 

I think it’s time . . . (this) NDP Government opens its eyes 

& takes a serious look at what they are doing to rural 

Saskatchewan! Once it’s gone, I . . . (know) you will never 

get it back (again). 

 

I think that’s the point that we’re trying to make, Mr. Speaker, 

is that when we ruin this fabric we’ve got out there right now, 

we can’t ever get it back again. Rural Saskatchewan has the 

way of life that people all over the world are looking for. I see 

people leaving Regina and Saskatoon at 4 o’clock on Friday, as 

soon as they can get out of the cities, and they go out to rural 

Saskatchewan to find the way of life . . . to live what we have 

all the time, or we’re trying to have. 

 

And by closing down the health and education which is the 

basic rights of people, there isn’t any reason . . . people are 

trying to find that. I think that we’re being unfair to the whole 

community and to our future generations by ruining rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a letter here from Dave Niekamp at 

Annaheim: 

 

I am writing to you in regards to the proposed removal of 

some (of our) high school grades in our school. I feel this 

proposal would have a detrimental effect on our (whole) 

community. 

 

It was suggested to the division board to cut the Industrial 

Arts Program in the Humboldt Division. (It was) . . . stated 

that (the board) . . . did not see this program being cut and 

yet in the same breath (said) . . . that young adults working 

(in our) . . . industry such as Doepker. . . (should) . . . not 

be . . . (concerned with closing of) schools. 

 

As an employee of Doepker Industries in the village in 

charge of hiring, I can honestly say that any person who 

would get experience in working for a couple of hours after 

school will be a much more qualified welder than anyone 

who goes to industrial arts for a few hours a day. The 

students hired there gain a work ethic that cannot be taught 

in industrial arts classes. 

 

Our kindergarten to grade 12 ratio is among the best in the 

Humboldt School Division, and yet the board wants to bus 

the students to Muenster and to Lake Lenore. Neither of 

these towns have a thriving industry such as Annaheim. 

The government of today is always stating how to keep the 

population in rural Saskatchewan. So tell me how they’re 

doing this by closing the high school in a town that has an 

industry employing 250 people, year around. 

 

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

Would you move to a town for employment if your 

children could not go to school in the same town? I think 

not. The board also states that Annaheim School was not 

big enough for more students. This is simply not true. 

When I graduated in ’72 we had double the student 

population in the same existing school that we have now. 

 

Before anyone closes Annaheim School, I think the people 

of the community are entitled to the same solid financial 

figures showing us where we’ll be saving money as 

taxpayers by closing our high school as opposed to closing 

. . . (the one in) Lake Lenore. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s many more letters and I . . . maybe some 

of the members across are not interested in hearing what these 

people have to say, but I think that they have a right to be heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that’s before us states that we should 

be following an agenda that the government is directing. I think 

that the government’s direction means to ram through the Bills 

that they consider important and not giving the people of the 

province a chance to actually look at them carefully and make 

sure the government sees all sides of them. So I think by having 

this opportunity to speak to them today, the people are getting 

that chance. 

 

Kathy Hilbert of Annaheim says: 

 

Our town is in the midst of having our high school 

removed from our town. The town I am speaking of is 

Annaheim . . . . The town is centrally located in the 

Humboldt rural school division . . . Our students will be 

bussed 15 to 20 minutes to various towns (like Lake 

Lenore or Muenster) 

 

The reason we are losing our school is because we are 

short of funds. Some . . . towns within the school district 

have not paid their taxes. 

 

Annaheim (only) has 333.00 of outstanding taxes (period) 

. . . (while some other towns have over $21,000 and some 

have as high as $90,000) of outstanding taxes. It does not 

make sense to me why we should be losing our school 

because we have paid our taxes. Is it not the duty of 

everyone to pay their taxes. Taxes help pay for schools, 

roads, health care, etc. If no one (paid) . . . their taxes 

where would we end up? 

 

Our school has been managed . . . well. Our students have 

done excellent work: winning scholarships and doing well 

in sports. Now they want to take (it) . . . away from us 

when we have done everything right. 

 

Our town itself will suffer because people will be running 

in all directions. Our store, (our) credit union, etc. will lose 

business because people will not have time to stop. People 

are not willing to move to Annaheim because they have 

heard (they) . . . will lose their school. If we could some 

guarantee of the school staying open for years to come we 

could have more students coming to school here. 

Please help us in our fight to save our school. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the other people that have 

written to the Assembly have written to the Minister of 

Education as well. But just in case she hasn’t had the 

opportunity to read all of these letters I think I will make sure 

that a couple more of them are read. 

 

Mr. Ted Kunz from Annaheim says: 

 

I am concerned by the possibility of removing some of our 

students from our Annaheim School. I feel it is a grave 

mistake and extra expense if they go through with (these) 

. . . plans. We have everything here in place at the present 

time. If they bus those children to neighbouring schools 

they will have to expand . . . (somewhere else.) 

 

We have a thriving manufacturing industry namely 

Doepker Industries right here in our town, who employ 300 

employees at the present time, and they’re still expanding. 

Whose families will keep up the enrolment? I really 

believe that our children and the entire community will 

suffer if they go through with their plans. 

 

In your discussion with the Minister of Education please 

convey my concerns. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister of Education should be 

told what the people in this province are saying. She is 

responsible, not only for the children in urban Saskatchewan, 

but also for the children in rural Saskatchewan. We have a 

responsibility to keep the whole province alive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the letter written by Peter and Arlie 

Knelson from Annaheim also should be read: 

 

I have been very concerned about the talk of closing our 

high school in Annaheim. 

 

My husband and I along with our five children moved here 

two years ago. It was the country life and small town 

atmosphere that attracted us here. 

 

I like my children going to a smaller school. They get good 

schooling and a lot of one on one contact. They are 

recognized as an important individual not just a number. 

 

I would be very disturbed and (very) sorry if we lost any 

part of our school (system) here. 

 

I think our community has a lot to offer and people will 

stay here because of the industry we have. Also new 

families are continuing to move here. I think closing any 

part of our school would be “jumping the gun” just a bit at 

this point in time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s some of the points that we 

should be making and I want to make sure I make. The people 

in my constituency have been asking me about the promises  

  



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

made by this government. So we’ve taken a few minutes to 

write down some of the promises and I want to see if they’ve 

actually been kept. 

 

On August 21 the minister of Health said: 

 

The opposition NDP is going fight these health care 

cut-backs and these changes to medicare. It’s going to fight 

the erosion of the principles of medicare. I feel rather 

certain we’ll be having a change of government next time 

around, and then this public isn’t going to have to worry 

about these problems. 

 

That was said by Louise Simard in 1989. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I really believe that we had a change of 

government and we have lots of problems now. I think the 

people of the province would attest to that. 

 

In March 1988, our now Premier said New Democrats would 

continue the fight to restore social programs such as medicare, 

the dental and drug plans, to their former place of leadership for 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, I don’t understand how our 

Premier could make a statement like that and then find out that 

this isn’t at all what’s happening when he’s in government. 

 

Again the minister of Health, Louise Simard, in 1991 said, 

“Why should the sick and elderly carry the burden for your 

PC’s (Progressive Conservative) incompetence  for the PC’s 

incompetence.” I think right now we’re carrying the burden for 

the NDP incompetence. 

 

We have a broken promise . . . in 1987 the Star-Phoenix quoted 

Romanow saying, “Romanow promises to restore the 

prescription drug plan and the school-based dental program.” 

That was said on November 9, ’87. The prescription drug plan, 

the deductible amount in 1991 was $125; the prescription drug 

plan deductible amount in 1993 is $1,700. It seems to me that 

restoring the drug plan meant restoring some dollars for the 

government from the taxpayers of this province again. 

 

In the Saskatchewan . . . “The Saskatchewan Way — it’s 

working” . . . in the 1995 election platform said: hospitals will 

always be there when they’re needed. Well we have 52 rural 

hospitals have been closed, the Plains hospital is scheduled to 

be closed in 1997, and how do you judge when 52 hospitals 

across this province are no longer needed? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a promise, a commitment, to the Indian 

and Metis people. The NDP pamphlet authorized by John 

Messer in Regina: 

 

New Democratic government will work with the Metis 

people to address outstanding issues of land and economic 

development. As a starting point we will recognize, with 

Metis people, a new Metis Act. 

 

I haven’t talked to the member of Athabasca about this but I’m 

sure if this would have occurred he would have been delighted 

to tell us about it. 

 

Our commit . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’ve been listening for some 

time to the remarks by the hon. member for 

Kelvington-Wadena and as the hon. member knows, her 

remarks must bear relevance to the motion that is on the floor 

and being considered by the Assembly. 

 

And I know that the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena will 

want to assure the Assembly that her remarks are relevant to the 

motion before us, and I’ll ask her to demonstrate the relevance 

of her remarks by tying her remarks to the motion that’s in 

consideration before us. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I do 

want to assure the Assembly that I am directing remarks 

relevant to this motion because I want to make sure the people 

in this Assembly are aware that, by not being able to debate in 

an open forum, the way the government is doing with this 

motion, will not allow us to have the thoughts and the ideas that 

the people of this province brought forward to the Assembly. 

That’s why we were elected. We have to make sure that 

everybody’s viewpoint is heard. And I want to make sure that 

the people of this province that we are representing are well 

heard. 

 

November 20, 1989 a caption in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

said: 

 

Roy Romanow capped off the NDP annual convention 

pledging to eliminate poverty in his first term in office. 

 

Well I’ve been talking to the member from Humboldt and I 

think that the whole Assembly knows that this is one promise 

that has not been kept. In fact the poverty rate in Saskatchewan 

has not been eliminated; it’s going up all the time. There are 

more people on welfare now than there ever have been. I know 

that it’s a concern of the government, but it’s obviously still a 

broken promise. It’s not something they’ve been able to get 

under control. 

 

And I think until everybody in this province is heard at all 

times, I think when we have a government that’s quite willing 

to ram through motions that will limit the time of debate on 

certain Bills, especially important Bills like the health care 

Bills, we’re not having an open and accountable government. 

 

We also have a promise in November 16, ’89 that said, if the 

NDP is elected in the next provincial election, their goal was to 

end poverty. It also said, “The New Democratic Party will work 

to get rid of food banks,” said Pat Atkinson, October 3, 1991. 

This is quoted . . . I apologize . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. members knows 

that she’s not permitted by rules of the Assembly  Order!  

to make reference to the proper names of members who are 

currently seated in the Legislative Assembly. I want to remind 

the hon. member of that rule and ask her to abide by it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I apologize. The Minister of Education stated, 

if elected the New Democratic Party would work to get rid of  

  



June 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

food banks. 

 

Also the Premier stated on November 16, ’89, “eliminating 

poverty is a priority for the New Democrat members of this 

legislature and will continue to be the priority of this New 

Democratic government.” 

 

Also the Minister of Education said on December 8, ’89, 

“constituents told me that they cannot take any more of these 

heavy tax and utility rate increases. Indeed they would like to 

see some of these increases rolled back.” In 1989 that was a 

statement that was made, and I haven’t seen anything rolled 

back except our cars in the highway holes. 

 

SaskEnergy rate increases since the NDP took power has been 

16.6 per cent. SaskTel line rate increases since the NDP took 

power is 15 per cent. SaskPower rate increases since the NDP 

took power is 9.1 per cent. 

 

We have a promise that said a New Democratic vision for the 

future, the election ’91, that the Premier and the New 

Democrats will improve benefits and services to seniors under 

the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. By June 1993, the 

Saskatchewan drug plan had already been eliminated. 

 

The Premier also said on January 6, 1994, since coming to 

office, this administration has done the job of turning this 

province’s finances and economy around. 

 

Well I’m not sure where they turned around to, but it hasn’t 

been to the point where people are fully employed. We haven’t 

seen hundreds of businesses started and lots of people having 

jobs. In fact the job numbers that have been coming out have 

indicated that we are one of the provinces with the lowest 

number of job opportunities in this country. 

 

The accumulated provincial deficit in 1991 was $7.738 billion 

and the accumulated provincial deficit in 1993 was $10.218 

billion. I don’t really think that’s turning this economy around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the people of this province elected us as 

opposition, they wanted to ensure that we would have the time 

and we would take the time to ensure that all the problems of 

this province were brought forth to the government and that we 

would represent their interests. And we are going to do that. We 

are going to make sure that every one of the promises that this 

government has made is brought forward to the Assembly, and 

the broken promises will be repeated until the government 

admits them. 

 

The Premier said on October 5, ’91 that the PST (provincial 

sales tax) is not going to be around after October 21, if we’re in 

power. In 1991, the provincial sales tax was 7 per cent. The 

provincial sales tax today is 9 per cent. 

 

We also heard from the Premier on October 5, 1991 that they 

would ease the tax burdens for ordinary families. The annual 

tax increases since 1991 for an average family of four in 

Saskatchewan is $2,300. That’s from the Association of 

Saskatchewan Taxpayers. 

 

Another one of the MLAs stated that the NDPs wouldn’t raise 

any personal taxes for four years. That statement was made on 

May 21, 1991. Saskatchewan income tax as a percentage of 

federal tax in 1991 was 50 per cent. Saskatchewan income tax 

as a percentage of federal tax in 1993 was 55 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, that is an increase. I’m sorry; I don’t know how that 

cannot be seen as an increase. 

 

I know when the government took over, they accused the Tories 

of having a larger debt than was seen, than was intended to be, 

but we still are seeing this government spending thousands of 

dollars and hundreds of thousands of dollars. That is not what 

the people of this province is asking them to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of hits to rural 

Saskatchewan that I think it’s important this government 

recognizes. Over the last year, the NDP government has made 

many choices, and all too often the rural programs, rural offices, 

and rural jobs are hit before their urban counterparts. 

 

The SaskPower offices were cut. We had 17 offices closed. Not 

only will jobs be lost, but safety and services for rural 

customers will be threatened. This is a letter from SaskPower 

on February 7, 1996. SaskPower rates . . . the NDP government 

went along with SaskPower’s proposal to raise farm power rates 

by 12 per cent. This included $4.95 for a reconstruction charge 

while non-farm residents only had to pay $2 for the same 

charge. I never could understand why it was thought that 

because they were farmers they should be paying something 

extra. I think that what our farmers have to offer to this 

province and to the viability of the province is something that’s 

always been underestimated by this government. 

 

The rural underground distribution program was cut this year. 

Gone is a program that provided rural areas with modern, 

buried cables that greatly improved farm safety and rural jobs. 

 

Also there was the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company) bus fares. The NDP government placed a 5 per cent 

increase on STC fares. These buses travel out to communities in 

rural Saskatchewan. Almost all of the 230 communities they 

serve are rural. This fare increase will hurt students and seniors 

who rely on bus services  the same seniors that have to use 

buses to get into the cities for their medical services. 

 

In 1994-95 the NDP government balanced the budget ahead of 

schedule by taking $188 million from the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program. While grabbing this $188 million 

for farmers, they also chose to leave at least $50 million in 

retained earnings sitting idle in the liquor board account. The 

government decided to break a 1995 election promise in which 

they said they would never send out bills for GRIP 

overpayments worth about $115 million. The Leader-Post said 

that on January 17, 1996, and Saskatchewan Debates and 

Proceedings on March 31, 1995. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the crop insurance cuts . . . the NDP 

government closed eight crop insurance offices in Wynyard, 

Wolseley, Wilkie, Kyle, Carnduff, Outlook, Melfort, and 

Canora. At least 154 people lost their jobs when these closures 

took place. The government sacrificed farm service and rural  

  



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1996 

jobs in order to save $5 million. Many more cuts are coming. 

This money could have been saved by cutting the CCTA 

(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) rather than cutting 

rural services. 

 

The government has suggested that amalgamating local 

governments would help. The minister in charge of Municipal 

Affairs had many discussions with the municipalities, with 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 

and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 

and I understand that this was taken off the government’s 

agenda for this time. And I think it’s one thing that we can 

thank this government for, and the fact that rural Saskatchewan 

is actually listened to. 

 

Rural people must pay more to get on to Internet. For the same 

basic services, rural users only get three hours of free time 

while urban or on-Net users get 20 free hours. For many hours, 

and beyond those given in basic packages, rural people must 

pay as much as twice as much per hour. 

 

And the highways . . . despite the already dismal state of 

highways, we’ll expect more cuts in the provincial budget. The 

Highways budget has already been trimmed $212 million in 

1991 to $177 million in 1995. Many highways are already in 

deplorable shape. A report in 1994 for the department suggested 

cutting as many as 22 maintenance crews, making our highways 

even more unsafe. Rural people depend on good road system 

for their safety as well as their economic well-being. Does this 

government plan on getting . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. It now being 5 o’clock, the House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2199 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2199 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2199 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2199 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2199 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2199 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2199 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2199 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2199 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2200 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2200 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2200 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  McPherson ..................................................................................................................................................................... 2207, 2212 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2207 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2209 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Scott Collegiate Remains Open 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2201 

 Third Annual Shorebirds and Friends Festival 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2201 

 Mine Safety Award 

  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2201 

 Community School Coordinator of the Year Award 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2201 

 Govan Ram Test Station 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2202 

 Swift Current Scholarship Winner 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2202 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Funding for Providence Place 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2202 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2202 

 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2203 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2203 

 Potential Sale of Porcupine Forest 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2204 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2204 

 Saskatchewan Bankruptcy Rate 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2204 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2204 

 Proclamation of Bill 93 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 

 Northern Saskatchewan Oil Exploration 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2206 

 Business Credit Checks 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2206 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2206 

 Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2207 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2207 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Request for Commission of Inquiry 



 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2207 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2208 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTIONS 

 Extended Hours 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2208 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2224 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2225 

 


