


















































June 6, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2235 
 June 6, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens in the province of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the closure of the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition are from Regina and Balgonie, 
primarily. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities the people that have signed the petition from, 
Mr. Speaker, are such places as Midale, Weyburn, Lang, 
Estevan, Qu’Appelle, Yellow Grass, and Alameda. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina; Lafleche; McCord, Saskatchewan; and other centres 
throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions from people throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Kelliher, Parkerview, Wynyard, and Foam 
Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again today on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many concerned 
and angry citizens in the constituency of Arm River, from the 
communities of Craik, Chamberlain, Bethune, Findlater, 
Aylesbury, and Holdfast. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Craven, Saskatchewan Beach, Earl Grey, 
Lumsden, Southey, Silton, as well as Pense and Morse in my 
constituency, and a number from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 
today to present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina, they’re from Lipton, they’re from Kelso, and 
they’re all from throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
  



2236  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan today in presenting 
a petition on trying to save the Plains Health Centre here in 
Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at these pages of petition, all of these 
people are from the Hazenmore area; I happen to know them 
all. And members will know full well where Hazenmore is. It is 
between the communities of Kincaid and Ponteix, the first two 
hospitals that that government closed the doors on. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reconsider closure 
of the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to urge the 
Department of Social Services to reconsider the reduction 
of parent education and support programs. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant:  Ms. Lorje presents the first report of the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations which is hereby 
tabled. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In presenting the first 
report of the Crown Corporations Committee to this legislature, 
I would like to thank all the members on the Crown 
Corporations Committee and those people who substituted, 
from time to time, for the regular members. I felt that the — to 
a person and all three parties — the members were extremely 
diligent in their deliberations and showed a great deal of 
cooperation so that we could bring the Crown Corporations’ 
reviews to a more timely basis. 
 
We will now, with the tabling and concurrence of this report, be 
up to date for all Crown Corporations up to 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  With the exception of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, the good news company. But we fully 
expect that we will be up to date with STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) as well, come this fall when the 
committee again sits. 
 
So again as I say, we did have a unanimous . . . we had a 
unanimous report today during our meeting, and I am very 
pleased to now move, seconded by the member from Regina  

Coronation Park: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you and to all 
colleagues in the Assembly, a group of grade 11 students who 
hold a very special place in my heart. These grade 11 students 
come from my home community of Invermay, specifically the 
Invermay School. And a number of them I have had the 
pleasure of helping to coach and helping to teach. One of the 
students is also a pretty special person to me, it is my son 
Bryce. I’d like to also introduce him specially. 
 
And of course one of the people that is with that group is a 
teacher who I know is probably the best teacher in 
Saskatchewan  my wife Gail. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  She paid me a lot to say that. I’d also like to 
introduce the bus driver from Canora, Cathy Thomas. And I’d 
like to make welcome all the students and Gail and Cathy to 
Regina and to the legislature, and I hope that you enjoy your 
day very, very much. I’ll meet you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure through you to introduce to the rest of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly today, 36 students seated 
in your gallery, grade 10 students from the Wynyard Composite 
High School in Wynyard, Saskatchewan. They’ve been in and 
had a tour of the building already, and I look forward to 
meeting with them later and sharing some discussion with them. 
 
They have with them their teachers, Nick Jordan and Morris 
Sokul, and their chaperon, Alan Brooks. I hope they enjoy their 
visit in Regina and don’t miss the school too much this day off. 
I realize that you would sooner be back in school but bear with 
us, and hopefully the members will behave themselves in 
question period today and they can take some good remarks 
back from the Legislative Assembly. So I ask all members to 
please join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You probably 
noticed when you entered today that there is a fine looking 
group of grade 4 students seated in the west gallery. This group 
of 27 grade 4 students are from Deshaye School which is in my 
riding. They are accompanied today by their teacher, Gwen 
Falconer, and I look very forward to meeting with them later. 
So if you join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, a group of 21 grade 6 students from 
the fine town of Watson, Saskatchewan. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Bernice Gerspacher, chaperons Lorna Strunk, 
Margaret Mierke, and Jan Le Gars. I will be meeting with them 
later to answer questions and have some refreshments with 
them. I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome our 
guests here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, some 
very special guests seated in your gallery. Our constituency 
assistants are in the legislature today for a training session 
which your office is very generously providing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the assistants are as follows: Jean Ball is the 
assistant for the member for Cannington; Tina Durbin is the 
assistant for the member for Moosomin; Cheryl Friday, the 
assistant for the member for Cypress Hills; Whitney Friesen, 
the assistant for the member from Rosthern; and certainly last 
but not least, my own constituency assistant, Susan Maedal. 
And I would ask all members of the legislature to please 
welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to join with the member from Watrous welcoming 
the group from Watson. They’re not in my constituency but I 
know a lot of them and I’m really glad to see them. Have a 
good time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Swift 
Current Collegiate Institute or SCCI has produced some pretty 
extraordinary and talented people, and one of them is my very 
special guest here in the legislature. This person went to school 
with Lynda Ham and Eric Malling. Those two left their home 
town and went on to fame and acclaim in either politics or the 
media. 
 
Mr. Ken Baba did probably what is the more difficult thing. He 
stayed home in Swift Current and I do not believe that it’s 
difficult to live in Swift Current but his chosen profession was a 
dentist, and so it was probably much more difficult for him to 
be a dentist in Swift Current. But it did allow him the 
opportunity to drill home, if you will forgive the pun, to drill 
home his theory that civic duty is extremely important and very 
worthwhile for all people. 
 
He is a dedicated civic volunteer, a truly wonderful person, Mr. 
Speaker. And his wife Lillian and Ken Baba join us here in the 
legislature today while they are staying in Regina for a short 
while. I would ask all members of the House to welcome him. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
such a pleasure for me to join with my colleague from 
Saskatoon Southeast in welcoming Dr. Baba and his wife 
Lillian. They really do exemplify what good citizens of 
Saskatchewan are. And I think because of their activities, 
they’ve made Swift Current the very special place it is. 
 
Dr. Baba I think has been a dentist for probably 25 or more 
years. I always knew him much better as Carol’s big brother, 
and Carol was my very special friend. 
 
I am very, very pleased to have everyone acknowledge them, 
the work that he’s done as an active member of Kinsmen, the 
advocate he’s been for the local dental association, and the 
community events in which they’ve both participated that really 
do enhance our province and benefit the people of Swift 
Current. 
 
Please join with me as well in welcoming Dr. Baba and Lillian. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Training for Excellence Awards Luncheon 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday my 
colleagues the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and the 
member from Regina South and I, attended the 1996 Training 
for Excellence Awards luncheon presented by the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board. 
 
These awards recognize achievement in developing training 
programs and services to meet the needs of individuals and 
industry. In today’s economy it is essential for training 
programs to prepare people for real jobs. 
 
The philosophy behind these awards and behind this 
government’s training strategy is to build partnerships between 
business, labour, and educators, so that students will get 
training that is relevant, and employers will get employees with 
the right skills for the job. 
 
I found it particularly exciting because Buffalo Plains School 
Division, where I once taught, received an educational 
partnership award for its youth internship program with its 
partners, Bennett Dunlop Ford, and Brandt Industries. The 
program integrates workplace-based training with the needs of 
the business partners and will result in full-time employment 
opportunities for participating students. 
 
Other Training for Excellence Award winners were the Bank of 
Montreal for its career development program; the Regina Public 
Library for basic skill development; and SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology ) for its promotion 
of equity participation. 
 
I congratulate all the award winners. I’m confident that these 
excellent training programs will bring excellent results for  
  



2238  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

individuals and for industry. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Flooding in the Fishing Lake Vicinity 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to commend all the people living near Fishing Lake 
who are trying to cope with extremely high water levels this 
spring. 
 
Resort owners of Saskin Beach, Buckhorn Bay, Leslie Beach, 
Ottman Beach, and all the cottage owners at Fishing Lake, are 
seeing the lake at its highest water level since 1964. 
 
The high water level is damaging cottages and several roads 
into the Fishing Lake area. But people in the communities are 
working together to try and salvage some of the busy vacation 
season. They are rebuilding boat launches, building extensive 
sandbag dikes, and setting up new campsites. 
 
I hope that officials with Sask Water continue to carefully 
monitor the situation and try to assist the dozens of cottage 
owners who are facing disastrous loss of property. These people 
must be regularly informed and fully consulted about different 
ways to deal with this serious problem. These are trying times 
for these people, and I wish them well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan Certification Dinner 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Deputy Premier 
introduced to the Assembly, Mr. Ray Davis, executive director 
of the Association of Tourism Professionals, who is here to 
attend the certification recognition dinner ’96, hosted by 
Tourism Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Tourism 
Education Council. 
 
A similar dinner was held the night before in Saskatoon. I was 
pleased to attend the Regina ceremony, and I was especially 
pleased to see the pride with which the tourism professionals 
received their certificates. The certificates say that these 
individuals have successfully completed training which enables 
them to perform their duties according to national standards set 
by the tourism industry. 
 
We know the value of tourism to our economy and to 
employment. What is not emphasized enough is the importance 
to this industry of the front-line people, the people who cater to 
our visitors’ needs and make sure that their stay is comfortable 
and enjoyable. If it is, they will come back. And that is the 
significance of this certification. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I must point out that our member from 
Elphinstone, the minister responsible for tourism, was called the 
best tourism minister in 30 years by Jim Kilkenny, the master of 
ceremonies and former chairman of the board of STEC 
(Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council). Mr. Speaker, a 
tribute to our minister as well as a tribute to our expanding and 
creative tourism industry, and a tribute to a  

successful training program  a truly Saskatchewan success 
story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Beauval Day Care Centre 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take time 
to congratulate the people in the northern community of 
Beauval who are in the process of opening their first permanent 
day care centre. Right now construction is under way at the 
future day care site, but in the meantime the day care has been 
running since January at a temporary location. 
 
There has been a tremendous need for day care services in 
Beauval for years, so it’s great to see this development of the 
day care. The community has embarked on an ambitious 
fund-raising project for the day care and has so far raised about 
$20,000. 
 
I’d like to commend all the people in Beauval and surrounding 
area who are donating their time and money to help this new 
day care open its doors. I’d also like to especially thank 
Dorothy Alcrow, who has spearheaded this project. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the distinct pleasure of joining Ms. Alcrow in her 
graduation ceremonies yesterday as she received her local 
government administration certificate at the University of 
Regina. 
 
It’s terrific to see what can be achieved through the vision and 
cooperative efforts of a community. The families of Beauval 
and area will greatly benefit from this new service. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Race Relations Committee 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, when I was on Saskatoon City 
Council I was very proud to take part in founding a city race 
relations committee. Since its inception this committee has been 
very effective and beneficial. 
 
I was proud when the committee was founded and I am very 
pleased today to tell the Assembly that the city of Saskatoon has 
just been nationally recognized for its race relations work. 
 
At its meeting this week in Calgary, the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities announced that Saskatoon is the first city to be 
given the award for its, quote: “exemplary work in promoting 
harmony.” 
 
Federation president, John Les, presented the award and pointed 
out that the race relations committee is but one significant step. 
Saskatoon also operates an active cross-cultural training 
program for its employees, and it promotes an intense public 
awareness campaign. 
 
Most importantly, I think, the city works very hard to build 
partnerships with significant cultural and racial groups, 
including the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations), the Metis Nation, the Saskatchewan Inter-cultural  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

Association, and the Saskatoon Open Door Society. 
 
The point to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, is that this recognition in 
fact does not go to a faceless corporate entity called the city. 
Rather it goes to the many individuals in government and 
throughout the community who know that racial harmony is 
something that you work hard to achieve. And it’s well worth it. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Family Fishing Weekend 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to take this opportunity to acknowledge Family Fishing 
Weekend which is coming up this weekend of June 8 and 9. 
During the weekend Saskatchewan residents and visitors will be 
allowed to fish throughout the province without a licence. 
 
This weekend has become something of a tradition in this 
province, and I think it’s a wonderful opportunity for 
Saskatchewan families to enjoy one of this province’s great 
outdoor experiences. 
 
In honour of this event, I would like to extend a special 
invitation to the Deputy Premier to come down to the south-east 
this weekend and enjoy the new fishing opportunities in the 
Rafferty and Alameda reservoirs. Environment and Resource 
Management has recently stocked the Rafferty reservoir with 
five million walleye  five million is a lot of fish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for those who don’t like to fish perhaps they could swim; 
and this would provide an opportunity for the Deputy Premier 
to fulfil his promise to walk across the Rafferty reservoir. 
 
It might be interesting to note that neither the fish nor the ducks 
are drowning in these reservoirs. 
 
Everyone, including the NDP (New Democratic Party), will 
have to agree that these opportunities are a tremendous 
testament to the success of the Rafferty and Alameda dam 
projects. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Land Donation 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Because this is Environment Week, I thought it was 
important that I comment on the spirit and generosity prevalent 
in my constituency that is leading towards a better environment. 
 
Prince Albert is a community that exemplifies the 
Saskatchewan way  the way of caring, compassion, and 
cooperation. Recently that was demonstrated by the generous 
donation of the north-west quarter of 31-44-21 west of the third 
meridian to the fish and wildlife development fund by my 
constituent, Bill Hyshka. 
 

Bill’s donation will be maintained as wildlife habitat in 
accordance with his wishes. A plaque will be acknowledging 
the donation and it will be mounted on a cairn erected on the 
site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Bill’s actions are very 
commendable, shows his appreciation for nature, and will make 
a notable contribution to the preservation of natural resources in 
the province. 
 
I know the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management, as well as other members of the Assembly, will 
appreciate the importance of maintaining and enhancing our 
wildlife habitat. As the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for the region, I want to say it’s a great pleasure to 
commend his donation and ask that all members join me when 
thanking Mr. Hyshka for his generosity and his commitment to 
the natural resources of our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Geriatric Assessment Rehabilitation Unit 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night about 
450 residents gathered to express their opposition to this 
government’s decision to break a written commitment to fund 
the geriatric unit in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, the residents of 
the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek district voluntarily agreed to 
rationalize services and cut at least one acute care hospital 
before government even began demanding cuts. They did so on 
the expectation that they’d get secure funding for 
wellness-orientated programing like the geriatric assessment 
and rehabilitation. 
 
What they received in return, however, is a chain of broken 
promises from government. Those broken commitments now 
threaten acute care services that people in the community 
already reduced on their own, and that, Mr. Speaker, is unfair. 
 
On Friday, it’s my understanding that the Minister of Health is 
visiting Moose Jaw for a mental health convention. It’s my 
sincere hope that he’ll find time in his day to visit Providence 
Place and the union hospital to see firsthand the damage his cuts 
are wreaking on health care in this community. 
 
Before concluding, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to send the 
minister over another 100 letters from residents concerned 
about the fate of the geriatric unit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education indicated to the media 
yesterday that many Canadians like to make anonymous 
donations to political parties, implying that it is appropriate that 
they be allowed to do so. He also did not understand our 
questions about the fund-raising methods of the Conservative,  
  



2240  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

New Democratic parties of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 10, 1978, our Premier, who was then 
attorney general, introduced amendments to The Election Act. 
He stated at that time and I quote: 
 

. . . all contributions to and payments on behalf of political 
parties and candidates must be handled through registered 
agents or the business manager. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is a clear exposition of the requirement of The 
Election Act by the man who is today our Premier. 
 
Will the minister explain to the House in detail why it is that 
many thousands of dollars of contributions to the New 
Democratic Party have not been handled through the registered 
agent of the party or the business manager of any candidate, but 
somehow has been funnelled or laundered through an 
organization known as Tommy Douglas House Inc. so as to 
protect these contributors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, we have examined this 
question at some length and we are satisfied that the 
requirements of The Election Act were fully complied with. 
That is the fact of the matter and it is so. We have been 
wrestling in Canada with this question of the obligation of 
political parties to disclose contributions for decades, even for 
generations. And we have arrived in this country at a certain 
consensus, reflected by the laws of the provinces and the federal 
government, as to what has to be disclosed. And we have 
disclosed all of that. 
 
So that seems to me to be in perfect compliance with statements 
by everybody in this House since the Act was amended in the 
1970s, and has been reflected in election returns ever since. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, then I guess we require a little bit 
of clarification, because yesterday’s Leader-Post and 
Star-Phoenix carried a story under the byline of Dale Eisler 
stating that in the past five years the Saskatchewan New 
Democratic Party has transferred $380,000 from Tommy 
Douglas House Inc. to its own party accounts. It indicates that a 
further $270,000 of political contributions remain in the hands 
of that non-profit corporation. This news item also states that 
the NDP provincial president and the NDP provincial secretary 
refuse to reveal the names of the donors of those monies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Election Act clearly requires that all 
contributions for the use of a political party be made to the 
registered agent of that party. It also requires that in the case of 
donations made through an agent, identification of the donors 
be made or the funds turned over to the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of those facts and those legislative 
requirements, will the minister explain to this House how the 
NDP has been able to take advantage of anonymous political 
contributions in the manner described and still refuse to identify  

the donors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member gets the idea that we’re dealing here with anonymous 
donations. We’re dealing here with . . . We have reported all of 
the things that are required by the law to be reported. There is 
no obligation on other incorporated organizations like Tommy 
Douglas House to be publishing their activities in any way, 
shape, or form, except as required by The Election Act. And my 
point is simply that we’ve complied with that. 
 
But while we’re on that subject, I have been inviting the hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, for the last 
two days to meet with me and discuss how we can improve the 
election law of Canada . . . or this province, how we can 
improve the election law of this province in order to accomplish 
the things that he apparently thinks should be accomplished. 
And he’s been a moving target. To date I haven’t been able to 
get a meeting with him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, there is an 
Election Act in place, and there is a law in place. And it seems 
to me that there’s somewhat of an analogy here, that in fact it’s 
not unlikely the speeding laws. . . there’s a 100 kilometre per 
hour speed limit. But it’s okay to go ahead and go beyond that 
until you get caught. And once you get caught, you suffer the 
consequences of the action, and you pay for that. You answer to 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears that the New Democratic Party places 
itself in the same position and the same shaky legal footing as 
the new Conservative Party of Saskatchewan when it comes to 
hiding shady and secret political contributions. 
 
Will the minister admit that in fact there has been a 
contravention of this, The Election Act, by the New Democratic 
Party of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  If the member hasn’t understood my 
answer so far, let me repeat it. We are satisfied that we have 
complied with the election law of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have, since the day before yesterday, been trying to arrange a 
meeting with that member and that caucus in order to discuss 
how we can deal with this question of what is in The Election 
Act, if they think there should be more in there. If they think 
there should be more in there, we’re happy to consider that. 
We’ve already met with the third party on that very subject, 
who have been responsive to our request for a meeting. 
 
I got a letter this morning, Mr. Speaker, I got a letter this 
morning in which the Leader of the Opposition says that there is 
no member of the official opposition caucus able to attend a 
meeting with me and that at this time with the House business 
at a standstill, due to the extended hours motion, it would seem  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

that a meeting probably couldn’t be held now but could be held 
sometime in the future. 
 
Now my friends opposite like to table documents. I’m going to 
table some documents. I’m going to table the exchange of 
correspondence that I’ve had with the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not a matter of 
dealing with things that need to be changed. It’s a matter of 
dealing with things that have been in place and answering to 
any of those contraventions of the Act that is in place right now. 
 
On May 10, 1978, our Premier, who then served as attorney 
general, spoke in this House on amendments to The Election 
Act. He stated, and I quote: 
 

I would remind members that . . . election expense controls 
don’t work unless all of us politicians want them to work 
and make them work. If we approach this bill with the 
mechanism of circumventing it, then the entire process is 
defeated. I know that every member will view it as his or 
her responsibility to make sure that this bill is complied 
with, both with respect to its precise precisions and its 
spirit and make sure that the high level of confidence that I 
think the electorate generally has in members of this 
House, is maintained. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is the conduct of the New Democratic Party today 
and the attitude of the minister in keeping with the statements 
made then by the Premier? Or do they now approach this 
legislation, in those words of yesterday, “with the mechanism of 
circumventing it.” 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I want to deal calmly and 
directly with the points raised by the member. I appreciate the 
comments that the member has dredged up from the 1970s, and 
I want to tell you that the law was passed in the 1970s, and was 
made to reflect the views of this House at that time as to what 
should be reported. I repeat again, those matters have been 
reported. 
 
Now the member says what he says, Mr. Speaker, with a very 
high degree of sanctimony. And let me say this to the Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, through you. If we have not 
complied with the law, then neither has he. Neither has the 
Liberal Party. If the obligations under The Election Act are as 
he suggests that they should be, he hasn’t been complying with 
them either. 
 
I say, let’s spell out clearly in the Act what those requirements 
should be. Let’s get together and discuss this matter and pool 
our views and see if we can arrive at a conclusion. Accept my 
invitation to have a meeting. Lets get on with the discussion of 
this thing. Let’s treat it as an important issue of public policy 
that requires discussion and debate, and let’s do something 
concrete. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Funding for Providence Place 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Last night hundreds of concerned Moose 
Jaw residents met to discuss this government’s failure to keep 
its promise of funding for the now threatened geriatric unit at 
Providence Place. This government has callously tried to paint 
the funding shortage for the geriatric unit in this House as a 
dispute between the Providence Place board and the district 
health board. 
 
A number of speakers at the meeting made it painfully clear that 
the boards have no dispute with each other. Instead they and the 
community simply disagree with this government’s decision to 
renege on a signed commitment to fund the unit. In fact one of 
the persons there said this government will be dealt with at the 
ballot box. 
 
Will the minister admit in this House today that his government 
is responsible for this funding shortage, and apologize for his 
cowardly attempts to pit people in this community against each 
other. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I know the hon. member will 
want to use parliamentary language as befitting of the House, 
and in his description of the minister I believe he’s crossed that 
line. I’ll simply ask him to withdraw the parliamentary remark 
and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  I apologize for the unparliamentary language, 
and I withdraw those . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said to 
the member before, as recently as yesterday, and I repeat again 
today, I believe that the way to resolve this issue is for the 
parties to come to the table, and I believe that people of good 
faith talking to each other in a reasonable way can resolve this 
issue. And I think all parties concerned want to have the issue 
resolved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that the board of Providence Place and the board of 
the health district in Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek and 
representatives of the Department of Health will be 
commencing a meeting tomorrow in Moose Jaw. And it’s my 
sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, that they will be able to have fruitful 
discussions, and that if they proceed in good faith  as I’m 
sure they will  that they will make some progress toward 
resolving this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, at last night’s meeting, the 
former Chair of the district board, a man this government 
appointed, took issue with the minister’s statements. Dr. Don 
MacDonald stated that if funding for the geriatric unit has to 
come out of the district budget, which is shrinking yearly thanks 
to the NDP’s funding formula, acute care in the district will fall 
to dangerously low levels. 
 
He stated there’s no more room to cut, as the number of beds 
have already fallen from over 200 to just over 100. If cuts have  
  



2242  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

to be made, Dr. MacDonald believes Moose Jaw will lose its 
intensive care unit. As a result, Moose Jaw’s acute care hospital 
would become little more than another community wellness 
centre. Patients in need of serious care would simply have to go 
to already-crowded Regina hospitals. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you breaking your promise on separate 
funding for the geriatric unit just so you can try and force the 
district to close yet another acute care hospital in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that both the district 
health board and the board of Providence Place are committed 
to coming up with an appropriate geriatric assessment and 
rehabilitation unit at Providence Place. 
 
As I’ve said to the member, I believe the best way to resolve 
this dispute is for the parties to come to the table to negotiate in 
good faith and in a reasonable way. The parties are meeting 
tomorrow and I have every confidence they will come to the 
table in good faith. I have every confidence that in due course a 
resolution will be achieved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Regulations 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Economic 
Development. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your 1995 election platform you set a goal of 
reviewing 10 per cent of all government regulations in each of 
the next 10 years, and eliminating 25 per cent of all government 
relations . . . regulations as part of that review. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s nearly been one full year since the election. 
Could you provide us with a list of the 10 per cent of 
regulations that have been reviewed, and the 25 per cent of 
those regulations that have been eliminated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to say to the 
member opposite that, on occasion the Minister of Energy and 
Mines has an opportunity to speak to the oil industry here in 
Saskatchewan and in Calgary. And they continually talk about 
the improvement in regulatory operation in this province that 
actually gives us an advantage over our province to the west, of 
Alberta, because the regulatory structures here in the province 
of Saskatchewan are simpler and more efficient and user 
friendly than they are in Alberta. 
 
This is true as well in the area of ag biotech. When we travel to 
Berlin, Germany and deal with AgrEvo and other biotech 
companies, they are impressed, both with the Canadian 
regulatory structures and the Saskatchewan regulatory 
structures. 
 
Now that’s not to say there isn’t improvement that can and  

should be made. And to that end, Ms. Lynn Minja heads up a 
group that is reviewing the very issue you talk about, and there 
will be a report forthcoming in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again this government is more talk than action. The truth is you 
have no real commitment to eliminating the bureaucracy and 
red tape that is strangling business and stifling job creation in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, our Bill, An Act respecting Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan, will reduce the over-regulation and red-tape 
burden on small business, allow for public input, as well as 
write any new regulations in plain language. 
 
Manitoba recently enacted a similar process, and in six months 
they reviewed 560 regulations and streamlined or eliminated 
133 of them. The end result was the elimination of 3,000 pages 
of regulations, including over a thousand pages of government 
forms. 
 
Mr. Minister, the business community in this province needs a 
similar process, and you promised it to them. Mr. Minister, I’ll 
be introducing the regulatory reform Bill immediately after 
question period. Will you honour your election promise and 
support our Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I can understand why the member 
opposite is so concerned about regulation given the fact that we 
had nine years of Conservative government under Premier 
Grant Devine, at which time the regulatory structure was 
complicated significantly. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that we are reviewing in 
fact the regulatory structures in a very, very thorough and 
important way. 
 
And I say to him again that, while the regulatory structures that 
affect many industries in our province are adequate and better 
than other provinces or other jurisdictions, we intend to 
continue that review. And if the member opposite has ideas and 
he has ideas in the Bill or some proposal, we’d be interested in 
looking at those proposals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Union Certification Process 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Labour or his designate. 
And continuing along the lines of government red tape and the 
hindering of business, it seems that there are some more 
examples. 
 
Employees, Mr. Speaker, at the Peak Manufacturing in North 
Battleford were asked recently if they wanted to become a 
unionized business. Now we have been informed that 131 out  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

of the 175 workers, or almost 75 per cent of the employees, did 
not sign the union cards because they didn’t want to join the 
union. 
 
Unfortunately, because of the pro-labour legislation you, Mr. 
Minister, brought in, it only takes 25 per cent of employees to 
unionize a business. So the opinions of almost 75 per cent of 
Peak Manufacturing’s employees are now being ignored. Of 
course the Labour Relations Board was speedy in this case and 
has rammed the unionization through in just a few short weeks. 
 
Now since when is 25 per cent a majority? Mr. Minister, how 
can you possibly justify 94.9 per cent of Peak employees now 
making the decisions . . . and having their decisions made by 
25.1 per cent of the employees? Do you honestly think, Mr. 
Minister, that this is fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I won’t 
attempt in the space of the time allotted to explain to the 
member opposite the rules under which the Labour Relations 
Board functions, even if he were an earnest student. Let me just 
say that the rules under which the Labour Relations Board 
operates are the rules under which every labour relations board 
operates in North America. That is, if a majority  if a 
majority  of the employees want to form a union, they may 
do so. That’s the rules, and I assume that those are the rules 
which apply. 
 
This matter, Mr. Speaker, is determined by a judicial body. The 
Labour Relations Board is a judicial body. I suggest to the 
members opposite: you leave it with Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental for the same minister, probably, because, Mr. 
Speaker, this minister was in charge of Labour at the time that 
these regulations were basically brought into effect, so he does 
know better. 
 
The owner of Peak Manufacturing says that your labour laws 
and regulations are the biggest deterrent to business in 
Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Minister, I couldn’t agree more. How 
can you claim to want to promote job creation and help small 
business while you are tying the hands of the people with unfair 
and unnecessary labour laws? Would you do the right thing and 
amend The Trade Union Act so that the majority of employees 
are listened to, that the majority will rule? 
 
Will you amend it so that it takes 50 per cent plus l in order to 
 by a secret ballot  in order for a decision like this to be 
made, rather than your government’s ridiculous 25 per cent of 
the employees, as it is now? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member opposite to continues to 
misstate the rules with respect to forming a union. If a majority 
of the employees of a free and fair vote determine they want to 
have a union, they may do so. But it takes a majority. 
 

I say to members opposite: we have no intention of bringing in 
any legislation at this session having to do with The Trade 
Union Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the minister in charge of Liquor and 
Gaming Commission. 
 
Will the minister, the member from Yorkton, explain if he has 
any knowledge of any monies received by his New Democrat 
constituency association by way of a gift, contribution, loan 
advance, deposit, or otherwise? 
 
And if so, will the member explain, to his knowledge, if any of 
these monies have been paid or transferred to a duly-elected 
business agent or the registered agent of the New Democrat 
Party? Or have any of these monies been paid to or shared with 
the business agents of other New Democrat candidates? Or has 
a business agent or constituency association received any 
monies from another New Democrat constituency association? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now the hon. member knows that in 
order . . . in question period, questions must be directed to 
ministers regarding their portfolio. Order. As I’ve listened to the 
question, I have failed to recognize the connection to a 
responsibility for a portfolio  order  and I will ask . . . give 
the hon. member for Wood River an opportunity to just make 
that connection to portfolio responsibilities, otherwise I’ll have 
to rule the question out of order. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Then, Mr. Speaker, I will put that identical 
question to the minister in charge of The Election Act, the 
Post-Secondary Education minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
have to wait for the transcript. I haven’t got the faintest idea of 
what the member was talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
member that refused to answer that question will get that in a 
written form. 
 
I’ll go on with another one. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education has proposed Bill 92 this session  
without amendment. It offers no change to the section of the 
Act that clearly demands political donor disclosure in law and 
intent. The minister believes that the practice of anonymous 
donations should be allowed to continue. 
 
Will the minister tell this House if his government is in favour 
of disclosure of political donations  yes or no? And if not, is 
this another case of passing legislation, signing contracts, and 
then deciding to double-cross that bridge when you come to it? 
  



2244  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I’m dumbfounded by the 
question. I have been trying to have . . . I’ve been trying for the 
last two days to have a meeting with anybody from that caucus 
on this very subject of how we could address the question of 
contributions . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now as all members of the House will 
recognize, the minister is not seated very distant from the Chair 
and I’m having difficulty being able to hear the minister  
order. I will ask for the cooperation of all members of the 
House to allow the minister to be heard in his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll speak 
more loudly. I’ve been trying to have that meeting for the last 
two days. I want to have that meeting today. I’ll have it right 
after question period today, and we can get into the question of 
what ought to be in this Election Act. 
 
I mean we have lived with these provisions since the early 
1970s. They are very similar to provisions in other provinces. 
We think we’re in compliance with them. If we’re not, then 
you’re not either. But let’s get together and reform the law so 
that we can try and bring it into some kind of shape so that 
you’ll agree and we will agree and the third party will agree that 
we’ve got an appropriate elections law in place in this province. 
Let’s meet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister in charge of Post-Secondary Education stated 
yesterday, and I quote, “We need to think long and hard before 
wiping out the process by which people can make political 
donations without revealing their identity.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 207 of The Election Act states that all 
monies  not some monies  provided by a person for the use 
of a registered political party shall be paid to the registered 
agent of that party. 
 
Can the minister explain by what process he and the New 
Democrat Party enable their supporters to make donations and 
remain anonymous? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  As I said previously, and I’ll say again, 
we think we’re in compliance with that section of the law. The 
question of the obligation of political parties to report all 
donations, wherever from, is a matter that has been debated in 
this country, as I said earlier, for generations, for decades and 
decades. And we have made some progress along that line. The 
member shakes his head. We have. 
 
The laws are fairly uniform in this regard right across Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. If it is time for us to move those laws to another 
level, let’s get together and talk about it. But so far as we’re 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, we’re in compliance with the law. If 
we’re not, they’re not. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Hon. members will come to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 119  An Act respecting  
Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill respecting Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Questionable Use of Private Trust Funds 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day, I rise pursuant to rule 19 to speak on my written request 
that I made to your Clerk this morning seeking a priority debate 
motion. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a couple of things 
very briefly in the House before I receive your decision on my 
request. 
 
Firstly, the integrity of our whole political system has been 
shaken by the recent revelations of private trust funds being 
used to finance campaigns, and an unregistered, non-profit 
corporation being used to finance political campaigns for New 
Democrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people continue to lose faith in the political 
system. We hear of millions of dollars of quiet donations being 
channelled through these funds and corporations to finance 
election campaigns, and we have no way of knowing who gave 
the money. That is outrageous. 
 
Further, the directors of these organizations state publicly that 
they have no remorse for their actions. They have no regrets and 
they won’t tell us who gave the money to finance the Tory and 
New Democrat campaigns. And we wonder why so many of our 
young people have little respect for the law. 
 
Now we have . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The members will come 
to order. 
 
The Hon. Leader of the Opposition has given notice to all 
members of the House that he wishes to move a motion under 
rule 19. And in doing so, he has the privilege of advising the 
House as to why he considers it to be important to consider this 
as a matter of priority of debate. 
 
And I would ask all members of the House to extend to the 
Leader of the Opposition the opportunity to be heard, to explain 
to the House his reasons for why he feels it deserves to be 
considered as a matter of priority of debate  order, order  
so that the matter can be properly dealt with. 
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now we have a 
Premier of this province, and his House Leader, moving to 
extend the hours of this House so they can shut down debate on 
urgent and pressing matters like the illegal raising of funds for 
political parties, through the use of secret funds, secret trust 
funds, and unregistered corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who have engaged in this illegal 
activity, under The Election Act, are saying they don’t care. 
Well we do care, Mr. Speaker. We want to debate our 
resolution. We want to have that debate here in the Assembly 
today, before the current legislative session is shut down by the 
actions of the Premier and this House Leader. 
 
There may not be any chance to put this question before the 
House any other way in the reasonably near future, so it is truly 
a priority debate motion. Mr. Speaker, I await your ruling. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Earlier today, the Leader of the 
Opposition provided a notice for priority of debate to the Office 
of the Clerk, as is required under rule 19(2). The notice was 
accordingly distributed pursuant to the notification provision of 
the rule. 
 
Members will be aware that it is the Speaker’s responsibility 
under rule 19(5) to determine whether the matter is proper to be 
discussed, and whether the matter should receive urgent 
consideration over other business presently on the order paper. 
Having reviewed the member’s case, I am now prepared to rule 
on the matter. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has made a sufficient case to 
suggest that the matter is of public importance. The question 
then remains whether the matter is sufficiently urgent for the 
Assembly to set aside all other business to discuss this matter 
now. 
 
Under rule 19(5), the Speaker is required to give “regard to the 
probability of the matter being brought before the House within 
reasonable time by other means.” This leaves the Speaker’s 
decision hinged on whether any other ordinary parliamentary 
opportunity remains available to raise this matter in the 
foreseeable future. 
 
The Speaker finds the argument that the existence of a 
government motion to extend the sitting hours of the Assembly 
will impede the ability of the Leader of the Opposition to put 
his motion on the order paper by regular means, is not well 
taken. Nor is it evident to the Speaker that the government 
motion will dictate when the session shall conclude. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition chooses to give notice of motion 
tomorrow, there is no reason to believe the matter could not be 
debated on the next private members’ day. It is the opposition’s 
turn to determine the subject of the first private member’s 
motion during the next private members’ day, which is on 
Tuesday of next week, three sitting days from today. 
 
For this reason it is the Speaker’s decision to deny the request 
for a priority of debate. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. members will 
recognize that the hon. member from Kelvington-Wadena has 
just been recognized to enter into debate, and the Speaker is 
unable to hear her first words when she enters into debate 
because of shouting across the floor from both sides of the 
House. Now I will ask all members of the House to extend to 
the member the courtesy which she is entitled to as a member of 
this House. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted 
to continue my remarks regarding this motion. Yesterday I 
talked to the Assembly about some of the important matters that 
were of concern to my constituents, those being the health and 
education in our area. And I think it’s important that I continue 
talking about these areas of concern, that being the economy 
and my important critic area of economic development. 
 
I think that the fact that the Minister of Economic Development 
is indeed very optimistic, which I would like to be as well, but 
as a result of my contact with a number of employers in our 
area and across the province, I think it’s very important that I 
bring to the attention, to this Assembly, some of the concerns 
that people have. 
 
In question period and through other means it’s sometimes 
difficult to make sure that the government realizes that there are 
concerns and there’s not just playing politics when we get up to 
speak. I’d like to give some information to the Assembly and 
this motion allows me to do that because I’m able to let them 
know as opposition members we do have some interests that are 
important to constituents. 
 
We actually did a business survey ourselves and asked one of 
the really important questions about the problems facing 
businesses in this province. The first indication we had, and the 
biggest problem that most businesses face in this problem, is 
government interference. I concur with the members of the third 
party that there is indeed over-regulation, and the concerns that 
businesses have when it comes to their day-to-day operations, 
when it comes to dealing with the extra paperwork that is put 
before us in running our business. 
 
(1430) 
 
Maybe in larger companies where they can afford to have a lot 
of staff running around shuffling papers that it appears 
government needs to have to make sure that we are considered a 
viable part of the economy, maybe other companies can afford 
it, but small companies can’t afford it. And basically a  
  



2246  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

lot of the larger ones are finding problems too with the 
increasing number of regulations that we’re finding. 
 
We’re actually very worried about the occupational health and 
safety standard regulations that are being threatened in this 
province. I’m getting calls every day from employers who are 
concerned with these regulations. I’m afraid that because these 
regulations were passed last year, but they haven’t been 
implemented, there’s a fear out there that they can be put in at 
any time. And they will again cause a lot of concerns for 
employers in our province. 
 
Another one of the concerns that was indicated to me was the 
lack of consumer confidence. Now that may be something that 
the government feels they can’t deal with. But it seems to me 
that a lot of confidence has to come from the feelings that we 
get, the signals we get, every day from the media and from 
government, trying to assure us that things are going well, when 
in our everyday life we understand that there are concerns out 
there and we know that they’re not always going well. 
 
Anybody who doubts that should go to coffee row in any small 
town in Saskatchewan and you’d know what the real feelings 
were out in this province. 
 
There’s been an increase in the employee benefits. And by that I 
mean things like workmen’s compensation. That’s one concern 
that every employer in this province has. I know that there was 
a band-aid solution offered last year when we asked for an 
inquiry into it, and it actually gave people a little bit of 
breathing space, but the worry is still there. The problem hasn’t 
disappeared; it’s still on the back burner. And I think as an 
employer, everybody is very worried about this, and I’m hoping 
that the government understands the importance of these 
concerns. 
 
They keep saying numbers like 3 or 4 per cent increase isn’t 
going to make a difference. I don’t know if government realizes 
that small businesses work on a very small bottom line, and any 
time you take a sum right out of the bottom line, that percentage 
is gone. It’s not like we’re taking it from our gross profits; it’s 
out of the very bottom line. And we can’t afford to continue to 
do that. 
 
The job stability concerns is another one that employees and 
employers have as well. I think that this government, through a 
lot of the regulations and rules that they have at this time, seem 
to believe that employers are out there thinking that we don’t 
have the basic concerns of our employees at hand. And that’s 
not true. 
 
I don’t know of any employer who isn’t concerned about their 
employee. Every day that we have to work with our employees, 
we want to. The only way that we can make some money is to 
have the very best productivity from everyone that works with 
us. And the only way we can do that is make sure that the 
people are happy and satisfied in their jobs. 
 
It’s difficult some times to do that, but we work very hard to 
develop relationships. And I’m not sure that the government 
realizes that this isn’t the Dark Ages, where we come in in the  

morning and set down rules and tell the employees they have to 
do this before the end of the day. 
 
The days when we had a production line and the boss standing 
there hollering at employees are gone. We have leaders, we 
have teams, and we work with our employees in ways that we 
can manage their needs and our productivity hand in hand to the 
best of both people. 
 
The economy itself is a concern. When we look across the 
border and see what’s happening in Alberta and in Manitoba 
and it looks like their . . . we realize that the pastures are 
greener there. There isn’t any doubt about that and I think that 
this is something that the government has to realize. With the 
global economy we have now, it’s very easy to go across the 
border. People in my constituency can shop there very easily, 
go across either border and pay less tax. And you’re often going 
there to visit your children anyway. So it’s just an incentive to 
spend your extra . . . your tax-free dollars over there, your 
after-tax dollars, in another province. 
 
I think to recognize the fact that by cutting things, taxes, PST 
(provincial sales tax), would actually encourage economic 
growth in this province. People aren’t as apt to want to jump in 
their vehicle and go some place if they can buy the product at 
home for around the same dollar. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m . . . Mr. Speaker, I think that when we talk to 
our constituents about what’s going on in the House right now, 
and we try and explain to them that the reason we are doing this 
every day is to make sure that the concerns that they have are 
brought forward to the floor of this Assembly, even through this 
motion here, it’s difficult sometimes to make them understand 
that if we don’t have some say in the agenda that’s set forward 
by the government, there isn’t any way of bringing their 
concerns to the floor of the Assembly. 
 
Another one of the questions that we asked was, what was the 
major impediment to growth. And one of the major ones was 
capital to finance growth. Now I understand, and I don’t believe 
that employers are looking for grants, we’re not looking for 
government hand-outs, but we are requiring some way to make 
sure that there is some capital there, some ability to expand. 
 
One of the concerns that I have, and I think has been obvious as 
I’ve been in the House, is government departments or Crown 
corporations like SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation) who are there specifically to help businesses. And 
yet when we see the amount of businesses who are actually 
aided by this corporation, it’s difficult to see that, where they’re 
actually helping the vast majority of the businesses. 
 
Most of them don’t have the time or the money or the 
inclination to run to a government, and fill out all the papers it 
requires, and to jump through the loopholes that government 
needs to decide in their own minds if we’re viable businesses. I 
think businesses aren’t asking government to do that. We’re 
asking them to create an environment so that we are willing to 
gamble or to invest our own money in our companies. If we win 
or lose, that should be our choice. But many of the roadblocks 
and the high taxes and the unhealthy environment in this  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

province is making it just about impossible for us to continue 
and to want to expand. 
 
There are lots of us who would have the option of going to 
friends or relatives and saying, would you like to invest in our 
company. But there isn’t any incentive to do that. I think that 
this government could find a way of doing that if they wanted 
to. I think that some of the regulations and laws that were in 
effect a few years ago, like investment tax credits and . . . that 
would allow people to have some security in the dollars, or at 
least some tax relief by investing in a Canadian or a 
Saskatchewan company . . . would give them an opportunity to 
feel more secure. 
 
Another one of the concerns that I had put forward was the 
declining rural populations and the poor economy in rural 
Saskatchewan. Yesterday I indicated that things like closing 
schools and hospitals had a cumulative effect on rural 
Saskatchewan because as soon as you lose a teacher or a nurse, 
then that affects the drug store and it affects the stores and 
pretty soon more people are moving out. And the desire to build 
in rural Saskatchewan, to build their homes or build businesses, 
is gone. 
 
I think that if the government had a real interest or desire to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan, they could do it. I think if as 
much energy was put into promoting rural Saskatchewan, into 
showing the world what we have out there, instead of some of 
the laws and regulations that are in place right now, we could 
actually have people moving out there. 
 
Right now in our small towns, I have seen ads put in papers in 
Toronto and in Vancouver, telling about some of the advantages 
we have in our small towns, and people do move out there. And 
I think that government advertising, if you’re going to do that, 
should be advertising outside of this province, telling them what 
we have to offer. 
 
I think that if there’s one thing that I would like to be known 
for, before this session is over, is the fact that I believe rural 
Saskatchewan is the best place in the world to live. I know the 
whole province is stated to be that, but I believe where we have 
. . . the constituency I’m from and my colleagues are from, are 
wonderful places. And if we would have the opportunity to tell 
the world that, it would improve the whole economy of this 
province. 
 
The unloading of costs by government, that is the downloading 
and this famous word we’ve been hearing so often, I think that 
we’re bearing the brunt of it on our businesses and in rural 
Saskatchewan and if there was some . . . if the whole idea of 
what would be the priorities of this government  the 
education and health care and highways  if that was 
re-examined so that’s where it was put and the rest of the 
money was left in the hands of the people of this province, we 
could re-energize our province very quickly. We wouldn’t have 
to wait for the heavy-handed government to decide when and 
where there should be some growth allowed. 
 
The third question that I asked in the survey that I sent out to 
200 businesses was: if you could implement one change or  

addition to government legislation to improve company growth 
potential, what would it be? The first answer, and the one with 
the most responses, was eliminating corporate tax and pick up 
revenues in personal taxes, and not to tax the production inputs, 
especially for businesses that export. 
 
Actually they’ve asked for removal of E&H (education and 
health) tax on building materials. And many times in the House 
you’ve heard me talk about E&H tax, the large cost involved in 
building hog barns. I know in my constituency, one of the 
people out there built a major hog operation last year and just 
the education and health tax on that building was over $30,000, 
which was more money than he took home personally. 
 
I can’t see that the government is not understanding that this is 
actually an impediment to growth. That $30,000, sure, they got 
it, but they don’t know how many more buildings they could 
have got if that tax was gone. And the economic spin-offs of 
having a number of these barns, or any kind of manufacturing 
plants around this province, would definitely increase if that tax 
was gone. 
 
One of the interesting items that was given to me was the 
deliverance of more good news. I think that that’s something 
the government is trying to do right now, and I find it kind of 
interesting. Because a few years ago I think they spent most of 
their time trying to make sure we were all depressed and now 
they’re trying to make us believe that everything is great again. 
And it’s taking them a lot longer to improve our disposition 
than it did to get rid of our good disposition. 
 
They asked for graduated taxation for property reassessment. 
They also asked for some job creation programs. And one of the 
interesting things that they asked for was teaching 
entrepreneurship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had five children that graduated, so I’ve been 
attending graduations in my small town now for over 12 years. 
And I find it very interesting that when they talk about kids . . . 
ask children, or young adults, when they graduate what their 
goals and aspirations are, I’ve yet to hear any of them say that 
they were going to start a business. 
 
I find that really disappointing, because everybody wants to 
either go to school or work for somebody else, and they haven’t 
either been taught or they fail to understand the importance of 
doing something to create a sustainable employment for 
themselves. They don’t understand that within themselves there 
could be an option or an opportunity to build on their own 
talents and skills, as well as making use of the places around 
them and the people around them. 
 
(1445) 
 
I wish that there was something that could be taught either in 
schools or by government or media to let them know that there 
is opportunities out there. It’s scary that when we think that this 
government is banking on the fact that it’s going to create 
20,000 jobs in the next 10 . . . or four years, I guess they’re 
saying, and that may happen. But if we get that many jobs in 
Saskatchewan, there’s probably 20 times that many in the other  
  



2248  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

province. And it’s because we have so many restrictions to job 
creation in this province. 
 
I think that the real idea of economic growth does not come 
from job creation  it comes from gaining . . . from measuring 
the actual economy. When I look at the economy, the numbers 
that was given out in May, Statistics Canada said that 
Saskatchewan’s economic growth is only .8 per cent, or was 
only .8 per cent in 1995, the third worst in this whole country 
and less than half of the national average of 2 per cent. 
 
I think what the government isn’t realizing is that we can’t be 
banking on specific companies or job creation numbers that 
means our economy is going to be moving again. Even if they 
do create a few jobs, it could be more if people were allowed to 
work and build the province the way they see that it could 
happen. 
 
The companies I talked to also asked to reduce the size of 
government and decrease involvement in business. This year we 
saw the actual size of government increase again. One of the 
most annoying growths in government for me was the addition 
of the second Department of Education in this province. 
 
I understand the importance of secondary education. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that if the government was . . . if their real 
important growth item is the economy, I think it would have 
been interesting for them to look at the idea of joining 
Post-Secondary Education with the Department of Economic 
Development. 
 
I don’t know if that’s a unique thought, but if we actually 
believe that entrepreneurship is the way to go in the future, we 
should be teaching children in school that there is an 
opportunity to start their own business. And the only way we 
can do that is by starting at the basics, starting in grade 6 and 7 
and 8 and letting them know what it takes to actually run a 
business. 
 
I had somebody tell me on the weekend the story about Rip Van 
Winkle. When he woke up after 35 years, the only thing that 
hadn’t changed in that time was education. And that is true. 
They have the same books as . . . My children are using the 
same books that I did, and some of the names in the front of the 
covers were a lot older than me. 
 
I think that’s a sad state  it’s a sad statement on what’s 
happening in our province. If we’re actually going to get our 
children involved in the future and in the global economy, we 
have to allow them to work in industry and with business in 
such a way that they can see that there is work for them outside 
of the structured job set-up that we as parents and the 
government expects to measure the economy by. 
 
There is so much potential out there and the potential is within 
the people themselves. And we’re not encouraging that. And 
through Post-Secondary Education in a link with Economic 
Development we could actually put some new sight or some 
new thoughts into the future. 
 
They also ask to expand small-business deductions to $500,000  

from the current $200,000 limit. I tried to get numbers from the 
Minister of Economic Development on the number of 
businesses that actually are paying income tax and that are 
involved in this $200,000 limit, but I haven’t received those 
numbers yet. 
 
But for myself, I think the number of small businesses actually 
paying income tax is very small. I wish somebody could give 
me that number. 
 
One of the other suggestions that businesses had was to 
implement tax credits based on job creation and in-house 
training after the fact. They’re not asking for grants and loans 
for projects . . . for projections and promises, but they’re asking 
for the government to look at businesses on one basis and then 
measure it again in a year from now or two years from now and 
see what type of growth has actually happened. That way we’re 
not allowing for some kind of a number that may or may not 
make a difference to this economy. 
 
And I think that this type of legislation or these type of 
suggestions that the people in this province had given to me and 
to our caucus is what the government needs and I think the 
opportunity to bring these motions forward or these suggestions 
forward is given to us through this motion. I guess I’m 
delighted that we do have this chance to talk about some of the 
things that the people in this province are looking for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out of the number of replies when we talked about 
sales forecasts, there was an increase of about . . . about 30 per 
cent of them said there would be an increase, about 30 per cent 
of them said there’d be a decrease, and 40 per cent felt the sales 
numbers would be the same. 
 
When I talked about the employee numbers in 1996, I had a 
different survey number than the minister had and some of the 
other surveys that I received answers back . . . Pardon me. 
About 15 per cent of them said that there was going to be an 
increase and about 30 per cent of them said there was going to 
be a decrease. 
 
I’ve heard numbers given by members opposite saying that 
they’re actually . . . that most employers were talking about 
increasing numbers, but that wasn’t what I had heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my place I just wanted to touch 
briefly on the one point that I had made this year a couple of 
times and that was for farm women who are farmers in their 
own right and have now, through current . . . through the 
Human Rights Commission, been told that their complaint that 
they are not eligible for the fuel tax rebate is actually justified. 
And I was dismayed when I heard the Minister of Finance say 
that it was something that they were considering appealing. I 
can’t understand how a government  a modern government, a 
government like ours that we should be proud of  is actually 
considering taking the women of this province . . . or why they 
would let them go to Human Rights Commission on an item 
like whether they’re considered a farmer or not. It doesn’t make 
any sense to me. 
 
If a man is farming with his daughter or a brother and sister are  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

farming, they have every right to both collect this fuel tax 
rebate. But now because of the marriage contract, they’re not 
allowed to do it. I think that does not give a woman any 
individuality in her status as a farmer because she’s married to 
someone else. I don’t understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of concerns in the economy that I have and I 
think that our caucus is dealing with them. And it’s unfortunate 
that our voice sometimes isn’t heard the way we would like it to 
be. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the opportunity to bring 
forward . . . or I appreciate the opportunity to bring forward my 
concerns, and I thank you for this. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
guess I would say that I am pleased to also be able to stand to 
speak to this motion, but I’m not sure if pleased is the correct 
word. I am standing to respond to the motion simply because 
the motion is here. I am dismayed with the fact that a motion of 
this nature has even come to be. 
 
As you well know and many of the people in this Assembly 
know, it’s their . . . for some of them it is their very first year in 
the Assembly, and I just find that rather than getting to the point 
and dealing with those things that are of utmost concern to the 
province and to the people of this province  in fact those very 
good people of the province that I have great respect for  
instead of looking to their concerns and so on we are playing 
really stupid political games here. I have no desire to do that 
kind of thing and nor do I ever feel that I will get tangled up in 
that, but goodness only knows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really am concerned about the health Bills that 
are out there. I’ve had many of my constituents come to me and 
they are concerned about those Bills also. Now in order to 
effect proper debate on those Bills, it is my firm belief that we 
should be doing that very thing. 
 
We cannot constantly keep on like this, and I don’t think 
historically . . . I guess looking into the future that the citizens 
of this province or of this country want this kind of thing to 
continue. I really believe the face of politics is changing, and it 
will change. It may not change as quickly as some of us would 
like it to happen, but it is changing. And it is simply going to 
change because people will no longer, they will no longer allow 
themselves to be governed by governments that ignore them 
and continue to get caught up in political positioning and 
everything of that nature. Every decision, it seems, that is made 
through politicians, long-time politicians, is made for every 
reason other than for real politics. 
 
Politics is about serving people. Politics is about remembering 
what we were put here for, that we are the voice of people. We 
are here to express their concerns for them. And we must 
remember that we are one with them. We are not separate from 
them; we are one with them. And so everything that we say, we 
do, and every decision that we make, reflects what those people 
out there would like to see happening. 
 
And I think they particularly would like to see the province  

being able to move ahead, forward, using all of the potential 
that we have in this province, the abilities and those talents of 
those people. They want to be empowered to use their own 
talents and to have things moving ahead so that their children, 
and the children of future generations, can in fact end up being 
in, I guess, somewhat of a heaven, you could say, for 
themselves. Although those things don’t happen overnight, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that that is the dream of those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you would permit me, I do have a little reading 
that I would like to do. And I do this because it’s such a 
wonderful piece of literature, an essay written by the president, 
I think it is, of Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Havel. I really ask for 
leave to do this because I know that constant reading is not 
accepted always in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Havel has come out of the Communist regime, and after the 
overthrow of the Communist government, he ended up 
reflecting on the past and what had happened there. And he then 
writes of his reflections and what his hope is, and how in fact 
morality and decency and so on are in fact tied to politics, and 
are the very essence of politics because our whole justice 
system has been based on the need for moral directives and 
order in our society. And, Mr. Vaclav says, he writes: 
 

I have been persuaded time and time again that a huge 
potential of goodwill is slumbering within our society. It’s 
just that it’s incoherent, suppressed, confused, crippled, 
and perplexed  as though it does not know what to rely 
on, where to begin, where or how to find meaningful 
outlets. 
 

And I reflect on the people in our province and I have a sense of 
that very same thing. People do have so much potential within 
them, but they need that potential to be articulated for them, 
named for them, and encouraged. And so I get the feeling that 
Mr. Vaclav is in fact speaking for what is happening not only in 
our province, but around the world. He says: 
 

In such a state of affairs, politicians have a duty to awaken 
this slumbering potential, to offer it direction and ease its 
passage, to encourage it and give it room, or simply hope. 

 
They say, Mr. Speaker, that a nation gets the politicians it 
deserves. In some senses this is true. Politicians are indeed a 
mirror of their society and a kind of embodiment of its 
potential. At the same time, paradoxically, the opposite is also 
true. Society is a mirror of its politicians. It is largely up to the 
politicians which social forces they choose to liberate and 
which they choose to suppress, whether they rely on the good in 
each citizen or on the bad. 
 
The former regime that Mr. Havel speaks of systematically 
mobilized the worst human qualities like selfishness, envy, and 
hatred. That regime was far more than just something we 
deserved. It was also responsible for what we became. And this 
is his words: 
 

Those who find themselves in politics therefore bear a 
heightened responsibility for the moral state of society, and 
it is their responsibility to seek out the best in that society  

  



2250  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

(and empower it) and to develop it and to strengthen it. 
 
Even the politicians who often anger me with their 
shortsightedness and their malice are not, in the most part, 
evil minded. They are, rather, inexperienced, easily 
infected with the particularisms of the time, easily 
manipulated by trends and prevailing customs; often they 
are simply caught up, unwillingly, in the swirl of bad 
politics, and find themselves unable to extricate themselves 
because they are afraid of the risks this would entail. 
 

(1500) 
 

Some say I am a naive dreamer who is always trying to 
combine the incompatible: politics and morality. I know 
this song well (he says); I’ve heard it sung all of my life. In 
the 1980s, a certain Czech philosopher who lived in 
California published a series of articles in which he 
subjected the “anti-political politics” of Charter 77 . . . (and 
he was met for that) with crushing criticism. Trapped in his 
own Marxist fallacies, he believed that as a scholar he 
scientifically comprehended the entire history of the world. 
He saw it as a history of violent revolutions and vicious 
power struggles. The idea that the world might actually be 
changed by the force of truth, the power of a truthful word, 
the strength of a free spirit, conscience, and responsibility 
 with no guns, no lust for power, no political wheeling 
and dealing  was quite beyond the horizon of his 
understanding . . . 

 
Because his doctrine had taught him that the bourgeoisie 
would never voluntarily surrender its leading role, and that 
it must be swept into the dustbin of history through armed 
revolution, this philosopher assumed that there was no 
other way to sweep away the Communist government 
either. Yet it turned out to be possible. Moreover, it turned 
out to be the only way to do it. Not only that, but it was the 
only way that made sense since violence, as we know, 
breeds more violence. This is why most revolutions 
degenerate into dictatorships that devour their young, 
giving rise to new revolutionaries who prepare for new 
violence, unaware that they are digging their own graves 
and pushing society back onto the deadly merry-go-round 
of revolution and counter-revolution. 

 
I’m going to skip some of this but I appreciate his words that he 
has further down. He says: 
 

Genuine politics  politics worthy of the name, and the 
only politics I am willing to devote myself to  is simply 
a matter of serving those around us: serving the 
community, and serving those who will come after us. Its 
deepest roots are moral because it is a responsibility, 
expressed through action, to and for the whole, a 
responsibility that . . . grows out of a conscious or 
subconscious certainty that our death ends nothing. 
 

I will leave it at that for now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have seen time and time again where many people have come 
to this Assembly and they have had to have . . . tried to have,  

rather, their words or their concerns brought forward and really 
they end up stonewalled many times. 
 
This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, when I think of the waste of time 
that we put on things like this and not really getting to the 
matter of people’s concerns . . . I came into the legislature this 
afternoon and I had been out for dinner, and on the steps of the 
legislature was a man sitting with a chain around his neck. And 
he was chained to, in fact, the railing out there. 
 
So I stopped and asked him what he was doing in fact. He had 
stated that many times over he was trying to get across a point 
that he needed to get across, as far as maintenance orders were 
concerned, that he needed some help with that. And that he had 
gone to government a number of times. 
 
He has no choice but to give over whatever he has for 
maintenance orders and he wants to do that. However he finds 
that he has no money for himself to live on. And so in protest 
and basically to the fact that government isn’t doing what it’s 
here to do  to assist him in somehow finding a resolution to 
this — he has come to the legislature today and put himself here 
as a symbolic protest of really government not listening to the 
people. 
 
Now I’m not too sure what could be done for this gentleman, 
but I know very well that something should be done to assist 
him if in fact the government doesn’t have the authority to do 
what is necessary. So it’s not good enough to be referred to the 
federal government when there’s cases like this, as he had done 
to him. Because he said: I can’t walk to Ottawa, and I haven’t 
got the ticket to Ottawa, and I can’t afford to get to Ottawa, so I 
need to depend on those people around me. And that is what 
I’m doing here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about service, that is what I talk 
about. I talk about cases like that  of people that have 
genuine, real problems. I don’t talk about political wrangling 
and what not in this legislature. I don’t talk about wasting a lot 
of time with games that move people towards power structures 
and a major hope for power and that’s all  power and control 
 because in fact that is something that people out there are 
saying that they no longer will have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some concerns also that I’m not even sure 
that I’ll be able to put forward by the time this Legislative 
Assembly is over. And so because of the lack of time that it 
seems that is imminent here, I would like to be able to put them 
forward now. 
 
The whole health care situation in the province is in fact 
causing people great distress. And we’ve heard many times 
about this. My concern is for the affiliates of this province. The 
three Bills that we have coming up in fact are going to probably 
end up negating the affiliates of any authority that they have. 
 
Now many people have . . . We have a freedom in this country 
 a freedom for religion, a freedom of choice, a freedom of 
speech, etc. Part of that, freedom of religion, is associated and 
in fact worked into the affiliate organizations, many of them 
that are religious denominations that have these facilities. I see  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

that if in fact their ability to choose how they want their 
organizations run and to run them in a manner that is conducive 
to their religious beliefs, if that freedom is taken from these 
people, we are in fact . . . I guess what we’re doing is we’re 
going back to what Mr. Havel has said. 
 
That is control, and that is the power and control for no other 
reason but the thrill of having power and control. To be able to 
effect something in this province that enables people to have 
continued freedom, I think we have to take a close, close look at 
these Bills. And I certainly hope that somehow these Bills, as 
written, will not go through. People are really very afraid out 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I have a great number of 
people who are self-motivators. They do believe in themselves 
and they encourage each other. They take each other and they 
say, you know, this is what I’ve done and you can do it too. 
 
We have got people there who are certainly involved in major 
industry. We have people there involved in farming. And we 
have children there, young people, high school children 
especially, that are very involved, in fact much more than they 
were even 10 years ago, in what is happening around the world. 
They are very astute and very aware. And I hope that as time 
goes on, we give them every opportunity to use again their 
abilities and their talents and that we are here to help them 
develop that potential. 
 
I want so very much, and I’m sure that most people do, to 
ensure that we have free enterprise, the freedoms associated 
with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. I want those things  
and many people do, as I’ve said  to continue on. We have to 
be very, very careful in this day and age, when power and 
control are such an important part of everybody’s mind it 
seems, that we don’t in fact negate and destroy those wonderful 
freedoms we’ve had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everything changes, and everything has changed, I 
think a lot, in the NDP Party. The ideals that the NDP Party 
have . . . had put forward in the past, at the time of Tommy 
Douglas, I believe were wonderful ideals. I had a great deal of 
admiration for the man, and so did everyone in this province. 
But things do change and we have seen a great deal of change. 
 
I remember even when Mr. Blakeney, if I may refer to him 
now, was talking about rural Saskatchewan as being such a 
vital, vital force, a vital part of this province in order that urban 
Saskatchewan would be able to continue and to thrive, also in 
order that northern Saskatchewan would, there was so much 
onus put on rural Saskatchewan at that time and I see now that 
things have completely changed; there has been a complete 
shift. 
 
So I say that that’s happening because of politics. When we are 
only concerned about elections and getting elected, and power, 
those kind of things happen. 
 
Now it’s really very sad, because I know that some of the 
members opposite would probably agree with me in their hearts 
 but that’s another thing. We don’t feel that we even have the  

chance here to express truly and openly  and oftentimes we 
don’t have the chance  what we’re really feeling. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my hope is that some of the ideals and the 
philosophy and so on put forth by Mr. Douglas can again come 
to be, because I think that he would be wanting that. He knows 
very well . . . or he knew very well that this was the only kind 
of a province that could possibly bring us honour. We would 
include everyone and we would know how very interdependent 
we are. 
 
So without the understanding of interdependence and respect at 
the very core of our being and our decision making and our 
philosophy, we in fact cannot go ahead with any kind of, I 
guess, renewed, new politics. It’s impossible. 
 
So I would just hope that some of the members would take 
those words of respect and understanding, the ability to be able 
to discuss, to communicate openly, honestly, with each other 
and to give some decent consideration to what many of the 
good people are trying to do here. I think if that had taken place 
we wouldn’t be looking at this motion right now. 
 
So my concern again is for my constituents out there because I 
really feel that I am one with them. They have got some 
concerns about the future more than they do about the present. 
They see a lot of changes in legislation. We see put in front of 
us, Mr. Speaker, this legislative session, 119 Bills. I have no 
idea, but I doubt very much, if there’s any other province that 
has had this many Bills come forward in one legislative session. 
 
And even the fact that there’s that many Bills makes us 
question, for sure, why all the legislation? Why all the 
regulation? What’s going on here? I mean if we’re freeing 
people we would need laws and legislation and to ensure that 
there’s order in our province certainly, but not controlling order, 
not controlling to this extent. 
 
We have had so much put in front of us within one session that 
it’s unfathomable how anyone could possibly deal with this. 
We’re trying to deal with it. We need the time for it and we 
need time that doesn’t end up overtiring us. So to ask for our 
days to entail 10 o’clock in the morning till 10:30 at night, is 
that what we would ask our constituents to do? Would I go to 
my constituents and say, well you know I think that it’s . . . you 
will represent me very well if you come into this Assembly and 
you sit every day from 10 till 10:30 at night. 
 
I doubt very much that we would do that to anybody that we 
care about, and I don’t believe that that kind of thing should be 
done here. I believe that we can sit for extended days. That 
would be wonderful and I’d be most willing to do that, but I 
don’t think that purposely overtiring people is anything that is 
going to be . . . or effect any good in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place shortly. I want to say that 
I have appreciated very much of the order that you have tried to 
conduct in the House and certainly have from time to time. I 
give a great deal of credit to the many people who in their 
hearts are working towards the common good of this province, 
and I would just hope that as time goes on we recognize, even  
  



2252  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

though we have differences in philosophies and differences in 
how to achieve our goals, that we can do that through some 
constructive criticism and also some respect. 
 
And I would ask all the members of the Assembly to chew on 
those words for a little while. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
speak on the motion before the House about the extended hours. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words by way of 
preface in this and that is, is that as a new member of the 
House, I guess I came to the Assembly with a lot of high 
expectations as to how we would proceed. 
 
I came with a certain amount of trepidation and misgiving, and 
a lot of feelings that this was going to be an occasion where it 
would be extremely adversarial in nature, and that every single 
day that we were here leading up to, I believe we’re on the 67th 
day, would be very difficult and would always be very, very 
partisan. 
 
(1515) 
 
I have to say that in many, many ways that that initial illusion 
was exactly that  an illusion. Because I found in many 
instances that the dignity and decorum of the legislature and 
colleagues in the legislature was something that everyone took 
very seriously, and members opposite and members of the 
opposition and third party respected the position of the really 
sacred trust each of us were given when we accepted our 
responsibilities to be members of the legislature. 
 
And I think that I found that I was anxious to do my job as an 
MLA. And I have to say that I really found the work after June 
21 in my constituency to be incredibly rewarding and incredibly 
interesting. I found it particularly rewarding to be able to meet 
with people that look to you for guidance, and wisdom, and for 
assistance in a number of issues that were facing their lives. 
And I found it particularly rewarding to go out again after a 
campaign and meet people on a new level, a non-partisan level 
as an MLA that now represented everyone, irrespective of the 
fact that they may or may not have supported you on the ballot. 
 
And so as we waited and prepared for the legislature to actually 
come to session, I became increasingly disappointed that time 
kept dragging on and on and on, and that it seemed very, very 
strange that in an instance where a government had been 
re-elected that it took virtually eight months from the election to 
the time that the legislature was called together. 
 
And I had to ask myself many times, why the delay. Why 
would it possibly take eight months from the time a government 
was re-mandated, from that time, for it to call the legislature 
together so that the people of the province could debate and 
look at a legislative agenda for the session. 
 
It struck me that there might be some argument for a delay of 
that magnitude if there was indeed a new government. And a 
new government would have all kinds of additional challenges  

before it that an incumbent government should not have. It 
wasn’t as if, after four years of government, suddenly the NDP 
Party had to rethink its whole mandate and how they were 
going to approach the challenges before it. 
 
In the previous four years, the government seemed to have as a 
principal agenda the need to balance the budget, and I 
understand the great impediment that was necessary for that to 
happen. But after that process occurred  and we can debate at 
length if it was an appropriate approach or not . . . but I fully 
recognize that the budget was balanced. If it was on the income 
side or expense side or too much on one side of the ledger and 
not enough on the other side of the ledger is, I’m sure, a point 
for debate for many, many years to come. 
 
But the point that I want to make here and now is, that it struck 
me as well that, as a member of a very small caucus and a 
relatively small opposition, that it was necessary that we had to 
do our jobs extremely well. It was going to be incumbent on us 
to represent and take our parts in government as the official 
opposition to hold the government accountable for the 
directions that they were going to choose to take. 
 
When I looked at the results of the election, it seemed to me 
that many, many people did not visibly and forcibly endorse the 
policies and mandate of this government. I don’t know the exact 
statistics, but I believe something like two-thirds of the 
population voted. Of that two-thirds, less than 50 per cent voted 
for the current government. And I don’t know how that math 
works, but it certainly means that something in the order of a 
third of the eligible voters actually expressed their confidence in 
the government by casting a ballot in favour of the government. 
 
And so by extrapolation, if you like, it struck me that two-thirds 
of the people did not necessarily accept everything that the 
government was proposing before the people of this province, 
and by extension, it struck me that the opposition had a role to 
speak for those two-thirds of the electorate of this province. 
And that was indeed a very heavy responsibility. 
 
It was a responsibility that was heightened by the fact that nine 
of us were brand-new MLAs and that the process of adjusting 
and acquiring the necessary skills that we would need was 
going to be a challenge over and above that which would 
normally be the case when you re-elect incumbents. And so 
when I looked at the challenge ahead, I realize that it was going 
to be a very great one indeed. 
 
I also had the expectation, if you like, that there was a great 
spirit of cooperation that could occur by the members of this 
Assembly. And I was given the privilege of being a part of one 
particular committee of the Assembly. And I was also given the 
privilege to chair the Public Accounts Committee. That gave 
me the very strong impression, firstly, that not all of the 
business of government happens in this Assembly. 
 
In fact in many instances, a great amount of the work that we 
are all responsible for happens outside of the legislative sitting 
hours, and indeed outside of the functioning of this formal 
Assembly. And I realized that in particular with the Public  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

Accounts Committee that I have the pleasure of chairing. 
 
During the course of this Assembly thus far, we have conducted 
nine meetings. We have found it very difficult to find a meeting 
time that was appropriate and convenient for all of our 
members. We have met regularly on Tuesdays from 9:30 to 
11:30 to discuss the business that was before the committee. 
And the members have worked extremely hard. I know that 
every member would agree that our committee has set aside, by 
and large, our partisan natures and has focused on the issues at 
hand, and we have certainly worked hard. 
 
I know that the member for Meadow Lake, a member of my 
committee, would agree with the fact that we have worked hard 
in a very non-partisan, organized, responsible way. I know the 
government member from Last Mountain-Touchwood would 
also agree that our committee has functioned very well and 
worked very hard. 
 
The member from Regina South has been a vocal member of 
our committee but has worked very hard to see that the job has 
been done. Likewise the member from Lloydminster has 
worked very hard and diligently to make sure that the work was 
done. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Eastview has worked very hard to 
see that the Public Accounts Committee has been functioning in 
a very strong and organized and effective way and in a way the 
Legislative Assembly would be very pleased. The member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland as well has worked and contributed to the 
efforts of the Public Accounts Committee on many occasions 
and added to the debate. 
 
The members from the opposition, the member from Thunder 
Creek, my colleague, has participated in debate and the 
questioning and the discussion that has happened within the 
Public Accounts Committee. The member from Moosomin and 
the member from Saskatoon Greystone as well have also put a 
great deal of effort into our committee. 
 
And I have to say before this Assembly and the people that are 
watching that I’m very, very proud of all of the members of the 
Public Accounts Committee and commend them for all of the 
work that they have done. 
 
And it illustrated to me in a very clear way that, using that 
committee as an example . . . and I know that there are many 
other standing committees of the legislature: Crown 
Corporations and Procedures and Rules and Regulations. And 
all of the committees of the legislature that are here function 
very well in a non-partisan way outside of the normal sitting 
hours of this legislature. 
 
And I guess that the point that I’m making here, Mr. Speaker, is 
that I feel that we have to fundamentally suggest that one of the 
fundamental flaws of the motion that we’re debating here today, 
in my opinion, is the fact that it only focuses every work of 
government onto the actual legislative sitting hours. 
 
How in the world is it possible to have members function on a 
committee like I’ve indicated, that is critically important to the  

people of this province, to the functioning of this legislature, if 
we are to meet from 10 o’clock in the morning virtually until 10 
o’clock at night? That is something like twelve and a half hours 
a day. How in the world can people then be expected to think 
clearly, to use their faculties properly, and to then find time to 
meet on Public Accounts or Crown Corporations or all of the 
other responsibilities that members have to the people of this 
province and to this legislature if we’re supposed to be doing 
these extended hours? 
 
The motion recognizes the fact that we have to do more work, 
and I accept that. But the motion completely ignores the 
physical limitations on people to be able to do their jobs 
properly, and it completely fails to recognize the fact that there 
are so many more issues out there than what can be rammed 
through in a short period of time by extended hours. It does a 
disservice to this legislature. It does a disservice to the process 
that is needed for the people of Saskatchewan to follow to make 
sure that their issues have been well thought out and well 
debated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that we have to take this vehicle of 
talking to the issues of our province at this time, to make sure 
that the issues of our constituencies and the issues that we see 
are important have to be put on the record, because we know 
that if we are going to go to these outrageous type of hours in 
order to get the government’s position satisfied, we will not be 
in a position to do the job that we have in representing what we 
feel is the two-thirds of the people that need to be represented 
properly and well. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in principle I, as the chairman of the 
Public Accounts Committee, know that it is unfair and 
impractical to ask the members of my committee to add two 
extra hours of work on top of a twelve and a half hour day and 
to be able to devote their full attention to that work. 
 
The work is not just the time we spend. The work is that plus all 
the preparation, all the reading, all the background study, all the 
research that has to be done, in order to discharge our 
responsibilities properly. And so I fail completely to see the 
logic of this kind of a brinkmanship kind of motion, if you like, 
that puts us into the position that we have no choice but to 
defend the issues of our people in a way that may be brought 
into consideration or debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, I then am asked to join the debate 
in terms of saying what are the issues in terms of a perspective 
for my constituency. And it’s important that my constituency 
realizes that they have had their issues recognized and that I 
have stood up and said that the appropriateness of this extended 
hours is really unfortunate because the work is not getting done 
properly. 
 
You know, I know as well as everyone that one of the most 
important things that are happening in our province right now 
are the changes that are being dictated from this government in 
so far as health care is concerned. It has been something that 
has been very disruptive to this province ever since it was first 
introduced after the government came to power in 1991. 
 
  



2254  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

And again what troubles me so much is that instead of using the 
common sense and cooperation that I find underlying most of 
the members of this House, what happened is the process was 
flawed by ideology and hastily ill-thought-out plans from the 
very beginning. 
 
And that’s what I’m afraid we’re going to face here again, Mr. 
Speaker, by this extended hours and the desire to have a defined 
time when we should be out of this House. We should be out of 
this House when we’ve fully and completely and with due 
thought and process debated all of the issues in front of this 
session, and not one day or one minute or one hour before. And 
not because we’ve sat for 14 hours in a day to get it done by a 
magical date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem that has happened in health care is 
that we’ve ended up taking an ideological approach based more 
on brinkmanship than on consultation and communication. I 
remember at the . . . roughly in about the 1989-90 time frame 
where I was involved with, in our church, the Diocesan Pastoral 
Council for the diocese of Prince Albert. And the bishop of the 
diocese of Prince Albert is Bishop Blaise Morand. And when I 
was the Chair of that committee, the bishop was a very busy 
man serving the people of the province in his role as a member 
of the Murray Commission of health care reform. 
 
And I remember him coming to our regular meetings with 
literally volumes and volumes and volumes of briefs and notes 
and things that had been before the Murray Commission. And 
the bishop was not a partisan politician; he was appointed there 
because of his role as a leader of a particular denomination of 
the Christian faith. And he took that role very responsibly on 
that commission that was constituted to look at the whole issue 
of health care in this province. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I realized from my perspective of observing that man’s 
work on this issue, how much work went into it over that period 
of time. There was due care and diligence, there was careful 
deliberation, and it was done properly and thoughtfully over a 
period of time with absolutely thorough consultation all across 
the province. They travelled from one corner of the province to 
the other and they listened to all of the people that had any 
interest at all. 
 
And then they sat down and they brought in experts and people 
that could give them the advice they needed from a technical 
point of view, and they drafted a report. And there was sort of 
the Reader’s Digest version of that report and the full report and 
I was interested enough because of my concern about health 
care to read both versions in detail. And it struck me as, while 
you could argue that it was not a perfect report and it didn’t 
provide absolutely every answer to every situation, it did 
provide a well-thought-out, well-documented blueprint for 
where health care could go into the future. 
 
And I thought that that was extremely well done and that, even 
though it was so well done, there was going to have to be a very 
great deal of work put into consultation with the people in order 
to implement the far-reaching ramifications of that report. 

Mr. Speaker, I was dismayed after the election at how little 
attention the government of the day paid to that report. I was 
terribly dismayed because there was absolutely no consultation. 
There was no discussion. There was no meaningful 
consideration of that report as far as I could see. And so what 
we ended up with is some other ideological approach to health 
care that we now are in the middle of stumbling through. 
 
Instead of taking what was a very well-thought-out blueprint 
and model, we ended up feeling our way through this current 
wellness reform process that, I’m sorry to say, was 
implemented by another lawyer who seemed to think that they 
knew what was best for the people of the province, who 
convinced their colleagues that they knew exactly all the 
answers, and who then were in the process, from 1992 on, of 
ramming it down the throats of the people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I recall what happened in my constituency. 
The first thing that happened in 1992 is 30 long-term beds were 
closed from Parkland Regional Care hospital. And I remember 
how outraged the people were because they were not consulted; 
they were not considered; and they were not properly consulted 
in terms of how this was happening, and why it was happening, 
how it should happen. 
 
And the reason that it had happened is because the first thing 
the government had done is they ended up throwing the 
communities at each other’s throats to compete for some 
magical salvation that was necessary. And what had happened 
is they had said to people is, that what you’re going to do is 
you’re going to have this different vision of health care, and 
you better go out and try to preserve what you have as best that 
you can. It was like throwing five T-bone steaks out in a pack 
of eight dogs and to say, now figure out how this is going to 
work and let us know when it’s all over. 
 
Well you know what’s going to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
When it’s all over the steaks are going to be gone, the dogs are 
all going to be bloodied, and someone is going to end up with 
nothing at all except wounds and hurts. And that’s what 
happened in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We ended up with a situation that forced communities, out of 
fear and self-interest, to go out and try to outdo, outmanoeuvre, 
outbid each other, if you like, so they could hang on to a health 
district that would save what they know is sacred to the people 
of this province. That’s what happened. And so instead of 
people in my region cooperating, they fought like crazy in order 
to try to preserve what was near and dear to them. 
 
So instead of Melfort and Tisdale and Nipawin as three large 
communities in the north-east coming together with a common 
vision  as they might have under the Murray Commission 
because that’s the kind of district that that commission report 
envisaged that would then be capable of providing all of the 
services that were needed by the people of that district  the 
first thing that happened, Mr. Speaker, is that Melfort and 
Tisdale and Nipawin started competing with each other. 
 
They started trying to bid for the municipalities around to see 
who would get who and who would come where. They tried to  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

go to the other communities and say, will you come with us? 
Will you go with the other places? And so we ended up in a 
bidding war that was destructive to everyone concerned and we 
ended up with no vision, and that’s the problem. When you 
move with too much haste and you do not consider the 
ramifications of your decisions, you end up with a situation that 
you have nothing that’s workable. 
 
And then you sit down and say, okay, now what we’re going to 
do, we’re going to control your purse-strings so that you then 
have to knuckle under to the fiscal imperatives that we’re now 
going to dictate to you. 
 
But these people have no way of knowing what the plan is. 
They have no way of understanding where we’re headed. There 
was no plan, is the problem. It was this ideologically, fiscally 
driven, knee-jerk reaction that . . . I understand the fiscal 
imperatives, but there was no plan. And we ended up with a 
situation of being rushed into something. 
 
And so the first thing, when the fiscal realities then hit home to 
these little districts, all of a sudden the Melfort area  the 
North Central District  ended up with, what do we do with a 
provincial regional institution? How do we cope as a little 
health district with a regional provincial institution? And I’m 
talking about Parkland Regional Care home. Well the 
government said it might be ours right now but we’re going to 
give it to you. 
 
Well thanks a lot. Because the people are there, the institution 
physically is there, but it didn’t just provide a service to the 
community of Melfort and the immediate district; it provided 
and had the vision for providing a service to all of the people of 
the north-east. And so it had special funding. It had special 
consideration. It had special programing that dealt with those 
type of people that were not designed to be dealt with in the 
normal 1, 2, 3, 4 level care home. That’s the kind of situation 
that we had. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important that I give that 
information to you, because I understand that you need to 
understand the fundamental backdrop that was necessary and 
why this government has made the kinds of mistakes that they 
have. 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the rest of the members of this Assembly, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce some guests in your gallery this afternoon. 
Of course there is my wife Beverley, who has recently returned 
home from Ottawa and the Canadian Association of Health 
Care Auxiliaries’ conference, as well as attending the CHA, the 
Canadian Healthcare Association’s conference in Ottawa. 

With her today in our gallery is some out-of-country guests, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in that of Mr. Bob Damurrell and Mrs. June 
Morris. These folks are on holidays from London, England and 
doing a tour of Canada over the past couple of days and the next 
few days. They flew into Canada, into Toronto, and enjoyed the 
sights down there of Niagara Falls and arrived in Regina last 
night. 
 
From Regina, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be going to Calgary and then 
on to Vancouver. From there, they’re going to New Zealand as 
well as Australia to where Mr. Damurrell was born and raised 
at, and from there, they’re going to continue on to Singapore 
before they return back home to the daily grind. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome my wife back to 
Saskatchewan and these folks into Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To recap 
the point, just to get back into the logic of it, the reason that I’m 
having so much objection to the motion on the floor is because 
of the problems that I see that have happened in the past and 
affecting my constituency when you start unduly hastening the 
due process of legislation and you expect people to make 
decisions under the ridiculous stresses of 12- and 14-hour days 
or from an ideological point of view instead of a logical one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the communities went out, I remember the 
mayor of Melfort as one member of a key group that was 
dealing in negotiating about what the boundaries for the health 
district should be. He said to the committee and to the 
community that he’s never worked on anything so hard in his 
life. 
 
And I know that people from Tisdale, which is another 
community that is now in my constituency as well, worked 
equally hard from their perspective. Because they knew that 
there was going to be changes dictated from Regina, and they 
were very, very fearful that if they didn’t work extremely hard 
to protect what they had spent years and years and generations 
to build up, it was going to be taken from them systematically 
one step at a time by a government whose only imperative was 
balancing the budget. 
 
And so they worked very hard, and at many times the work that 
they did created difficulties between the communities. Because 
if you’re competing for the same base of citizens that you’re 
trying to draw to your area, very often the debate and the 
discussion gets very competitive and very difficult. And so 
animosities and wounds were created that I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to take a number of years to heal because of 
the nature of the pressure that this government put on local 
people because they had no vision except balancing the books. 
  



2256  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that happened is that local 
district health board was forced to look at their new budget. 
And the reason it became increasingly difficult for them is they 
had a relatively . . . because of this competition and because of 
the carving out of districts, they ended up with a district of 
between 12 and 13,000 people, smaller than probably what is 
really needed in order to do a good job of delivering services 
for the people. 
 
And what’s so particularly disturbing is that in the natural 
evolution of things, the Melfort health community had come to 
provide services to that whole north-east region, and many 
people from that whole area came for particular services to that 
region. 
 
We had a surgeon in Melfort by the name of Dr. Ernie Smith 
who was of particular . . . Ernie Fuller, I stand corrected. Dr. 
Fuller was particularly well qualified in the work he was doing. 
He was an outstanding surgeon to the point . . . is that he took 
his people on a seminar at the University Hospital in Saskatoon 
where they were looking at the newest techniques in 
laparoscopic surgery. And they were bragging about how new 
and how wonderful it was for these procedures to happen in the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon. And when they said to Dr. 
Fuller, when do you think you’ll be able to implement that in 
your clinic, he said, we’ve been doing it for over a year already. 
 
They were doing laparoscopic surgery in Melfort, Mr. Speaker, 
before they were in the University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
That’s the quality of this man’s capabilities. 
 
And so we had something special. We had radiology; we had 
urology; we had the features that gave a real regional centre to 
the Melfort community, not only for our community, but for the 
north-east. We had Parkland care home that was not only for 
the people that had particularly difficult situations of dementia 
and Alzheimer’s and advanced brain damage because of 
accidents, to the people of Melfort, they provided that service to 
the people of the whole north-east. 
 
And suddenly then the government dictates that, in this 
dog-eat-dog world of competition, the North Central Health 
District has now got to absorb all those services and find ways 
to fund them. And instead of the regional hospital having 
regional funding because it was a regional hospital  because 
it was a provincial institution  they said, sorry, this is now 
part of your responsibility. 
 
But they didn’t just do it to Melfort, Mr. Speaker. They did it to 
the four regional hospitals in this province, all four of which 
had that regional responsibility and all four of which are now 
having a great deal of difficulty in meeting the commitments 
and the needs of the people of their region because funding is 
no longer recognized for that kind of work. 
 
I mean the same thing exactly — the government pulled out 
from with the geriatric assessment unit in Moose Jaw. The same 
kind of reality for those people occurred, and when the sisters 
had done it in good faith. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that kind of competition has been  

totally destructive. We’ve ended up with situations where 
people have had no way to turn except the way the government 
was going to dictate by their fiscal imperative. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what happened in one of the very first 
decisions of the appointed health board, was to close 30 beds at 
the Parkland Regional Care Home  30 beds, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker  25 per cent of the bed allocation. And I remember 
that when that happened how upset the community was. 
 
I can remember the picket lines in front of the former MLA for 
Melfort, the Hon. Carol Carson’s, office. I remember by the fact 
that she did not stand up for the people that she represented, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I remember how upset people were, and 
they remembered what happened. They remembered, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think that it was a major factor in my 
election in 1995, that an incumbent cabinet minister went down 
to large defeat, and it was largely over the fact that what had 
happened in inordinate haste because of health care in my 
community. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now try to bumble our way through this whole 
health care issue to try to find what’s going to go on and where 
our solutions are. Now we hear again, because of further 
reductions of funding in our health district, that the local health 
board is now again faced with the need to reduce the number of 
long-term care beds by another 30. So we’ve gone so that we 
have actually reduced our component over the . . . since health 
care “reform” in this province. We are losing 60 long-term beds 
in Melfort. And, Mr. Speaker, we do not have any fewer seniors 
that need caring for. 
 
One of the great eye-openers for me, Mr. Speaker, in this whole 
process of campaigning and seeking election, is the experience 
of going out and meeting people. Mr. Speaker, the election, as 
you know, was in June last year but I certainly was one of the 
people that started campaigning much earlier than that. And my 
first experience in this last election, the campaigning, happened 
in November . . . I’m sorry, in January and February. My 
nomination was in January and I started campaigning shortly 
after that. 
 
And there was a lot of snow on the ground, and I went out into 
some of the rural constituency areas. And what surprised me 
immensely, you expected to see farm families living in rural 
Saskatchewan, and you expected that these people would have 
tractors and dozers and snowblowers and four-wheel drive 
trucks if you like, to make sure that they were able to get out if 
something happened as an emergency to their family. You saw 
a lot of that, that’s true. 
 
But it struck me as really shaking when I went to one farm 
home that had a driveway that was hard to get into. There was a 
little bit of manual shovel work that had been done up around 
the house. There was smoke coming out of the chimney from a 
wood stove obviously, and it sort of . . . one of those nice, little 
picturesque things where there was improved maples and trees 
and a few yards and everything was painted and looked nice 
and tidy and neat. 
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

And I went up to that home and I knocked on the door, and an 
elderly gentleman came to the door and welcomed me in and 
asked if I’d have a cup of tea with him. And he and his wife 
were living there all alone, in the middle of nowhere, with a 
very limited ability to get out if anything happened. They had a 
telephone. 
 
And so, in the conversation we had, Mr. Speaker, I asked him, 
how do you stay out here? What would happen if there is an 
emergency? What would happen if there’s a storm? How will 
you clean your driveway? How would you get out if you needed 
to get to Melfort for medical attention? And he said, we simply 
couldn’t  I would have to phone and if I’m lucky my 
neighbour, who lives two and a half miles away, will come and 
start his tractor and open the road for me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well that struck me as a kind of a serious situation. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I asked him, I said, where would you like to be? And 
he said, well my wife and I had planned, we had planned for a 
number of years, that we would now, when we knew we 
couldn’t take care of ourselves, we would go to Melfort and we 
would live there so that we could be looked after. But, he said, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the closure of the beds, we think that 
we might as well stay right here because we’re afraid there 
might not be a place for us. There might not be a place for us, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that was weighing as heavily on their head and their mind 
as if they had been told that they had to leave the situation they 
were in. They were afraid about what was going to happen, not 
today but in the future. 
 
And so the impact this has not only on the fact that people do 
no longer have a place to live  of course they do  but 
they’re worried about what happens when their situation 
changes so they can no longer be looked after. And I said, oh 
but goodness, the government talks so bravely about their home 
care and all the rest of it. And he said to me, he said, the road is 
just as tough driving in the other way of the driveway than it is 
for me to come out. The nurses and the home care workers that 
try to come around here have a very difficult time. We’re too 
far from town, we do not get regular service, and it’s extremely 
expensive and costly so we don’t like to bother them. 
 
Now I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but my mother 
doesn’t like to bother people. She may need help but she 
doesn’t like . . . she’s fine, thank you very much. I don’t need 
your help; I’m fine. They’re very proud, independent people, 
and they’re very kind and considerate and they do not want to 
bother people, Mr. Speaker, because they think they’re just fine. 
 
And you know and I know that in many instances they’re not 
just fine. They’re afraid of what’s happening and they’re afraid 
of where they’re going to be if something does happen. And 
they quietly, quietly stay at home, day in and day out, long 
hours. They don’t sleep much. They have all of this weighing 
on their mind and the time is long and the time is slow, and they 
have nothing much more to think about than worrying what’s 
going to happen to them if their health deteriorates or the 
situation changes. 
 

And we now, by rushing through decisions, by dealing with 
decisions without due care and deliberation, by rushing things 
now because it’s expedient for us, by jamming up a 10 or 12 
hour day, Mr. Speaker, we end up condemning people like this 
to waiting slowly, minute by minute, hour after hour, and 
worry. And that is simply unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is one of the fundamental reasons why I have so much 
difficulty with the fact that this government seems hell-bent to 
rush through this kind of stuff by making us put in this time in a 
rush. I would rather stay here till July and debate these issues 
properly than to rush through stuff if it means that it’s going to 
end up being that people like this are going to have to sit alone 
and worry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are the kinds of situations that we have. 
We need to deal with these issues properly and effectively, and 
we have to realize that not all the business of this House 
happens within the 1:30 to 5 o’clock or the 1:30 to 10:30 time 
frame. A lot of the business of what ultimately is decided on the 
floor of this House is time that’s taken to think and reflect and 
plan and research and talk and, foremost, listen to the people 
out there that we serve. 
 
And that’s where this government has failed. This is where this 
government is now in an inappropriate situation by trying to 
just get the job done in a short time frame. The decisions we 
make here, we have to make after very carefully thinking 
through everything that we do  taking the time to research, 
taking the time to listen, taking the time to contact the people  
the decisions of which we’re going to have people live with for 
a long, long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors across this province are worried about 
what we are doing here. They’re worried about what this 
government is doing. And we are going to debate the issues. We 
certainly will, Mr. Speaker. But we’re not going to debate these 
issues 14 hours a day for two or three days until we physically 
drop to the ground and our minds no longer work because this 
government is jamming these hours. 
 
We’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to take 
the time to thoughtfully, carefully consider the issues. Not like 
this government has done, about ramming things in front of 
people’s faces. Because we know that we not only represent the 
one-third of the people that these people have representing 
them, that have voted for them, we represent the two-thirds of 
the people that want nothing to do with this government. And 
that’s who we’re going to stand up for. Even though we’re few, 
we speak for many, Mr. Speaker. And you know that that’s 
right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other people that are concerned are the people 
who are families of these seniors. I know in my community that 
there are many, many people who are living at home, who are 
senior, who are in increasingly difficult situations because of 
their health, and who have family, not necessarily right in the 
community. 
 
The government is right when they say that the world is 
changing. It used to be that families stayed very close to home.  
  



2258  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

Where mom and dad homesteaded or where they had their 
family business in a small community, in many, many cases the 
children did not live that far from home. They became part of 
the family business. They became part of the family farm. They 
married neighbours’ sons and daughters and they stayed near to 
home. And so the image of the nuclear family or the family of 
that era was much tighter and closer geographically than it is 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Today we have in many instances a whole changing reality for a 
whole number of reasons. People are living longer, so our 
parents are living to an older age. And the children of these 
people by and large have spread much further, not only through 
Saskatchewan or Canada, but the world, looking for 
opportunities and pursuing careers that they now had. That’s the 
one major change that has happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The second thing that has happened is, it used to be that it was 
rare that there were two working people in a family’s 
relationship. They were all working but not in professional jobs 
or careers. Very often the traditional model of family was the 
husband was out doing the job away from home and the wife 
was at home doing the job at home. And so they both had jobs 
to do for the family, but one was different than the other and 
one of the jobs was centred at the home. 
 
Today that’s largely not true. It’s necessary, both because of 
careers and of the changing atmosphere of job opportunities, 
that people are looking outside for jobs, and so both couples are 
working. And so we see the situation in many instances where 
these families are looking at their parent or parents in increasing 
age and decreasing health and they are physically unable to 
provide the kind of physical support that they used to be able to 
do. 
 
I remember a neighbour of ours on the farm, that when they 
took over the farm, they built a new house and their parents 
lived in a smaller house, the original house, just across the 
farmyard. And it was an easy matter for them to check one or 
two or three times a day, to go and see how their parents were 
across the farmyard. 
 
The mother and the father, the grandmother and grandfather, 
you know, tended to their house, tended to a small garden, 
watched the flowers, played with the grandchildren. It was a 
wonderful type of situation. But that no longer exists, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s no longer the world of today. 
 
But people still love their parents. They’re still concerned about 
their grandparents, and they’re still worried about who’s going 
to look after them. And so we in our wisdom have said, you’ve 
got to look after yourself, and what we’ll do is we’ll come 
around with a nice meal for you in a styrofoam box, that’s been 
prepared three or four hours earlier and rides around in the back 
seat of a car of a bunch of community volunteers to do the 
meals on wheels, and this is what you’re going to get your meal 
for the day on now, thank you very much. 
 
And so all of a sudden everybody, all of these people who for 
their whole lives have been used to preparing and eating 
home-cooked meals, have now got take-out food that’s sent to  

them from an institution. Wonderful way that we’re looking 
after our seniors, isn’t it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the reason that we’ve ended up doing this, we end up then 
with a nurse that comes around once a week and does the high 
blood pressure. We end up with someone that comes around 
and cuts the grass and paints the fence every now and again 
because it’s a job. There is no love, there is no community 
attachment, there is no personal relationship here any longer. 
And people then say . . . the minister gets up in this House day 
after day and say they’re going to have a very good home. 
 
Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister, but your definition of 
a very good home and a comfortable and suitable place to live 
is a little different than my definition, Mr. Speaker. Because it 
may meet the definitions under the SPCA (Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) but it doesn’t meet the 
definitions of home under what I consider the dignity and 
respect that our seniors are deserved of. 
 
And the problem that we have, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve rushed 
again and we’ve ended up with no choices and no solutions 
because we wouldn’t talk and listen; we wouldn’t even engage 
in the possibility that there may be other creative solutions for 
providing proper homes for these people. The only way we’ve 
thought of this is it had to be some institutionalized, 
union-based institution where people are treated as numbers 
instead of as people. 
 
(1600) 
 
No one sat down and dealt with the community organizations 
and said, is there any vision that could be done more 
effectively, more cheaply, more cost-effective, but also more 
humanely and would create an atmosphere of home and an 
environment of friendship for these people. It wasn’t done. 
 
And so we’re ended up into this situation where now not only 
the seniors are afraid of what their future holds for them, their 
families have the same fear of what the future holds for their 
parents. And there is absolutely no ability, no process, no 
thought about how we can develop alternatives that will make 
this happen a lot more humanely. 
 
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the result of what happens 
when we sit here and say, it’s now time to get out of this 
legislature; in order to get “done,” we have to meet ten and a 
half hours a day. 
 
I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our job isn’t to get done here. 
Our job is to represent the people well, to listen to them and to 
provide creative solutions and alternatives that we just 
absolutely have to have if we’re going to move this province 
humanely into the 21st century. We can do things differently. 
We do not have to just follow the fiscal imperatives that have 
occurred, because they have not worked. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at what’s happened to health 
care in my community, and I think that the cut-backs and the 
hurts and the hardships must have at least resulted in substantial 
savings. And you know what? When I look at the public  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

accounts numbers, health is receiving roughly the same one and 
a half billion dollars a year that’s it’s been receiving for the last 
number of years. 
 
There is no savings that we’re incurring. All we’re doing is 
re-jigging things. We’re moving it from here to there, and there 
to here, and we’re trying to feel our way through a process. And 
we’re spending more money on the process of change and the 
process of experimentation and the process of ideology, than we 
are on the actual people that need the service. Because we’re 
following an ideological vein and we’re not taking the time to 
properly consider all of the alternatives. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reality we have, in my mind, 
and that’s the concern that I have for the seniors and the issues 
that confront them in my constituency and this province. 
 
But health care has not only failed the seniors of this province, 
it’s also failed the people that work as front-line workers in the 
health care profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall not very long ago, where my wife needed 
surgery, and I went in with her to the hospital when she was 
having this surgery. And I sat with her after her surgery, and I 
sat in a ward where there was too few nurses. The nurses that 
were there were extremely conscientious and extremely mindful 
of their responsibilities, but they were asked to do the 
physically impossible tasks of providing the care that was 
needed for these patients. 
 
They were asked to have a great number of people on their 
ward. They were asked to deal with these people’s health 
situations. And it was physically impossible for them to do it 
with any kind of time and any kind of compassion, with any 
kind of care. And what happened is that they were worn out at 
the end of the day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it strikes me, it strikes me, Mr. Speaker, that 
what was happening is that there was just ideological . . . again 
cut-backs. And you know what happens when cut-backs occur 
in the union shop. Well bumping starts happening. And they 
say, oh nobody loses their jobs. Well of course they do. The 
most protected of course retain theirs. 
 
And so we ended up in a situation in this hospital where most of 
the new graduate nurses, the people that were the youngest, the 
freshest, the most able to put up with these kind of extended 
hours, were all the people that had lost their jobs. They had 
been bumped down the system by the people that were more 
senior to them. And so you ended up in a situation where the 
people that were providing the actual front-line care were 
people of a more advanced age. They had been supervisors and 
managers. And so now they were asked to do these heavy, 
heavy ward duties, and it was wearing them out. 
 
The other thing that happened is, because of the cut-backs and 
because of the rushing, there was also a very much increased 
workload and injury factor that was occurring. And so what was 
happening, I suspect, is that there was much more time off for 
injury, for hurt backs and pulled muscles. And so substitutions 
had to come in. The people that were now on leave were still  

being paid because of the nature of the contract and the 
responsibilities, so that the whole process ended up costing as 
much or more than if the wards had been staffed appropriately 
in the first instance. And so where’s the savings? 
 
Well obviously there is no savings. The Department of Health’s 
budget will show you year after year there are no savings. It’s 
just money that’s misspent, money that’s wasted, because this 
government has had no plan for health care from the very 
beginning. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s because you’ve rushed 
through things too quickly without proper process and 
consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other people of course that fit into this are 
employees, the front-line employees who aren’t necessarily the 
professional health care providers. And I’m talking about the 
people that have to provide the physical support for the facility. 
And so we have people that, instead of now having to push a 
mop down a mile of corridor, were being told they got to push it 
down two miles of corridor. That is what was happening, and 
the reason they were being told that is because they now had 
two managers to tell them to do that so they could justify their 
existence over the process. 
 
And again what’s happened in these shut-downs is, nobody is 
remembering the employees. Nobody is giving consideration to 
the people that are involved in the system. And the process of 
top-down direction in health care does not lend itself to 
listening from the ground up. I mean if the direction from the 
funding comes from Regina and the Department of Health and 
Mr. Duane Adams, and he says, this is what you shall do and 
this is how you shall fund your money and it’ll come through 
this pool or this stream and you can transfer one way but not the 
other way, and those are the rules, people — this is all you’ve 
got. There is no more — then what happens? The district health 
board says, well what are we going to do? The CEO (chief 
executive officer) says to his people, what are we going to do? 
And they make a decision, and down it goes. 
 
And the result is lay-offs of service and people falling through 
the cracks of an ill-thought-out process that we are only now 
fully beginning to comprehend the magnitude of, as we have 
closure and closure, beds cut back after beds cut back, at a time 
when we have an increasingly ageing population. And it’s 
totally inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t know 
what’s going on. You know, my colleague certainly says, we’ve 
got the money to spend $70 million on a computer system. 
We’ve got the money for that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we get wrapped up into this technological 
world, and we begin to actually believe that it saves us money. 
We think that, and we believe it. And I will challenge anyone in 
a business who 10 years ago was operating that business 
without a computer, I will challenge anyone in a business, 
including one like my own  who has said they used to do 
their booking systems and the functions that they now believe 
the computer is saving them so much time over  I will 
challenge them to show me how much actual time and money 
this computer system is saving them. 
 
And I will challenge this government to explain to us how a  
  



2260  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

$70 million computer system is going to make health care better 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. I understand it will do this and 
that. It will transfer this and that. And what we end up doing is 
having way more information that travels faster between places 
and takes way more people to assimilate and understand. And 
health care does not get any better. The bureaucracy gets bigger. 
The administration gets bigger, and the system goes missing 
with a bunch of things that we used to do much better with 
common sense, on the ground, local decision-making processes 
that happened all along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is impossible for me to say seriously enough 
about what the ramifications have been to health care in my 
community and my district and into rural Saskatchewan. But 
it’s also happened in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
We end up with the situation where we have been tabling 
through the 67-or-whatever-odd days that this legislature has 
been sitting, petitions from across this province of people who 
are saying your decision to close the Plains Health Centre is 
absolutely unconscionable. 
 
We will table over the course of this sitting over 70,000 
signatures of people that say you’re wrong. And when I say that 
we’re speaking for the two-thirds of the people that didn’t 
support this government, I think that you know that that is a 
serious commitment, because we have 70,000 people that have 
signed petitions to say, stop what you’re doing, rethink the 
process of why you’re closing the Plains Health Centre. 
 
And so it’s not just urban Saskatchewan that’s suffering under 
the fact that this government has never had a plan thought out 
for health care; who totally ignored a very well-thought-out 
Murray Commission report that at least could have been a 
fundamental starting point for serious discussion and planning 
for the people of this province. No, we couldn’t do that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We had to move on with some ideology out of 
Ontario or somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is a very, very serious concern for 
people. Over the last few months and weeks I have met an 
increasing number of people who serve to me as inspiration and 
examples of why we just must do better in our health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in a small community in our constituency 
last summer. And I walked past this house, and it had a 
caragana hedge in the front that was grown up and overgrown 
and looking pretty wild. The house was in obvious disrepair 
with plastic . . . It was a house with a . . . older home with a 
veranda. Some of the windows in the veranda were broken and 
there was plastic stapled over top of these missing window 
panes. The grass was grown up and there were dandelions 
everywhere. And it looked to me when I was walking by on the 
sidewalk that this house was abandoned, that it was condemned. 
 
But I thought, well I better stop in if I’m going door to door 
anyway and see if anyone’s home. I knocked on the front door 
and a lady’s voice from inside invited me in. And here was an 
elderly lady sitting in a large armchair in the middle of a 
living-room, and on her side she had a little coffee table and she  

had a remote control for her television there. She had a 
telephone. She had a glass of water, and she had a tray of pills, 
of medication. And she was sitting in a chair crocheting 
something or other, and I went in to visit her. And she said, 
please come in. She said, I can’t get up very easily; would you 
mind coming in? And so I did, and we started having a 
conversation. 
 
And we talked about, was she alone, and did . . . was her 
husband around or did she have children in the community? 
And she told me that she was all alone. Her husband had 
predeceased her a number of years earlier. Her one son was 
working in the oilfields in Alberta, and she was alone in this 
small community  all alone. And she wasn’t able easily to get 
up. In front of her was a walker that she used to get around her 
home. 
 
And this was not in the city of Melfort or the community of 
Tisdale that are major communities, this was in a small, rural 
hamlet, and she was there all alone. And I said to her, what are 
you going to do if something happens to you; how is your 
health? And she said, well I will phone my neighbour and if 
he’s home, he will come and help me. And I said, what do you 
mean, if he’s home? 
 
And she said, well he has a job from 9 till 5 or 8 till 4 or 
whatever, every day, Monday to Friday  this individual who 
she counted on helping her in an emergency was at work. I said, 
well what happens if something happens during work hours? 
She said, well I leave it to God. 
 
So here she was sitting all alone, pretty well isolated, and she 
was willing to endure that. I said, where would you like to go? 
She said, I’m here; God will look after me. Well God better 
because this government surely won’t. 
 
That’s the reality of these people’s homelessness and 
helplessness. And I know they’re not out in the street, I know 
they’re not living on a bed on a sidewalk. They are in these 
situations, and this government does not seem to recognize 
what a great deal of fear that puts on people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two weekends ago when I was home in my 
constituency, a lady phoned me and said, I need you to meet my 
neighbour in Caskey Place, which is a home in Melfort, and this 
lady lives independent and she is not able yet to be seriously 
enough considered and classified to be able to move into 
Nirvana or one of the long-term care homes. 
 
(1615) 
 
And you know what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, because you’re 
cutting the beds on the long-term care facilities, what they’re 
doing is changing the classification requirements for entry to 
these homes. And so the people that are now entering these 
homes are more seriously and more seriously in need when 
they’re able to meet the qualifications. This woman was in a 
situation where she was virtually restricted to her room because 
of a lot of health complications that she had, and she knows she 
has no hope of getting into Nirvana, particularly now, because 
the community has to withdraw 30 beds. 
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

And I know that the minister has said, well we’re not throwing 
anybody out  I know that. But what happens, what happens 
when you draw 30 beds from the available pool of beds for 
long-term care? 
 
It means people like this lady, who are waiting for one of those 
spots, are going to have to wait even longer. Because the reality 
is it’s going to take from 12 to 20 months for 30 people to pass 
away in these beds so that we just get down to where the 
minister’s new dictate about the quota is going to be. And that 
is how long people are going to have to wait before any new 
people can come unless there is an extreme emergency. And the 
people that are there know that and that fear sits on their head 
and in their minds every single day, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
they’re facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a very troubling thing when a person reflects 
on the great deal of pride that this province always had about 
the way we treated each other and particularly the way we 
treated the seniors of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that two-thirds of the people are 
asking us as the opposition to represent them and to say to this 
government, take the time to think out the ramifications of your 
decisions properly. The solution is not in trying to get out of 
this House in a hurry. The solution is in trying to work together 
without this ideological framework that is forcing us to make 
these kind of ill-thought-out decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know of other issues that are particularly 
important to me and my constituency and I think in rural 
Saskatchewan as well. And it’s part of the concern I have for 
what we’re being asked to do in terms of 14-hour days for 
discussion of the issues. And I’ll refer specifically to the 
government’s proposal for a 911 system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we first had 911 on television we looked at 
the whole thing that 911 could be to people. Everyone watched 
the show 911 and perhaps that was both a blessing and a curse, 
because what we could do is, we could see what technology and 
emergency services could be. And granted, in the initial 
instances these services were based out of the Los Angeles 
County perhaps, and it was idealized by television. That’s true. 
 
But everyone in the province came to understand that there was 
real merit in having a 911 system for emergency responses. And 
so initially the first 911 systems were located in the larger 
centres, in Saskatoon and Regina and, Mr. Speaker, I don’t fault 
that because it makes sense to start somewhere. 
 
And so when that was occurring everyone watched and looked 
with a great deal of anticipation to the day when a 911 system 
could be made available all across the province. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I certainly was one person, when I was chairing the 
chamber of commerce in Melfort, that felt that we could take a 
role as rural communities to facilitate the implementation of a 
911 system throughout north-east Saskatchewan at the time. 
 
And so the chamber of commerce acted as a facilitator and 
invited municipalities, towns and villages, fire departments, 
ambulance associations, health care providers  anyone we  

could think of that would be remotely interested in the various 
aspects of 911 from the whole north-east  to come to a 
meeting to discuss the whole issue of the implication of a 911 
system. 
 
And we invited a gentleman from Swift Current who is very 
implemental about working on a 911 system in the south-west 
as well, to come and speak to us. And, Mr. Speaker, to indicate 
how important this was to the people in the north-east, every 
single municipal jurisdiction in that whole north-east corner 
came to that initial meeting. Now, Mr. Speaker, that tells me 
something, when there’s that much interest in a topic that every 
single municipal jurisdiction will come to a meeting, about how 
important it is to them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they said that they could think of no reason 
why there could not be a fully enhanced 911 system developed 
for the north-east. Because at that time, the only logical 
argument that was an impediment to a fully implemented 
system was technology. And with the digital telephone system 
that was at that time spreading across Saskatchewan, that 
physical, technological impediment was removed. And now it 
was going to be physically possible to link all these systems to 
an enhanced 911 system. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we started working on the project. All of 
a sudden the government, and particularly the then minister of 
Municipal Affairs, the Hon. Carol Carson again, of course at 
least read the minutes of the chamber of commerce meetings 
and thought, oh-oh, these people are on to something; I better 
jump on the bandwagon. 
 
But again, because there wasn’t the time to consult and to think 
through the process and to listen to what the people really 
wanted, they then, before the last election in ’95, made the 
commitment that they were going to have a 911 system for all 
of Saskatchewan. But they never did say what kind of a system 
it was going to be. They just jumped on the bandwagon about 
what was obviously a good idea, again without thinking any of 
this through and without dealing with proper consultation. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in front of us on the floor 
of this legislature now, a proposed Bill as to the solution the 
government proposes. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
acknowledged in our discussion, in our work, that there have 
been a good number of very positive things that have occurred 
in terms of direction the government’s going. And we concur 
with them and support those positive things. 
 
But again, as in health care, the government has simply not 
thought through the whole process. And now we’re being asked 
to consider this legislation in these ridiculous hours and try to 
get someone to understand why this system is flawed 
fundamentally and why what’s being proposed is simply not 
going to again meet the needs of the people that we represent. 
And again we’re repeating the same flaw. 
 
And the reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re so adamant that this 
Bill is flawed, is because what we’ve ended up doing is ending 
up with a placebo for the people out there. We’ve taken, over 
the last four years, a situation where people like I’ve outlined,  
  



2262  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

are living out in rural communities, snow bound, alone, with a 
telephone at their side . . . that’s true. 
 
I showed you the example of the lady living in a small 
community that has a telephone at their side, that’s true. And 
we now are going to do the ultimate disservice to these people 
in that we’re going to fool them into thinking that while on the 
one hand we’ve taken all this health care away from them; 
we’ve taken away the ability of the health care in the region to 
respond to their needs by having proper and decent, humane, 
comfortable places for them to live and call home . . . and not 
just a sterile institution; we’ve taken that away from them and 
said, now you’re going to stay at home. 
 
And we make them think that they should end up with a fast 
food, styrofoam-packed lunch and that’s supposed to take care 
of their nutritional needs. We send around a nurse and a janitor 
every now and then to help them with their home and their 
medical needs. And we have them alone with the telephone in 
their hand. And now we’re going to propose the ultimate 
disservice to them because we’re going to tell them that we 
have given them a 911 emergency system. 
 
And these people, who have had very little to do over the last 
while because they’re homebound, have watched the same 
television programs that you and I have. And their hearts leap 
with joy when they think they now have a 911 system like 
they’ve seen on television. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is not anywhere 
close to what this government intends to offer. They’re going to 
call it 911, and they’re going to allow people to think that they 
truly have the 911 system that they believe is what 911 means. 
Where if they phone there’s someone on the other end of the 
line who can talk to them and can counsel them about the 
emergency that they’re experiencing. They believe that while 
that person is talking to them, they’re dispatching a helicopter 
or trucks or ambulances or paramedic units or whatever, and as 
that’s happening they know where the most close unit is to their 
physical location. They believe all of that is going to happen 
when they dial 911. 
 
And they are being duped  duped, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
into thinking that they are going to have this kind of a service. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the cruellest joke of all on 
these people in rural Saskatchewan, because you know and I 
know that that is absolutely not what’s going to happen under 
the legislation that’s before this House. And now this 
government is asking for us to sit ten and a half hours a day so 
that they can wear us down and make us deal with this 
legislation and force it on the people without the due process 
and the thoughtfulness that is needed. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
absolutely a disservice and injustice to the people that we 
represent. 
 
And so we need the time to be able to point out to this 
government, if they will listen, what’s flawed in their system. 
We owe it to the two-thirds of the people that have not been 
mandated by this government. That’s who we owe it to. We 
owe it to these constituents to point out our role as opposition is  

as important as the role of government is in charting the course 
and the future of this province. It is our role to do that 
thoughtfully, with due process and time for consideration, time 
to point out to this government where we believe fundamentally 
their process is flawed. And we should not, Mr. Speaker, get 
into a rush in order to make this happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have attempted to show how the decisions of 
government are interrelated and how we run a real risk of doing 
fundamental long-term damage to the people we represent if we 
do not take the time to allow each of us, all 58 of us as 
legislators, to do the proper work we have to for research, for 
consultation, and for thoughtful approaches to legislation that 
this House has to deal with. I don’t believe in any way we can 
do that by all of a sudden, after some magical time in the 
session, if it’s at 60 days or 63 days . . . I hear people tell me, 
well it’s traditional that at this time we go to extended hours. 
 
Well if this tradition has served us so well, why are we 
experiencing all these problems in health care? Why are we in 
the mess that we are on all these issues if this tradition of 
ramming through everything at the end has served us so darn 
well? Why is that something that is a way that we have to 
ultimately and blindly follow into the future? What is wrong 
with this Assembly sitting a little longer? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard some interesting arguments from 
the tradition as to why this happens, as to the fact it’s very, very 
costly. Well, Mr. Speaker, after 70 days I’m not going to get 
paid at all. So the costly day here is the first day, the day that 
we sit down and do the ceremonial things and we all get paid, 
and we accomplish absolutely nothing other than ceremony. 
That’s the most expensive day. It would be logical that we 
disband that day if that’s a day that we should get rid of. So 
that’s a day that’s expensive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my basic job as an MLA doesn’t change 
after day 70. My job is to stand and represent the people in this 
province. So that isn’t costing a darn cent more. I suspect the 
lighting bill costs something, and that’ll change a little bit. Mr. 
Speaker, the library, the legislative staff, all the legislator staff, 
they’re all going to get paid irregardless. The Clerk’s office, 
your office, all of our offices are still going to get paid the same 
way. So what is the extra cost? 
 
But I figured it out, Mr. Speaker. The extra cost is the pages. 
We are going to burden on the people of this province, the extra 
cost of the pages. And, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the argument of 
why we should rush legislation is because we’re overpaying the 
pages, I submit you should ask what we’re paying them. 
Because it’s nothing when it comes to the importance of what 
we have to face here. 
 
The argument of how much it costs to run this place is 
ludicrous. It costs the same to run it irregardless if we’re here or 
not. The only thing that changes is the cost of the pages. And if 
any member opposite is going to tell me that they’re prepared to 
put in jeopardy the people of this province’s health care, or 911, 
or any of the other issues because of the wages that you’re 
paying to the pages, then I think you’re on very dangerous 
ground because that would be the best money that we have ever  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

spent in this province in its entire history. So let’s not forget 
about that argument. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  The point is well taken because the best 
money that we’re paying on the pages is because they’re at least 
here every day and they do the work that they’re intended to, 
while the members of the Assembly take a great deal of latitude 
in terms of when they’re here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other issues that we’ve attempted to 
bring before this legislature that this government will not deal 
with, irregardless of the fact that we sit longer hours or not. Mr. 
Speaker, for example, I want to talk about two further areas to 
illustrate what I mean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the first things that the government did 
when they came to office after 1991 or ‘92, is they decided that 
they had to pick the pockets of the people in Saskatchewan in 
order to balance the budget. And balance the budget they must. 
I agree with that. 
 
And so instead of dealing with any of the ridiculous things that 
they had promised to spend money on, like their union friends, 
they went into our pockets. And one of the things that they did 
in going into our pockets, because they weren’t bold enough to 
just raise taxes to the point we all bled, what they did is say, 
well let’s start drawing money out of communities through 
vices. 
 
And so we decided to get into the gambling business because, 
Mr. Speaker, the government knew that this was going to be 
one avenue that was going to be a golden calf for them, and it 
has turned out to be. I’m not sure what the last numbers are for 
the province in a fiscal year, but I understand that the gain is 
between 90 and $110 million annually  $100 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And that sounds like a lot of money, and it is, but it 
sounds like a lot more money when I relate it to my community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure right now how many VLT (video 
lottery terminal) machines are in Melfort. I’m not at all sure. 
I’m not sure what the current number is in terms of how much 
money leaves the community of Melfort each and every year 
because of gambling. But The Melfort Journal a year or 18 
months ago had done a study and they had learnt and had 
shown at that time that it was approaching a million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, out of the community of Melfort alone. 
 
Now Melfort is a great community and a growing community 
and a fairly prosperous community by and large. And it has 
over 6,000 people living there. But, Mr. Speaker, for a 
community of 6,000 people to have a million dollars net money 
leave that community each and every year to ching into the 
coffers of the government’s money habit is unconscionable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so what we end up having is a Melfort contributing a 
million dollars to the government’s coffers. We have Gronlid  

contributing several tens of thousands of dollars. We have 
Tisdale sending hundreds of thousands of dollars. We have Star 
City sending tens of thousands of dollars. We have Kinistino 
sending tens of thousands of dollars. All throughout my 
constituency in that whole district . . . the town of Nipawin, 
again, probably contributing something in the magnitude close 
to a million dollars. I shudder to guess how much money is 
coming out of that corner of rural Saskatchewan to feed the 
government’s need and drive to have money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was not a problem at all for this government 
to do, absolutely not a problem to take this money out of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what’s the ramifications of that, Mr. Speaker? The 
ramifications are pretty easy to see. There are people who 
habituate these places that I think may have a problem. But 
they’re fortunate enough that they also have the financial 
wherewithal to afford that problem if you like. 
 
But you know what? I don’t know many people that can spend 
2 or 3 or 4 or $500 a day, in some instances, that are going to 
have the financial wherewithal to afford that problem for long. 
And so what happens? Someone who may have decent assets 
and wealth is going to have fewer assets and wealth sooner or 
later. And so that happens. 
 
You have the situation where people who have only modest 
means get hooked into the trap of gambling and VLT addiction 
if you like, and so their modest means are now stretched. And 
so what happens is that instead of the pay cheque lasting for 35 
days in the month, all of a sudden it only lasts 25 days and we 
have a period of five days at the end of the month when maybe 
the cupboard isn’t as full as it used to be and maybe the two 
quart of milk or the two litre of milk isn’t purchased as it should 
be for the family, because suddenly essential money is going 
into VLTs. 
 
You have people who have turned to theft because of their 
addiction to the VLTs in communities. You have people who 
have virtually lost everything they’ve had because of these 
VLTs. And so it touches us all. 
 
Even the people who have the wherewithal to have the money 
to spend into these VLTs are being touched by it because a 
million dollars is being removed from my community for this 
VLT addiction. 
 
And where might it go otherwise? Where did it go otherwise? 
Well some of it went to the local service groups that held 
bingos and ran the small little operations where people got 
together, played five cards of bingo, spent $5 or $10 in an 
evening. And it was a social event and by and large the profits 
from that stayed in the community. 
 
And so when I look in my community, I see things like ball 
diamonds. I see youth groups and organizations that were 
sponsored by the Lions Club and the Kinsmen Club and the 
Knights of Columbus and the hockey associations and all of 
those things that were supported by the benefits of the 
community bingos. 
  



2264  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

And so in an evening a person who is really into bingo big time, 
boy if they are on a real losing streak, they are out 10 or $15. 
And it was a wonderful social evening while they visited and all 
these things went on. And probably out of that 10 or $15, 70 or 
75 per cent stayed right in my community. And so it became a 
social event. It became an entertainment event and it became a 
source of local revenue to be used by local people for local 
priorities and local projects. And that was all right. 
 
But now what happened? Because we’re pulling a million 
dollars out in VLTs, people don’t have money to spend the 2 or 
$300 on a VLT, or the roll of quarters or loonies or twoonies, or 
whatever is going into these things now. And so the bingos are 
having a very difficult time. They’re having a very difficult 
time in order to raise the funds through the bingo that they used 
to, because the money can’t be used everywhere. 
 
And so what’s suffering is the Knights of Columbus and the 
Kinsmen Club and the Lions Club. And all the projects that 
they supported in our community are having a very difficult 
time. And that’s the ramification of the government’s policy on 
VLT. Because again they haven’t thought it through. It was just 
rammed through ideologically without due process. And what’s 
happened? Here’s what we now see, is the ramification of this. 
 
This opposition wants for this Assembly to consider some 
things that maybe rural Saskatchewan needs to progress and 
move forward. We wanted this Assembly to consider a regional 
telephone system . . . regional telephone districts for 
long-distance purposes. And I proposed a Bill to address those 
type of issues, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate the fact it got first 
reading. 
 
But I know and the Assembly knows that that’s where it’s going 
to be. Because we’re in a hurry now to get out. We have to get 
all this work done because we can’t possibly consider a good 
idea that anyone else might have. Because it’s just fiscal or it’s 
just because of ideology. 
 
And I understand that it would cost money for SaskTel; I 
understand it would have money implications to SaskTel if this 
was implemented. And the point of the whole exercise was, is 
let’s consider it and let’s look at this type of a concept. We 
could say that it’s difficult for people. We acknowledge that it’s 
difficult for people across the road to phone each other. It’s 
difficult to have 11 or 12 or 13 telephone exchanges in a 
constituency. 
 
And what we’ve proposed is that if we want to have an add-on, 
an enhancement to the regional economic development 
authorities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I recognize it would 
cost. The member opposite asked me how much . . . the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, asked me how much it would 
cost, and I will certainly get to that, Mr. Speaker, because I 
recognize it would cost money. I recognize, from the 
information we have received, if you were going to implement 
this system . . . and the only source of the replacement of the 
revenue that you’re now taking from rural Saskatchewan again 
to implement this system, if that was the only source . . . and I 
understand the number approaches $70 million globally if you 
look at that in the total context of the province; I understand  

that. 
 
So if you’re going to replace that $70 million with revenue from 
the subscribers, I recognize it would take something in the 
magnitude of 25 to 30 dollars in order to do that, per subscriber 
in those areas. Now that is probably not a viable solution in 
itself. I understand that. 
 
So we have to come up with solutions that will mitigate this 
whole situation to some extent. Does SaskTel have to have a 
$70 million annual profit? We should ask ourselves that 
question. Is it fair that you have no problem to take $100 
million out of rural Saskatchewan in gambling revenue, and 
you’re taking $70 million out of rural Saskatchewan in 
long-distance charges? When in the world is this government 
going to put something back? It has to go back. You can’t just 
keep taking from rural Saskatchewan if you expect rural 
Saskatchewan to be able to sustain itself. It’s just not possible. 
 
And so what we have to do is we have to be able to consider 
alternatives to the status quo if we’re going to be able to meet 
the challenges of the next century. And we can’t do that if we’re 
going to keep rushing and hastening our decisions on all the 
issues that are before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleague will undoubtedly speak 
more eloquently about issues of education, but I would like to 
touch briefly on them because I did spend six years as a 
member of the board of education in my community. And I do 
have at least passing knowledge about the issues of education. 
And I will tell you that through that time we spent a great deal 
of time with challenges that were in front of us  some of them 
totally unrelated to the government situation. I think that in the 
time we were treated fairly by government. Some of them were 
just things that happened in terms of demographics. In terms of 
the school division having to deal with a decline in enrolment, 
that was sort of a short-term thing, but certainly also a trend of 
what was happening to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I understand what it means to have fiscal imperatives 
that you have to meet. It’s not unknown to rural people to 
realize they have to live within balanced budgets. School boards 
have been doing it for years, municipal budget people have 
been doing it for years, and it doesn’t come as strange to us to 
have to do that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I look at what’s happening in the whole 
educational field with a great deal of concern, because again I 
think one of the problems that we’ve been experiencing is the 
fact that we don’t think through solutions early enough. 
 
I have to as well, in having said that I served on the school 
division, I also have to note with considerable credit to the 
government of a proposal that we had made as a joint 
community effort. And it was a joint community effort because 
it involved the Melfort urban school division, the Tiger Lily 
rural school division, and the city of Melfort in a joint project to 
approach the Department of Education, back before 1991, about 
a regional college in our area. 
 
And the government of day . . . I recall we had met the then  
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

minister of Education who said this was an impossibility; that 
there was absolutely no way on earth that there would ever be 
any likelihood, in a reasonable way, that it was going to be 
possible to deliver university education programs to a regional 
college in a place like Melfort, Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we persisted, and we talked about this, and we met with 
people ongoingly over time. And I have to give this current 
government credit because on this issue they did listen to us, 
and they did take the time to look and try to build some creative 
alliances, if you like. And so I note with considerable 
satisfaction that there has been a great deal of progress made in 
our community of Melfort in terms of this whole initiative. 
 
And I use this as an example of what positive things can happen 
when you take the time to listen and to think through and work 
with local people in a constructive way instead of an ideological 
way to make things happen. And today I think the Department 
of Education points to the Melfort situation where we now have 
first- and some second-year university classes being offered, 
that we’re using facilities that were extra, if you like, by and 
large in the composite collegiate to deliver those services. And I 
do believe that it would show as an example of where the 
constructive, comprehensive kind of work that can happen will 
bear very, very good fruit. 
 
And so it’s not as if I would totally stay here and slam 
everything that this government does. I point with considerable 
satisfaction as one example where working together bears some 
dividends. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that is of critical concern to my 
constituency is the future of agriculture. And it is something 
that I think many people think is just sort of a homogeneous 
group of people and that the farming community is all the same. 
 
It became a very obvious thing to me when I travelled around 
the large constituency leading up to the election how different 
the farm community was, even within my constituency. And 
I’m sure it’s going to be an increasing source of amazement as 
you learn how the provincial scene changes very dramatically 
from the north-east to the south-west, from the East to the West, 
and from different soil zones and areas. 
 
But no matter where you go, agriculture is the backbone of 
Saskatchewan. And we often get carried away by the great 
things that people say that’s happening in the mining industry 
and the forestry and the lumber industry, and they are incredibly 
good things. But we can’t forget that the backbone of this 
province is, and is likely to continue to be into the foreseeable, 
imaginable future, agriculture in one form or the other. It’s 
either going to be agricultural as we’ve known it or agricultural 
in a changing world and with changing technology. But it’s still 
going to be agriculture. 
 
And within that broad definition, Mr. Speaker, there are a whole 
lot of different folks. You know, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, if you 
go back to communities in rural Saskatchewan, that you find all 
kinds of farmers. You find farmers that are very close to  

the earth, that have almost a spiritual linkage with the soil and 
with the environment and with the animals that they raise. It’s 
almost something mystical in nature that happens, and very 
often that they are the people that we think of when we think of 
agriculture. 
 
Other times we think of the very highly mechanized farmers 
that have four large, four-wheel-drive tractors and four large air 
seeders and hired men, and it’s like a corporate entity and a big 
business scenario. That, too, is agriculture. 
 
And they’re all businesses in one sense or the other, some more 
rooted in the soil and the tradition of the earth, and others more 
corporate in nature and attitude and responsibility. But they’re 
all farmers, and they’re all agriculture. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re the people that have been the 
backbone of our province, and they’re the people that right now 
are undergoing incredible change. They know that their industry 
is changing, and the forces of competition and free market and 
worldwide situations of famine and drought and oversupply or 
under-supply of commodities are having incredible pressures on 
them. 
 
Last night when I was watching television, I saw the effect of 
the downpour of rain in the community and the farming area 
around Kamsack, where an individual was interviewed on that 
program. And he said the field was just moving, that he had 
seeded. The water was like he had never seen. And in the 
downtown area where it showed pictures of vehicles going 
through two feet of water in that community. 
 
Well when that happens, what does that do to the community? 
There are those that are not as nearly immediately affected by it. 
But the person standing out in his yard, looking across that 
field, knows what it means to him. They know what it’s going 
to mean because the spring is late, and they know that what’s 
going to happen is that they are going to face an unsecure 
future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, where are we, as government, for these 
people? What have we done in order to build them some sense 
of security and then some sense of a plan that we can offer to 
them to say, here is a disaster of God, of nature; and we need 
you to know that if you will work with us, we have a plan in 
place that will sustain you, that’ll allow you to stay on your 
farm till next year. 
 
And we’ve dabbled with things. There was a plan in place, as 
you know, Mr. Speaker, called GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
plan). And no one suggests that that was a perfect plan. But at 
least it was a plan. It was at least a beginning. And I know that 
there were many farmers who did a better job of farming GRIP 
than they did of farming their land. But there was also many, 
many times more than that of farmers that used that and needed 
it in the best interests of the plan; and used it because it was a 
protection for them in the eventuality of travesties of nature or 
travesties of price which were out of their control. 
 
When you had a war between the Americans and Europeans and 
a price war, what did that person connected to the earth  
  



2266  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

have to do with that? His job was to grow his commodity and to 
try to be protected while politicians globally did their little 
political games. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we forget about what farmers mean to 
rural Saskatchewan. We forget that they are the core and the 
base on which our society and our province exists, Mr. Speaker. 
And we again are sitting here behind the illusion of the fact that 
now wheat is $7 a bushel, the farmers are fine. Everything is all 
right. We have nothing to worry about. 
 
Well I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, the only thing the farmers have 
going for them now is the fact that they’ve paid the highest 
prices that there’s every been for fertilizer, for chemical, for 
fuel, and all the input costs that they’re desperately trying to put 
into those fields. And they only get the $7 a bushel or the $6 a 
bushel if that crop is successfully put in the bin next fall. 
 
And so they need to know that we would take the time to think 
out programs that would be there for them when they need 
them. And so they have an important aspect to our community, 
and we have to take the time to make sure that what happens is 
in their best interest because what’s in their best interests is also 
in the best interests of everyone in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our area there are a great deal of aboriginal 
people that live around the community, and I want to briefly say 
a few words about how they have impact on the lives of the 
community. I am very much touched by the fact that when I 
spent some time on the bishop’s council, I had the privilege of 
meeting and beginning to know a gentleman by the name of 
Harry Lafond. 
 
Harry Lafond is a respected chief of his people and has moved 
his people forward a great deal with service and vision and 
integrity. And he tried, at least a bit, to explain to me the 
richness of the culture of the native people and how much they 
have to offer us. And I really think that what we have really 
missed over the years is the fact that none of us, as the 
communities that we grew up in, have taken the time to 
properly listen to the native community. We haven’t taken the 
time to appreciate the rich tradition that they have in their 
culture. We haven’t taken the time, Mr. Speaker, to understand 
the depth and breadth of their spirituality. 
 
We haven’t taken the time because we again knew best. We 
decided a number of years ago at Confederation that it was 
better that we make little, white, European Christians out of 
these people than to let their natural beauty and culture come to 
the fore. And today we grapple with that problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it hurts me deeply when I listen to some of the rednecked 
rhetoric that goes on about discrimination and prejudice against 
these people because again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve missed the 
point. The point that I’ve been trying to make today is that we 
have to listen, and we have to take the time to understand what 
the real issues are for our people and our aboriginal people. And 
if we do that, we will have the ability to all be enriched, to all 
be enhanced, and all to have a better situation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I raise that issue because I think it’s  

important to put it in a context of how we have to approach the 
whole challenge that we have of reconnecting ourselves to the 
real richness that the aboriginal community offers to our 
communities, offers to my community in Melfort, and to the 
whole of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I trust that I have sufficiently demonstrated the 
reason why I have a fundamental problem with this motion. Mr. 
Speaker, this Assembly needs to take the time so that we can 
properly consider all of the ramifications of the issues before us. 
It means that we have to work, but it can’t mean that we have to 
impose on ourselves superhuman hours of work so that any of 
the other work and all of the thought that we have to put into 
these issues are lost. 
 
We are making a fundamental mistake, Mr. Speaker, if we think 
that we can accept the direction of this motion, which is going 
to force us into ten-and-a-half or twelve-and-a-half hour days 
and to pile on top of that our committee work, our research 
work, our discussion work, our planning and preparation work. 
And to say that, when you look at the number of Bills that we 
have to deal with yet, that they can be dealt with thoughtfully 
and properly just by compressing all the work into the shortest 
period of time with the most amount of hours, that we will do it 
properly in the best interests of the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, I think is a huge error that we’re making. 
 
And I really, for one, do not care . . . I do not care, Mr. Speaker, 
if the precedent has been always to do this. I trust that I have 
demonstrated to you and to my colleagues today that, Mr. 
Speaker, that this has been, in my opinion, one of the faults that 
we’ve had, one of the failings that we as an Assembly have had 
in dealing with things too quickly, without due process and 
consideration. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the reasons that I’ve outlined, I cannot 
support this motion. And I would ask all members, irregardless 
of political partisanship or philosophical bent, to give due 
consideration to what we’re asking all of ourselves to do. 
 
I’m told that I should continue to raise one other issue that I 
have inadvertently overlooked. And so, Mr. Speaker, I will try 
real quickly to understand from my colleagues what it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one other issue of course avoids me for the 
moment. But I do recognize the challenge that was put before 
the hon. member of Post-Secondary Education some time ago, 
when he was asked to continue speaking on a topic, and some 
discussions were happening on the floor, and I sort of marvelled 
at his ability to do that. And I didn’t realize that I should’ve 
been listening much more attentively because I was going to be 
asked to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has occurred to me exactly what the issue is that 
I have neglected to make, and it’s a very important issue. Mr. 
Speaker, one of the important things that when we talk about 
the needs of agriculture to be considered properly, we have to 
consider the fact that in our rural communities agri-business is 
now becoming an important add-on to what agriculture used to 
be in its isolation. 
 
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m really particularly glad I thought of this, 
and I’m glad my colleagues pointed out the fact that I had 
inadvertently neglected to mention it in my speech because last 
night I had an opportunity to have a meeting with an individual 
that I had not seen in the agricultural business for almost 20 
years. And, Mr. Speaker, this individual is now a very 
important individual in the agri-food business, and it was a 
great pleasure to see him because when I had last contacted and 
worked with this individual was when we worked together to 
establish Plains Poultry in Wynyard, Saskatchewan. 
 
Plains Poultry was an interesting concept of how rural and 
urban people can work together to better agriculture. What it 
was, was a processing plant that was owned by a family in 
Wynyard, Saskatchewan, and I was in the poultry growing 
business at that time. And there were a number of people that I 
got to meet through my association with the business, and they 
were the KFC operators  Kentucky Fried Chicken. 
 
And I was raising chickens, and they were selling chickens, and 
so we realized quite quickly that there was a very symbiotic 
relationship that had to occur between these two groups of 
people if anyone was going to succeed. So, Mr. Speaker, I had 
the pleasure of being the first chairman and president of the 
company, Plains Poultry, that brought together these two groups 
who purchased the family processing business in Wynyard and 
who then together met the challenges of their industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I use that as an example in terms of a 
reference of where I’m coming from when I say that agriculture 
is now evolving into a new relationship between producers and 
primary producers and the market-place. 
 
And I know that one of the critical things that happened within 
that is that we have to do that more and more. And I point with 
a great deal of pride to a couple of businesses in my 
constituency that come to mind and I know in pointing them out 
that I seriously run the risk of omitting some, and I hope I will 
be forgiven. But I will point out, for example, Thomson Meats 
as an example of how relationships can come between 
agriculture and business for the betterment of all. 
 
Here you had a small, family business that originated in Naicam 
and was able to build a meat processing and cutting business. 
They moved to Melfort because it was more central and offered 
more labour and more people to work with, and so the business 
started and grew. Rusty Thomson, the patriarch of the clan, if 
you like, had a million ideas of how he could further process 
meat products and added recipes for cold cuts and sausage and 
things of that nature that are quite famous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
His son Lorne, who has ended up being the operational head of 
the company, has a lot of vision for the future. What he did was 
build a company and expand it so it was always growing and 
providing an outlet for Saskatchewan and world products of 
meat. And he had a vision that what you have to do if you really 
want to expand is you want to get into markets where there’s 
thousands of people, millions of people, tens of millions of 
people, and he expanded into the Asian market. 
 

And I was really pleased, Mr. Speaker, some weeks ago to 
congratulate the Minister of Agriculture on his efforts with the 
federal Minister of Agriculture and Mr. Thomson on their work 
of moving into the whole Asian market and to further enhance 
the opportunities that our companies have to value add 
agricultural products and to find market-places over there where 
they have huge difficulties in terms of meeting those markets. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that that’s a positive initiative that 
is going to bear fruit into the future. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of development that has occurred in 
the relatively near future . . . or in the recent past, has been the 
whole area around the lentil seed production. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s two major organizations in my constituency that I know 
are doing an incredible job over the last two years of developing 
markets for lentils. They are Walker Seeds out of Brooksby and 
Naber Seed out of Star City. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two companies based on farm families in the 
area who recognized they not only could grow these products, 
they needed to find markets for them, have developed markets 
all over the world. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I note with a great deal of pride that these 
people are now marketing their product throughout the 
Americas  North and South America — who have product 
going into Africa and Europe, into the United States. And this 
has created an incredible advantage for our people in our area. 
 
One of the impediments that they have that we have to 
recognize and look at, is we’ve got to make sure that we have 
the transportation system in place so that their needs can be 
met. A tremendous amount of transportation is involved to 
bring these products from the fields of the farmers in the 
constituency onto the trucks and into the processing plant where 
it’s cleaned and further processed and then sent out to these 
international markets. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that one of the challenges this 
Assembly is going to have and into the future, is that these 
things have to be looked at in a spirit of cooperation rather than 
ramming things through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the further things that I know is important 
to people is the whole area in rural Saskatchewan of the 
importance of recreation. Mr. Speaker, we have to, as an 
Assembly, deal with some of the issues of recreation because, 
as the Minister of Economic Development has talked about in 
the past, this is a real area of opportunity and a real opportunity 
for people, not only in the service industries but people in the 
hospitality industry and the people in the cottage industries. 
 
I recall in 1989 our family had the great pleasure of taking a 
family trip. It sort of reminds me of the Wally World thing  
Chevy Chase goes to Wally World  because we packed the 
five of us . . . I should say the six of us because it was Carole 
and I, three daughters and a neutered poodle. And we packed 
ourselves into a trailer, and we headed for Disney World. And 
in that whole exercise, I guess that if you really wanted to  
  



2268  Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 1996 

filibuster, if I could connect it enough on a long enough term, 
we would probably all enjoy the stories of this vacation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the point I want to make about this trip is that 
when we were coming through the Smoky Mountains we came 
to a place called Dollywood, and it was an interesting place 
because what it did, it really catered to a cottage industry 
mentality. And if anyone has been into that area, when you 
travel through the Smoky Mountains, you go from quarter 
section almost to quarter section. And you find a little stand 
along the road where people from the farm are marketing their 
product. But it wasn’t just agricultural products, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m sorry to say it also wasn’t illicit alcohol because I 
would have been very interested in some of the squeezings from 
the hills. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what it was, was quilts, for example. People 
would make quilts, and they would offer in a display in front of 
their home, quilts for sale. Down the road you would go and 
people would have vegetable garden produce for sale. Further 
down the road you had all other handicrafts, like carving  
beautiful things like that, that people were making and using the 
income, for tourists to subsidize their farm operations. And 
quite often people took their primary farm products, if it was 
berries or things of that nature, and further processed them and 
made them into jams or jellies and things that they sold. 
 
And there was a real sense of pride in that area. It was a unique 
area of the Americas that I remember very fondly because it 
was so based on fundamental skills that people had. It was 
based on their interest in fundamental things that they needed 
from their land, and their talents and their skills that allowed 
them to market them to the tourist industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there has been progress made and 
there’s a real initiative for tourism. And I think, though, it’s 
incumbent on us as a government to make sure we think 
through every opportunity we possibly can in order to enhance 
our opportunities for tourism. 
 
And one of the things I point out as a positive that the 
government has done is that, for example, they've designated 
Highway 6, coming up, as the CanAm route. Well I happen to 
be sitting on the new CanAm route and I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that in my estimation, there are double  at least 
double  the number of American visitors come past my store 
each year since that CanAm route was designated as such. 
 
Now I don’t think it was a very costly thing that the government 
had to do. I’m sure that there was some cost in terms of signs; 
maybe some work that had to be done with the tourist groups 
along the way. But I’ll bet you that it was a very low-cost idea 
that provided some very good returns to people all along this 
route. And I think that that’s the kind of creative thinking that 
we have to do in order to build some of our inherent strengths in 
a positive way. And we have to take the time to think about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that rather than advertising for things 
that we know about in our province and our communities, for 
example the telephone things or whatever we do . . . and I don’t  

care how they much cost. If we’re just sort of giving ourselves a 
feel-good advertising feeling by the family of Crown 
corporations, why instead aren’t we taking the kind of money 
that we’re spending on that, which provides very little return I 
suspect in terms of actual benefit to our Crowns, and why are 
we not developing enhanced marketing strategies for the 
American people so that they are further encouraged to see the 
very, very many advantages that we have in this province to 
offer to them. 
 
Why aren’t we taking a more proactive role with Europeans or 
the Asians? Why aren’t we doing those kinds of things, Mr. 
Speaker? I think what we have to do . . . in fact I know what we 
have to do. We have to develop a new attitude in this Assembly 
that develops a mechanism where we can more responsibly, 
more cooperatively, more openly, discuss alternatives rather 
than just debate issues that the government brings forward. 
 
I really believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
are demanding a new accountability. They’re demanding a new 
approach to politics that we’re just beginning to understand, all 
of us here, and that we have to understand. And if we don’t, we 
don’t at our peril, because I think the world is changing. I know 
Saskatchewan is changing. I know the way they look on us as 
legislators is changing, and not always for the better, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think we have to change that. There is a new way 
that we can approach politics, I believe, that allows for more 
open discussion. And I don’t believe for one minute that it’s 
going to be something that happens because we confront each 
other time and time again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about the strengths that I see in 
Saskatchewan. I’ve talked about the things that I think are 
challenges for us. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to now touch on 
what I think is the greatest strength that we have of all and that 
is our people. Mr. Speaker, we talk about the inherent wealth 
and value of our natural resources. We talk about our forests 
and our land and the crops that we can grow on them. Mr. 
Speaker, we talk about the mines and the economic prosperity 
that we have. We talk about the GNP (gross national product) 
and we talk about all those things, but, Mr. Speaker, we too 
often forget the challenges of the real asset that we have, the 
real treasure that we hold in this province, and that’s in our 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken too often the course that deals with 
the technology. We’ve taken the course that deals with the GNP 
and the GDP (gross domestic product) and the per cost this and 
the ratio that, and we deal with all of those things and we get 
wrapped up into it. We think that these kinds of things are what 
makes life real and what makes the world turn. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t, and far from it. Quite often what 
happens is that when we focus on those cold and hard numbers, 
we end up doing a disservice and a hurt to the people that truly 
are our wealth and our asset and our gold  the people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to more regularly take the 
time to focus in this Assembly on the real gold that we hold  
the real treasure that we have in this province — and that’s our 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
  



June 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

You know we talked about the seniors and how they’re feeling. 
And some of them are doing well. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, they are. But the measure of society isn’t how well 
that we treat the most well done or the most secure; it’s how 
gentle and how caring and how responsive we are to the 
weakest of our number, not to the strongest. 
 
And so we focus too much, very often, on the richest man in 
Saskatchewan, the most powerful man in Saskatchewan, the 
most influential woman in this province, and that is well and 
good. But the real strength of our society, the real test that we 
are going to be looked on one day, is how we deal . . . and how 
we focus on the weakest man and the weakest woman and the 
weakest child in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And so when we face these issues, we have 
to listen to the people. We have to become more attuned to what 
they’re really talking about. And we have to withdraw ourselves 
from this place and the advisers and the bureaucrats and the 
people that surround us and we have to focus on the true 
strengths that we all have, Mr. Speaker. The real strength . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I draw your attention to the clock. 
 
The Speaker:  It now being past the hour of 5, the House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 o’clock a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:12 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2235 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2235 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2235 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2236 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2236 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2236 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES  
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations  

Clerk Assistant ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2236 
Lorje .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2236 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2236 
Flavel ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
Upshall....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
Lorje .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2237 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2256 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Training for Excellence Awards Luncheon  

Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
Flooding in the Fishing Lake Vicinity  

Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
Tourism Saskatchewan Certification  

Bradley ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
Beauval Day Care Centre  

Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
Saskatoon Race Relations Committee  

Lorje .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2239 
Family Fishing Weekend  

D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2239 
Land Donation  

Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2239 
Geriatric Assessment Rehabilitation Unit  

Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Political Donations  
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 
Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 

Funding for Providence Place  
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 

Government Regulations  
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 

Union Certification Process  
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2243 

Political Donations  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2244 
Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2244 

 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 119  An Act respecting Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan  

Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2245 
PRIORITY OF DEBATE  

Questionable Use of Private Trust Funds  
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2245 
Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2245 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
MOTIONS  

Extended Hours 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2246 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2249 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2252 

 
 


