
























































June 19, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2883 
 June 19, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you were making some comments 
before the notification of supper brutally came in between our 
debate here and brought us to attention. But, Mr. Minister, a 
couple of things you commented about that I want to bring to 
your attention, just for your information, in case as a farmer 
you’re not totally aware of these things. 
 
You made comments about the fact that the reasons a lot of the 
wildlife people and why the Environment doesn’t allow 
controlled grazing on wildlife land is because you want to 
protect the habitat. You don’t want duck nests destroyed 
because of livestock walking through that land, or you don’t 
want to destroy the few lady’s slippers that happen to come up 
in the spring. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Minister, we’re not talking of grazing, say the 
first part of May; we’re talking of maybe getting into grazing 
the middle to the end of June. By then if the ducks haven’t 
hatched . . . those ducks nests and those ducks haven’t hatched, 
they’re not going to hatch. The lady’s slippers have basically 
bloomed, and they’ve gone into hibernation for the rest of the 
year. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, all those little, if you will, the animal 
lovers out there and that who feel that you’ve got to keep 
something in its total natural environment because of this duck 
nest out there, if they don’t understand how nature works, I’m 
not exactly sure if we’ll ever get them to understand this 
process. People in the city should recognize it just from walking 
around Wascana Centre here and all the goslings already and 
how large they are. And it’s at this time of the year. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, we recognize the fact that we want to 
protect habitats so ducks can have their nests and . . . or the 
waterfowl or all the birds of the air or all these flowers can 
bloom and people can enjoy it. But there comes a period when 
this process is through; we’re not really damaging anything. 
And to help sustain even the land and farming community, I 
personally do see nothing wrong with allowing some grazing. I 
realize that we’ve got a problem with the so-called wildlifers, 
and I think many of these wildlifers are not hunters any more. 
Originally the wildlife federation was made up of a lot of 
people who enjoyed hunting and were building a natural habitat 
so they could protect these species so they could enjoy hunting 
in the fall and allow for the ongoing development of wildlife. 
I think as I see it, and just having attended the last few wildlife 

meetings, it seems to me we’ve got a lot of people now that 
aren’t necessarily involved in hunting involved in the wildlife 
federation, whose only motive is to say, we don’t need any kind 
of land development. Let’s leave it all to wildlife. And I think 
that’s where the conflict arises between the farm community 
and some of these individuals. 
 
And when I look at that, I look . . . I was just talking to a couple 
of first nations ladies yesterday who were doing a bit of a study 
on first nations and their role in society. And one of the things 
that came up out of our discussion is the fact that a lot of first 
nations people have hunted over the years. And they’ve hunted 
in a way that they sustained the animal kingdom around them 
because that’s how they’ve lived and they treated that kingdom 
with respect. 
 
They’ve hunted, and through their hunting it was a means of 
providing clothing for themselves, it was a means of providing 
food, it was means of providing shelter. It was also a means of 
providing some type of income. And unfortunately our first 
nations people have lost that ability as far as providing income 
for themselves because of the animal rights activists around this 
country, and in most cases, Mr. Minister, outside of this 
country, specifically Europe, where they have basically said 
we’re not supposed to take the life of an animal, we’re not 
supposed to make fur coats and whatever. 
 
And I guess if you will, Mr. Minister, what I would suggest, 
maybe it’s time the individuals, these groups and these animal 
rights activists, instead of the governments and the taxpayers of 
Canada having to try and maintain and help people continue to 
live, maybe it’s time we took the funds out of their big bank 
accounts and sustained the livelihood of individuals in northern 
Saskatchewan who have lost their way of life and things like 
that. I firmly believe that it’s time we started looking at some of 
these avenues, because I get little perturbed, as a taxpayer, and I 
think people who used to have an existence from wildlife are 
somewhat perturbed too, that they have to look to the 
government to sustain them. 
 
So I throw out a few of these comments hopefully to provoke 
some thought. And maybe, Mr. Minister, as you’re talking with 
groups that are interested in wildlife and interested in . . . 
involved in the wildlife lands, Ducks Unlimited, as they 
purchase more and more land around to build these marshes, 
that they will give some consideration to the agricultural sector 
in this province and the fact that through the years agriculture 
has worked very hard and very diligently to preserve wildlife. 
 
I know in our area duck hunting was a big thing years ago. And 
you talked about the moisture and the potholes, and I guarantee 
that there’s a lot of wildlife in our area again. And there will be 
hunters coming back into our area. They’ve been in fact the last 
couple of years because we’ve more and more ducks starting to 
survive. And they’re surviving not because of everything the 
wildlife federations have done, they’re surviving because nature 
has reversed the process and we’re getting more and more 
moisture again versus what we had a few years ago. 
 



2884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

So I think, Mr. Minister, these are a number of things, there’s a 
number of food for thought, about what can be done to sustain 
the wildlife in our province, to work together with the farming 
community to help them build their farms, help them sustain 
themselves; as well as working with our first nations people and 
individuals who basically through the years have made . . . their 
livelihood has been totally dependent upon fur-bearing animals 
and the fur trade. 
 
So there’s some food for thought. Maybe you’d like to respond 
to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The hon. 
member raised a number of issues. I’ll comment on a few of 
them. 
 
Certainly to lump the wildlife federation in with groups like 
animal rights is not correct. The wildlife federation digs into its 
pocket, contributes money towards wildlife conservation 
through their hunting and other activities. And if the fact be 
known, that most of the wildlife federation members are 
farmers. So I think that we are well in tune with the balance 
between agriculture and wildlife. 
 
And the fact is that the wildlife federation came to us 30 years 
ago almost, and said, look, we’re losing habitat at the rate of a 
thousand acres a day during the 1970s. Let’s preserve some of 
what’s left. Charge us an extra $10 on our licence and put that 
money towards a fund to buy habitat. We’re not creating more 
habitat; we’re preserving the remnants that do remain. 
 
In actual fact we’ve lost 75 to 85 per cent of our natural 
landscape in southern Saskatchewan, which is the most 
modified landscape in North America. Twenty per cent of our 
plants are rare and endangered and disappearing. We have more 
endangered species in this region of Canada than any other 
region. So we have made a big impact in Saskatchewan. And I 
believe that we are working cooperatively with agriculture. 
 
You indicated the lady’s slippers bloom in June, which is true, 
while the lilies come in late June and July. Many duck species, 
like gadwall and blue-winged teal, don’t nest until mid-July, 
and some of the grassland sparrows are late nesters too. 
 
The fact is it’s hunter dollars that’s bought this land, and we 
certainly are open to discussions, and we’ll certainly be 
considering this. But at the same time, we need to work 
cooperatively and work out a balance with agriculture and 
wildlife. And we intend to continue on that line. And the 
wildlife federation, like I say, has been a leader, and they’re 
mostly farmers, and we figure we do have a good balance in 
that area. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, while you mentioned mostly 
farmers, it seems to me a lot of the wildlife members that I 
talked to in the last little while, a good portion of them are 
coming from some of our major centres and are not necessarily 
farmers. And I’m not sure if Mr. Begin’s a farmer, but I do 
know that the wildlife federation down in that Wawota area and 
the Moosomin and Rocanville area put a recommendation 
forward regarding this grazing policy and a recommendation  

forward a number of years ago  about five years ago  
regarding some wildlife compensation. 
 
And they put a resolution forward at their local  it passed. It 
passed in the south-east but when it got to provincial it was just 
basically defeated. And they put it forward because they were 
farmers dealing with neighbours who were having problems. 
 
The reason I made the comment about the fact that it seems to 
me there’s differences of opinion . . . And certainly I’ve had 
some wildlife members mention that they feel they’re losing 
some of the control and ability to put forward their ideas 
because of the larger urban centres where there are more 
members coming out of urban settings versus the rural setting. 
So when I make the comment I made, it was based on what I’m 
hearing at the local level in working with many of the wildlife 
members that I know quite personally because of situations that 
they dealt with. 
 
Another problem that I can see coming up, and I know a lot of 
the local wildlife members are quite concerned about, is there 
are more and more farmers, even though they’re concerned 
about the compensation and they’re concerned about the loss, 
are basically saying, unless we get some kind of a better 
understanding or working agreement we’re going to start 
posting our land and we won’t allow anybody on to the land. 
 
So then we’re going to be in a situation where SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is going to be facing a 
problem if they decide they’re going to post their land and 
allow, if you will . . . that’s one of the easiest and best ways of 
preserving wildlife and allowing them to go, because they 
won’t allow any hunting and the wildlife will find . . . It seems 
to me, Mr. Minister, wildlife are quite smart. I’ve watched the 
geese and if there’s land that’s posted it seems like they can be 
flying good and high and all of a sudden just dive down, they 
find that no hunting sign, and they know where they’re 
protected. So wildlife aren’t dumb neither. 
 
So I think it’s an understanding of knowing how everybody 
feels and working together with them to provide an 
environment where everybody can work together, and I think 
that’s something we certainly need to work towards. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Minister, in the Kenosee, or Moose Mountain Provincial 
Park, there’s a facility called Camp 100 that used to be used for 
young offenders. That young offenders’ facility has now been 
moved more to the centre of the park near a group of Bible 
camps. But the old facility has been, I believe . . . we’ve 
allowed a group of . . . a riding club to utilize the facility, to 
make use of it. 
 
Received a call from them just recently that the centre road that 
they travelled on is certainly in need of grading. And as well, 
it’s in definite need of gravelling. What they find is if they do 
drive in and have a weekend where they’re trail riding within 
the park, they get to the Camp 100. But if it should happen to 
rain, their ability to drive back out is impossible because of the 
lack of gravel on that road. 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2885 

What they asked me about was to contact your department 
about the possibility of gravelling, and they’re not saying from 
the east end towards the west, because I think if you just come 
in from the west perimeter it’s about  I’m not exactly sure  
4 or 5 miles that would need gravel. Whereas if you were to 
gravel from the park proper right through to the west end, you’d 
be looking at something in the neighbourhood of 20 miles, 
which isn’t really necessary for the amount it’s used. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering if your department could look 
into possibly supplying some gravel from the west end, that 4 or 
5 kilometres, into the Camp 100 that would allow the Moose 
Mountain trail riders access to this camping area that they’ve 
been utilizing for the past three or four years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  A couple of comments, Mr. Chairman, just 
to go back to the wildlife federation  the Wawota branch of 
the federation has more members than the Regina branch. And 
by far, the vast majority are rural members, so it is a rural 
organization with good rural roots. 
 
With respect to your road, we will certainly be in 
communication with the park superintendent and see if we can 
assist the group in getting the road gravelled to their site. 
 
Mr. Toth:  With that comment, Mr. Minister, when you 
talked about the park superintendent, is it the park 
superintendent that okays . . . or what’s the process? Because 
this has been an ongoing concern and it seems that when they 
approach the park superintendent, the park superintendent talks 
about having to get approval from the department. 
 
So while you’re talking about putting some gravel into Camp 
100, can you also bring to the attention of the park, and I’m 
bringing to the attention of your department, that the centre 
road east of the waterslides from No. 9, there’s about 5 
kilometres in there tends to be, on many occasions . . . And 
that’s a very active road. Like the road west is travelled very 
minimally, but the centre road east of the waterslides, there’s a 
lot of oil activity. There’s a lot of activity off No. 9 south of 
Wawota. And that’s a road that has had some construction on it 
but certainly is in dire need of gravel. And probably if it’s 
gravelled earlier in the season, you’d get more benefit out of it. 
 
And so while we’re addressing that, Mr. Minister, will your 
department check and see what needs to be done to make sure 
that there’s gravel both into Camp 100 and gravel on that centre 
road east of the waterslides. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  As I indicated, Mr. Chairman, we’ll 
certainly look into both those issues, and of course our budgets 
are also under pressure, but we will do what we can to 
accommodate these groups. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I’m just trying to think of some more questions 
until the Minister of Economic Development gets here. 
 
Actually, Mr. Minister, as far as the young offenders camp in 
the Kenosee park area, has your department had any major 
concerns raised regarding the proximity of the camp to the 
Bible camps. I know that every year it seems to be an ongoing  

problem that crops up about the fact . . . whether or not the 
individuals who may be at the camp are being looked after and 
supervised properly, and I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, 
whether your department, or via the parks, certainly does hear 
about any concerns in regards to supervision at the young 
offenders’ camp. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We’re very pleased to report that there is a 
good working relationship between the park staff and the park 
. . . other park users and the juvenile camps. We appreciate the 
opportunity to get these young people out into the outdoors. 
And there have been no problems, no complaints. And we plan 
to continue dialogue with the work camps and the other park 
users. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, as you’re a new minister, I’m wondering if you could 
elaborate for the public and for the House your top three 
priorities for your department  your own personal priorities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well thank you for the question, colleague. 
Some of the areas which I feel are really important, not only for 
today but for future generations, is to complete our 
representative areas network across the province. This is a goal 
of protecting a certain portion of natural lands. The World 
Wildlife Fund uses a figure of 12 per cent. We won’t be able to 
achieve that in some areas because the habitat’s already gone, 
but in other areas we do have that opportunity. 
 
There’s still conflicts in the forest with different users. We want 
to try to streamline that. And a lot of people have problems with 
clear-cutting. It’s not very nice to look at but we need to deal 
with that. And so that’s certainly a whole issue of forestry . . . is 
an area that we need to look at. 
 
So those are certainly a couple of areas, and the future of our 
parks as well, again with reduced budgets. Over 2 million 
people use our parks every year so we need to make sure that 
our parks are still available for people, and so we’re going to 
continue to work on that as well. So those are a couple of areas 
of interest that need attention now, sort of. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I would just like to encourage you, Mr. 
Minister, to attack those three areas with some energy and 
conviction, because I think you’ve rightly identified three areas 
of public concern that need attention to serve the interests of the 
public. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I certainly appreciate the 
member from Saskatoon asking a few questions. It just shows 
every once in a while that although it would be a little more 
interesting if say the members would have something that 
would really quiz the minister . . . quiz their own minister on, 
but thank you. 
 
We do have some questions though that were just handed to me 
that I didn’t have in my position a minute ago  questions that 
have been coming to our office that we’d like to respond to, and 
we felt that one way of getting a response was certainly to raise 
these questions with you in estimates. And quite frankly there’s 
some questions that I’d just as soon have you answer as me  



2886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

answer anyway. 
 
First question comes regarding the Fair Chase League. We’ve 
received a great deal of correspondence from the Saskatchewan 
Fair Chase League, and as you are probably aware, this 
organization is opposed to wild game baiting practices both 
among private hunters and outfitters. I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, what is your department’s position on this issue, and 
have you taken any steps to answer the Fair Chase League’s 
concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you for the opportunity to comment 
on this. I can assure you we’ve had a number of opportunities to 
correspond with the Fair Chase League, who are opposed to 
baiting of big game animals. They’re not opposed to baiting 
fish, baiting waterfowl with decoys, and baiting big game 
animals with calls, but they are opposed to food bait for big 
game and I guess particularly deer and bear. 
 
We know that through the scientific studies, that baiting does 
not increase harvest of big game animals. Our wildlife 
populations are sustainable. Take bear for an example, baiting 
is certainly one of the easier ways to hunt these animals, and 
insomuch as the hunter may become the bait if something goes 
wrong. 
 
But certainly there is probably growing public perception that 
baiting of bears is not acceptable. But so far, scientifically our 
bear population is doing well and we will continue to have 
bear-baiting seasons and deer-baiting seasons. The outfitters 
usually bait deer, usually with the use of tree stands, for their 
clients. 
 
But so far we will be continuing on that path. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I think I can 
certainly concur. One of my former colleagues, if you will, that 
was one of his great pleasures, was going out bear hunting. But 
the unfortunate part is sometimes the baiting never did work all 
that well and he’d be sitting out waiting for a bear to show up 
and they were never there. 
 
So it’s obvious, it’s not something that is just 100 per cent fail 
proof or works 100 per cent of the time. And I think I concur 
with you, that baiting certainly isn’t something that is just 
taking a lot of animals out of our resource. 
 
While it is used in a small way  I’m not exactly sure even 
how much it’s used in hunting deer  I think most people still 
like to kind of seek out and try and sneak up rather than just 
waiting for something to walk up within sight. 
 
Mr. Minister, another call we had received and a request came 
from Mr. Les Hainstock, and I understand from your staff that 
your office is also familiar with this case. In brief, Mr. 
Hainstock suffers from a disability which he feels impaired his 
ability to attach a deer tag last winter, for which offence he lost 
his licence. Mr. Hainstock feels that your department has 
discriminated against him because of his disability. And I’m 
wondering if you could tell us what your department has done 
and intends to do with regards to Mr. Hainstock’s case. 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, we certainly are aware of this 
particular case. It’s been in the courts and we are at the present 
time having an independent appraiser evaluate all the evidence 
around this issue. We have laws to enforce, and basically we do 
the best we can to achieve that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, another question comes from the 
village of Lebret. I received a letter from the village of Lebret 
complaining about the fact that your department is requiring 
them to build expansion to their lagoon drainage system. These 
changes would cost the village between 150 and $200,000. And 
in cases such as the small community of Lebret, this kind of 
money certainly creates a problem for them, as it’s going to kill 
the community the size of Lebret, trying to find this type of 
money all at once. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you look into this situation and either modify 
the requirements or offer the village some financial assistance 
or some way of helping to meet the problem they’re facing in 
upgrading this drainage system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, we are aware of the situation at 
Lebret. Like many other small communities, their sewage 
system is working at capacity. And with the Qu’Appelle lakes 
in the close proximity, we are concerned about that, as are the 
residents of Lebret. We realize there’s a problem and we need 
to see what we can do to fix it. We will be working and 
communicating with Sask Water, Municipal Affairs, and other 
government departments, to see if we can help the community 
out. And that’s an ongoing discussion with the community. 
 
Mr. Toth:  It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that the 
problems here with lagoon systems is something almost along 
the lines of compensation for big deer and wildlife big game 
damage. And the fact that so many communities, especially 
small communities, have all of a sudden found themselves 
having to deal with systems that probably weren’t large enough 
originally, and now they’re having to upgrade them and in many 
cases they’re finding themselves with a shrinking dollar 
because of cut-backs coming from your government, and a 
shrinking resource base  or revenue base  within the 
community as there are fewer and fewer people. 
 
So I certainly hope that between your department and 
Municipal Government and  what was the other  Water 
Corporation, that they were able to come up with some sort of a 
program that helps these communities indeed manage and 
operate their lagoon systems properly so that they don’t create a 
problem. They meet the needs of the community and at the 
same time do not put the community in great financial risk. 
 
(1930) 
 
Another question I have comes from the north versus . . . it 
says, north versus south outfitters, so there must be a bit of 
concern or a difference of opinion on something that . . . We 
received several letters from a Mr. D. W. Dunlop who 
complains that regulations for northern outfitters are different 
from southern ones, to the extent that southern outfitters are 
prohibited from guiding groups into the North, while northern 
outfitters can guide hunting parties into the South. 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2887 

Can you confirm that this is how the regulations read? And if 
this is true, why is there a distinction? Do you not think this is 
unfair and what is your department prepared to do for southern 
outfitters who are losing money in this way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  There are a lot of changes happening in the 
outfitting industry. In fact we have a discussion paper out and 
we’ve been working closely with Saskatchewan Outfitters 
Association as well. And we are . . . what we had is, in the 
1980s was a mushroom effect of outfitting. We had territories 
overlapping and conflicts between outfitters. We’re trying to 
sort that out. 
 
And there are different qualifications for fishing outfitting 
operations, bird guiding, and of course big game. So we have 
this discussion paper out there now and we’ll be getting 
feedback from the public and trying to sort out the conflicts. 
And if you care to give us a copy of that letter, we’d be pleased 
to provide a more detailed answer to the individual’s questions. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll get our staff to 
certainly get this information to you. 
 
One more question that Mr. Dunlop brought to our attention is 
that Alberta requires all non-residents to use guides or 
outfitters, and he says this is not only beneficial to the 
province’s tourist industry, it also keeps pressure off that 
province’s game birds. Saskatchewan, we understand, is still 
studying this proposal and I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you 
can tell us what this proposal is, and where it’s at today, and 
why you’re taking so long to act on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That proposal is also in the discussion 
paper, so we’ll be dealing with that accordingly as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, one 
of the things that makes Saskatchewan an interesting place to 
visit and to live in is that in the summertime our towns and 
cities are absolutely beautiful, and I guess that lets you know 
that I’m into Dutch elm disease. 
 
I’m wondering if you could sort of outline for us the status of 
Dutch elm disease problem in the province  what’s the stage, 
what direction is it going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Dutch elm disease is certainly a very big 
concern, especially to our urban communities, our cities and 
towns. Dutch elm disease is prevalent in the Qu’Appelle Valley 
and the Souris River system as well as the Assiniboine. And it 
has made inroads as far west as Regina. 
 
And we have a Dutch elm disease committee to plan strategy on 
how to deal with the issue. We have good cooperation with 
urban communities. And we will continue to do everything 
within our power. We do fund some money towards the battle 
against Dutch elm disease, and I think people in Saskatchewan, 
in our towns and cities particularly, are going to do everything 
they can to beat this disease. So it’s certainly a concern. We’re 
working with the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) tree nursery station at Indian Head as well as 
urban municipalities to combat this disease. 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I think most of us are aware that 
there are efforts going on by municipalities, urban ones in 
particular, to control this. I’m wondering how effective are they 
at the present time in controlling it. Like is the disease sort of 
on hold, or what’s happening with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Unfortunately it’s a disease which people 
have been combating for decades, beginning on the east coast, 
and it’s gradually working its way west. We certainly will not 
save every elm tree, but we hope to minimize the loss of elm 
trees basically to a point where they can be replaced over a 
period of time. 
 
So it’s going to be a . . . we won’t save every tree. But we’re 
going to certainly try to do the best we can. And we’re also at 
the point of salvaging some of the lumber for economic gains. 
This was present at the Cowessess Reserve north of Broadview. 
So we are doing everything we can in cooperation with people. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In a previous 
answer, you mentioned the term funding, which obviously is 
going to lead into this question. What is the level of funding 
that the provincial government is providing with this? Is there 
funding to municipalities that they can tap into? So what is the 
level of funding and how far short does it fall of what’s being 
requested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I suppose we could always use more 
money. We have $300,000 direct money into the program, but 
we also have a lot of manpower from our forestry branch. We 
provide office space for the Dutch elm committee to operate out 
of. So there’s a number of donations in kind as well. 
 
I guess if we see a need or new outbreak of the disease and we 
see a need for more money, we will certainly look at it at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  I’m going to interpret from that answer that 
when a community has a problem, there is some hope for them 
to go ahead and contact your department for some help in that 
area. 
 
Moving over to The Environment Management and Protection 
Act, the main impact of that particular Bill passed last year was 
the requirement of mining companies to post bonds to 
guarantee the clean-up of closed mines. And I think that 
concept probably has a whole lot of public support, so when 
they go through the natural parts of Saskatchewan’s 
environment they don’t run into some pretty bizarre sights that 
are out there. 
 
The question is, what has been the level of compliance with that 
particular piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We’re very pleased to report that there has 
been good compliance and interest and support from the mining 
industry to this posting of bond. And we all know that there is 
mines that have been abandoned, and they are an eyesore, 
perhaps a danger to the public as well. 
 
But we have good cooperation. In fact we are going back, and  



2888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

some existing mining operations such as potash mines are in the 
process of developing a plan to get rid of spoils and spoil piles, 
and reclamation program, so that they can be decommissioned 
as well. 
 
So the new operations which are coming into effect are 
complying. And we are also going back and working on 
existing operations. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Just to ask for a little bit of 
specific information on part of the answer that you gave, and I 
believe you referred to some of those spoil piles, as you called 
them, at the potash mines which tend to just get larger and 
never more beautiful. What sorts of things are there that are in 
place to sort of either beautify those or get rid of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We have a good working relationship with 
the potash industry and we are currently having research done 
to see what we can do to get rid of the piles. But the stuff came 
out of the ground; there’s a good chance, and it makes sense, to 
go back into the ground. 
 
We have several test projects and research projects looking at 
this. And our immediate concern is to make sure that the piles 
are contained. And we have continual monitoring with the 
industry on the existing piles. So I guess ideally a decade from 
now the material would be returned back underground. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Sometime ago I saw a short blurb on a 
television thing about using some of the mine shafts that had 
been excavated and were no longer being used, and those were 
being used as places to grow various kinds of crops and plants 
and actually do some development. Is that something that’s 
being considered with the potash mines? I think this was 
happening in northern Saskatchewan with a different mine, at a 
different level and temperature probably. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  You are correct in citing an example in 
northern Saskatchewan, as Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting 
that is growing some plants underground in a mine. We haven’t 
done that yet, but it’s certainly something that could be 
considered. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Moving back to where this 
question started, and that was with the particular environmental 
posting of bonds by the mining companies. What is the value of 
those bonds collected this year under that particular Bill? And 
where does that money go? And what happens to any interest 
that accrues from that pot-full? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Because the posting of bonds legislation is 
fairly new, we only have one bond posted so far and that’s from 
McArthur River. We’re also looking at the best ways for the 
industry and government to have this money posted and in 
readiness, if needed, for decommissioning. So we’re still fairly 
new in this process, and the one for McArthur River is just for 
an exploration process. So it’s not that large yet, but the 
industry is accepting the idea. And we will be pursuing it and 
working out the best options for the industry as well as 
ourselves and the public. 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. That leads me to two or three 
questions. I think I inferred from your answer that there’s only 
one mine that has basically posted that bond to date. So my 
question . . . one of the questions that I have is, do existing 
mines then not have to post those bonds? And what is the size 
of . . . or how’s the amount of the bond assessed, and are there 
any companies that might have been kept from doing the 
exploration or the mining because of the size of the bond? So 
there’s three things there. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The insurance are insuring that there’s 
enough money or ability to decommission the site. First of all, it 
may not just be a bond. We need just proof that the company 
has the money to do the decommissioning. 
 
For existing mines, there’s a two- to three-year time frame for 
them to develop a process and to see how they can best 
decommission the operation. And that has to be acceptable to 
us as well as the industry. And also the . . . as I say, the posting 
of the bond . . . it doesn’t need to necessarily need to be a bond 
but just insurance that the company does have the money to do 
that. So because the process is all fairly new, we are still feeling 
our way along and again hand in hand with industry on this. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I would like your response to an 
objection voiced by Cameco that those bonds in many ways 
were unnecessary because what government could do is just 
seize the assets of the company if it failed to go ahead and live 
up to its clean-up objections. And that statement from Cameco 
is from the Star-Phoenix, March 17, 1994. I’m looking for a 
response to that kind of thinking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The uranium industry has been very 
supportive. In fact McArthur River is Cameco, the only 
company that has posted a bond or a guarantee that there is 
decommissioning money available. And if we look back, we 
don’t need to look very far, just need to look at Uranium City 
and the mess there. The company goes bankrupt. We still have a 
mess there which probably tax dollars will end up cleaning up 
at some point. And it’s something that we just don’t want to 
leave more sites like this for our children and grandchildren to 
have to deal with. So we think we’re on the right track, and we 
want to make sure we do this right. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and I think with the statement 
that you made about leaving the country in an acceptable form 
for our children and grandchildren, I think that’s probably a 
very supportable direction to go, to ensure that that happens. 
 
Moving into the Canadian-Saskatchewan infrastructure program 
parks project, I wonder if we could have an update on the 
progress of the approved projects in the following parks with 
reference to their adherence to timetable and budget. And I have 
about 9 or 10 parks listed here. They are Battleford, Duck 
Mountain, Douglas, Narrow Hills, Saskatchewan Landing, 
Cypress Hills, Greenwater Lake, and Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member is in 
agreement, we would provide that information in writing  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2889 

because there’s a number of avenues. Some of the money is 
spent. Maybe there’s some to come yet. We will give a detailed 
breakdown if the project’s completed, if it’s partly completed, 
and we will provide that to you in writing. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you also list 
any further projects approved under this particular program and 
detail what the projects involve and how much they cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That’s for all provincial parks? 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Yes. Dealing with the same concept, the 
infrastructure programs, could you outline the criteria for 
approval of parks projects under this program and the process 
by which submissions are made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We will also provide that information to 
you. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving over to 
what we’ll classify as native co-management of Crown lands, 
could you update us on the status of any co-management 
projects you’ve entered into with native bands and the federal 
government in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The federal co-management project which 
was proposed has been completely withdrawn. But the province 
is very pleased to have several co-management agreements with 
first nations. And I don’t have a list of all the agreements here, 
but I can certainly provide you with a list of co-management 
agreements we have with various first nations. I know there’s a 
Peter Ballantyne Band, for example, a very successful 
agreement. 
 
So we can provide that information for you. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  So we do have, as you stated, a number of 
places. We’ve got quite a number of situations where these 
projects are in place. What’s the process for one of these 
projects coming together? Like is it initiated from government? 
Is it initiated from the band? How does it work that that 
particular . . . what is the criteria for selecting a site as a 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We have a number of co-management 
agreements. And they can operate both ways. Sometimes if the 
government sees an opportunity, we will initiate it and contact 
the local communities, first nations, northern communities, 
perhaps trappers in the area. And also sometimes the first 
nations or a community such as Green Lake would come to us 
with a proposal. 
 
And we’re finding co-management to be very successful. It’s 
stakeholder involvement. And we see an expansion of this type 
of management, particularly in the northern part of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When these 
projects are put together  two questions, I guess  is the 
amount of authority or control by the various stakeholders fit 
into a set formula? And the second question that follows 

through with that, what is the level of input afforded to the 
bands, and particularly, do they have a veto power on decisions 
that are made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Unlike the federal model which was 
proposed a year or so ago around Montreal Lake, the province 
does retain the final word in our co-management agreements. 
But we certainly consider very seriously the input from the 
stakeholders, and in many cases the stakeholders have ideas 
which we can accommodate into the general operation of the 
resource user plan. 
 
So it is a cooperative effort, and in fact Saskatchewan’s 
co-management models have been picked up by other 
jurisdictions across the country as good examples to follow. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, specifically then, the bands do not 
have a veto? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  You’re correct  they do not have a veto. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Next question, dealing with the Bienfait 
waste disposal plant. Could you describe the status of the 
environmental review of hazardous waste plant proposed to be 
built near Bienfait? 
 
And I think people in Saskatchewan have a definite interest in 
this, because hazardous waste disposal is a concern for all of us 
because no one wants it stored in their backyard. And so a 
proposal to sort of deal with the issue and deal with those sorts 
of products are obviously of concern and interest to everyone in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what is the status of that review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  That’s certainly an issue which did show 
that people are concerned about the environment and what’s 
happening in their backyard. The project did meet the 
requirements of the environmental assessment process. 
However, the environmental assessment process does not deal 
with the concerns of local people, in as much as them not 
wanting it in their backyard. 
 
So because it met the requirements of the environmental 
assessment process, we approved the project. But we knew 
there was a lot of concern in the local area and we thought that 
the local people should have the ability to negotiate or say no to 
the development. So that was one of the conditions of the 
approval. And I understand that communication between the 
proponent and the local Bienfait people has been quite limited 
and the project has not proceeded at this time. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, and probably each one of us can sort 
of sympathize with the concerns that were out there. However, 
all of us have the concerns about where that hazardous waste 
can be stored. I’d like to have comments coming from you as to 
your feelings, what the chances are of putting one of these 
projects together and what initiatives the province is taking to 
 if this doesn’t work  to keep on working for a project 
some place. And probably a follow-up question: at what 
particular point will the province say we need this; it’s critical  



2890 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

enough; we’re just going to take the initiative and do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly we are always developing 
technology and new products and so on and so forth, and with it 
unfortunately sometimes does come waste  whether it’s used 
oil or whatever. So we need to deal with it but we also need the 
public behind us to proceed with a project. And we only need to 
look at Alberta, the Swan Hills community welcomed a waste 
disposal site there, and in fact Saskatchewan does ship some of 
its waste material there. I guess one of the advantages of being 
sparsely populated, we don’t have a lot of waste compared to 
some of the more highly developed parts of the world. But 
certainly it is up to this generation to deal with this waste 
responsively, and if we did not have an outlet of Swan Hills to 
deal with waste, we would need to find a way of dealing with it. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ve discussed 
tonight, and I think you and I on a limited amount discussed 
personally, some of the directions and possibly streamlining 
some of the regulations around Environment. And my question 
deals with federal-provincial environmental regulation 
streamlining. Can you update us on the status of the process of 
harmonizing and hopefully also simplifying environmental 
regulations. 
 
And usually when you simplify things and you harmonize them, 
they’re not just simpler and harmonized, they’re usually also 
more efficient and effective. So I think we can accomplish a lot 
of things at the same time. 
 
So my question is, where are we at with having provincial and 
federal regulations streamlined? 
 
The Chair:  The member for Saskatoon Northwest? 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair. I would ask 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair. I 
would like, on behalf of the member from Rosetown-Biggar, 
who has the sad occasion of attending a funeral tomorrow in 
Edmonton, I would like to introduce his constituency assistant 
who is in the Speaker’s gallery this evening, Ms. Brenda 
Slimmons. I would like the Chamber to please welcome her 
here this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The Environment ministers met a couple of  

weeks ago in Toronto and we certainly agreed that there is lots 
of room of coordination. And basically what we have 
happening in some cases is a federal official and a provincial 
official goes to the same river to take water samples. We don’t 
need that. We just don’t have the money to do that. 
 
So we are committed to working cooperatively together to get 
rid of some of this duplication and cooperate more. If the feds 
want to so some particular water testing, we’ll provide the 
sample instead of them having to go out and get it. So we are 
working towards that, and there was good progress made at the 
meeting to continue in this direction. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. My next question 
gets its origin out of the Leader-Post, January 1995, dealing 
with used oil depots. And you’d announced that you would 
soon be requiring oil manufacturers selling in the province to 
provide for the recycling of oil filters and containers. Do you 
have any idea how much this system will cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We’re very pleased to have the cooperation 
of industry. In fact industry is driving the used-oil recycling 
program. The government is basically just there to sort of see 
that things are going along okay and help out where we can. But 
it’s industry driven. 
 
And because the project is just getting up and running, we don’t 
know the total cost, but there will be a bit of a levy on oil and 
filters to accommodate the disposal of them, and I’m sure that 
people don’t mind paying a few cents to know that their oil is 
not going to end up in a slough or on a road somewhere, a 
gravel road. So we don’t know the total cost. 
 
But again it’ll be good cooperation. If there’s five garages and 
dealers in one town, perhaps they’ll have one tank to contain 
the oil and the filters. Every business wouldn’t have to do that. 
There’ll be good cooperation, I’m sure. And we’re looking for 
good things and we’re here to help industry as much as we can 
on this. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m quite fully 
aware of the cooperation from industry on that. I was involved 
in some of the early stages of some of the planning that took 
place to organize this a number of years ago, and also have one 
of those funny-looking tanks on my business as well that we 
take oil in from the community. So I’m aware of some of that, 
also quite aware of some of the cost. 
 
Do you have any idea about how many of those depots we feel 
we’ll need across Saskatchewan to take care of the needs of all 
the used oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again we expect the program to pay for 
itself, and I appreciate your insight into the issue. But because 
the program is just getting up and running we don’t have costs 
or numbers of depots, but certainly this will be something 
that’ll be worked out in a good balance. And again we’re 
interested to see what the results will be. 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2891 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Sort of in the same vein, and 
that’s dealing with sites that are contaminated, and I believe you 
mention or refer to one in northern Saskatchewan that the 
province you know is obviously going to be caught with the tab 
to clean up. I’d like you to report on your department’s progress 
on what sometimes been called the “dirty dozen of 
Saskatchewan” contaminated sites around the province. I 
believe there’s been a commitment from your department to 
clean up those sites. What stage are we at with that? What’s the 
progress? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We are making some progress on these 
sites. For an example, the worst site in the province or one of 
the worst-determined was the creosote plant at P.A. (Prince 
Albert), is all cleaned up now. Another one of the dirty dozen 
was the fertilizer plant site in Saskatoon; it’s virtually cleaned 
up. Some of the other ones which we haven’t quite got to yet, 
we’ll certainly continue to monitor to make sure the 
contamination is under control and not getting into drinking 
water. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And it’s good to see that some of 
those things are being taken care of. But I do have a question 
about a specific one that you could probably enlighten us on 
and see where we’re at. I believe that there was an effort made 
to start cleaning up the northern petroleum refinery near 
Kamsack and there’s been a change of plans there. Could you 
explain what’s behind the change of plans and where we’re at 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The site you referred to at Kamsack, our 
original evaluation had indicated it was a bad site, one of the 
dirty dozen. However, subsequent testing indicated that the 
contamination was much reduced and not an immediate threat 
to groundwater or anything else. It is one of the orphan sites 
which we have to deal with. And again, hopefully this 
committee looking at environmental contamination liability will 
have some indication as to how we might fund this. So that’s 
one of the sites that we can continue to monitor to make sure 
that the contamination is not going to cause some immediate 
problems too. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s interesting that 
there’s a particular site that does have some problem; the 
province sees it fit and acceptable to sort of back out of that and 
put it on hold. My question is, why cannot individual farmers 
and business people who happen to have a storage tank that 
isn’t doing much, back out of it as well and just say they’ll look 
at it when they choose to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  You make a very good point. And the 
legislation introduced by the previous government in 1988 did 
have strict deadlines and dates that had to be complied to. 
We’ve worked with industry on a number of occasions and 
we’ve changed the regulations a number of times, to the point 
now where a tank which is not leaking can simply have 
monitoring wells put in, for a cost of about $250, and that 
operator can continue to operate until there’s an indication the 
tank is leaking. 
 
There are a few sites which are very close to perhaps municipal  

water supplies. We still are requesting that those sites be 
cleaned up. And of course any site which is leaking, its use is 
terminated and we want it cleaned up as quickly as possible. 
And again the liability report will be eagerly looked forward to 
as to how we best deal with these. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. You made some reference to 
active sites that were still being used needing that monitoring 
equipment; however there is many sites around the province 
that have storage tanks that have not been in use for 10, 20, 30 
years. They were pumped dry the last time they were used, and 
so obviously the amount of damage they could do has ceased to 
increase or even be there since they were pumped dry the first 
time, and so maybe they should be allowed that same option as 
the other site we mentioned. 
 
Question about Interprovincial Cooperatives chemical plant in 
Saskatoon is leaking Agent Orange in the South Saskatchewan 
River. In your opinion, is this less important than a storage tank 
that might in the future leak just a small part per million 
gasoline into an aquifer, keeping in mind what Agent Orange 
actually is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  As indicated earlier with the site in 
Saskatoon, the old fertilizer plant site, we are very close to 
having an agreement as to how this will be dealt with. And not 
to belittle that; all contamination is important, and we simply 
cannot say that once a tank has been empty there’s no problem. 
We have a community near Regina where a credit union is built 
on a site and the house next door has contamination, gas fumes, 
in the basement of the house. The site has been empty for many 
years but it was never properly cleaned up. So we need to deal 
with these and they’ll be around to haunt us for a long time to 
come. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair. Actually, 
Mr. Minister, a few more questions just finally came to my 
mind, some that I’m glad I had a chance to give some second 
thought with you to . . . number one, regarding the resource 
centres. Where are we at today? We were informed yesterday 
that there may be some more closures coming in, that 
communities like Moosomin may lose their resource centre. 
There may be a reduction of staffing as result of it. And, Mr. 
Minister, I wonder if you could bring us up to date as to the 
reductions that are coming in your department as a result of the 
downsizing and the cost-cutting measures you’re taking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We thank the member for the question, and 
again he talked about this yesterday and I apologize for not 
having the details. But we eliminated eight sites, conservation 
officer stations, this year  Dore Lake, Pelly, Carrot River, 
Mistatim, Sandy Bay, Weyakwin, Maple Creek, and Glaslyn. 
And as far as Moosomin, it’s not on any list. 
 
And these sites were with this year’s budget. And in actual fact 
the budget, overall budget, for field operations, which includes 
conservation officers, went up $600,000 to $19.7 million. We 
are certainly committed to providing good law enforcement and 
resource management in Saskatchewan. And like everything 
else, we are streamlining and trying to do more with the dollars 
that we do have. 



2892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Mr. Toth:  So I have your assurances tonight then, Mr. 
Minister, that the resource centre in Moosomin will continue to 
operate as it currently is and that there certainly aren’t any 
changes that would be taking place in the Moosomin office. 
 
And of course that one I bring to your attention because of the 
fact it’s in my constituency. But I know there is some other 
offices, I’m sure, have the same concerns as they were raised 
today. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  You are correct. The Moosomin office 
operation will continue as is. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering as well, with 
the discussion we’ve had over the Alameda-Rafferty project 
over the past number of years, and I know you’ve had a very 
definite interest in the past, and I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 
what are the water levels that we’re facing today in Alameda 
and Rafferty? 
 
And I raise that as a result of the fact I understand there was a 
substantial stocking of pickerel in the Rafferty dam, and I 
believe Alameda has already has some good fishing available in 
it. So could you give us the levels of the water in those two 
reservoirs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Probably the minister in charge of Sask 
Water could give more detail. I gather the Rafferty reservoir is 
just about half full. The Alameda reservoir has to be kept at a 
certain level to meet the agreement with Tetzlaff brothers, so 
it’s not full but it certainly could have more water in if we 
didn’t have to allow some of the water to be released. And 
undoubtedly when there is water in these reservoirs, they will 
provide fishing opportunities. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So I take it from that, Mr. Minister, that we’d 
have to invest in scuba equipment and air tank for the Minister 
of Economic Development for him to walk across the bottom of 
the Rafferty project at the present time. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, he tells me he 
can walk on water. Well maybe we’ll have to take him up on 
that. Any bets in here tonight? 
 
Mr. Minister, a question that continually comes my way  and 
I think you gave a figure of some amount to my colleague 
earlier  but many individuals have been asking, and certainly 
people in the wildlife federation in my area at a couple of the 
wildlife banquets I attended this spring, the question came up: 
what is the revenue that is derived from big game licences and 
also bird licences? I’d like that specifically, the amount of 
dollars that’s collected in licences for big game and the amount 
of dollars in licences for bird licences. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The revenue generated by fishing licences 
and game licences, which would be big game and birds, is 
about $9 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 9 million. 
Fisheries, 2.9 million and game just over 6 million. 
 
(2015) 
 

Mr. Toth:  So when you’re saying 6 million, Mr. Minister, 
that’s bird and big game? You don’t have a breakdown split up 
between big game and bird licences, like split down for . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We do not have it. We just have it listed as 
game, but if you would like a breakdown we could probably 
supply it. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I’d appreciate that, Mr. Minister, because it’s 
certainly something that comes up, and I think it comes up 
because of the individuals who are involved in hunting and as 
well individuals as a result of their farming backgrounds and 
dealing with neighbours and wildlife depredation. This question 
is something that they’re asked. And I wondered why some of 
those funds aren’t actually put into some kind of a 
compensation program. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you just give us a bit of an update as to 
what park rates have done in ’96 versus 1995, and also park 
usage for the year 1995? I know we’re into a new season. It 
seems to me some of the numbers I saw for ’95 and some of the 
parks, we had a substantial increase. I trust that we’re not going 
to see a decrease as a result of the inability to get to the parks. 
We’re going to be dealing with the Minister of Highways in a 
little bit regarding some of these problems, but maybe you 
could just bring us up to date on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The park users last year was about 2.2 
million people; 2.2 million people used our parks last year. And 
the visitation is often coordinated with the weather. If you get a 
poor summer, you get fewer people that turn out. 
 
The park fees, let’s see, we’ve brought in a new fee, a three-day 
fee, of $12 and a new weekly fee of $18. To accommodate 
people using a park just maybe one weekend out of the year, 
we’ve decreased the daily park permit from 6 down to $5. We 
have a decrease in park fees for a day. 
 
We’ve decreased the cost of a transferable permit from $32 
down to 30. And this was popular because you can put it from 
one of your vehicles to the other instead of having it only in one 
vehicle. 
 
Camping fees, electrified sites have gone up $2, from 15 to 17. 
Non-electric sites have gone up from 9 to $11 per night. 
Seasonal camping rates have gone from 560 to 650. This is for 
somebody parking a motor home in a park and using it 
throughout the summer. 
 
So we’ve had some fees go up and some come down. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I sure appreciate how 
thorough you are in providing the information. 
 
Mr. Minister, another concern that is an ongoing concern, and 
this concern is beyond this province, and it’s regarding Bill 
C-68. Now where are you today in your dealings with the 
Minister of Justice in proposals to the federal government as to 
how we address the concerns regarding Bill C-68, and then 
certainly the opposition in Saskatchewan to that specific federal 
Bill? 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2893 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview 
might better answer this. Certainly the Justice minister will be 
able to provide a more detailed update, but we are committed to 
fighting this Bill. We are working cooperatively with the other 
jurisdictions  Alberta, Ontario, Manitoba, the Territories  
and certainly the feasibility of court action is being looked at. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, the reason I ask that is because it 
would seem to me, from your background and involved with the 
wildlife federation, that you should be one of the strongest 
allies that hunters in this province do have. 
 
And I want an assurance from you tonight, Mr. Minister, that 
it’s not just a vocal assurance but certainly you’re going to get 
out and really do something to prod the Minister of Justice, if 
you will, if he needs a prod, to act to make sure that the 
concerns and the questions that have been raised regarding this 
Bill are brought to the federal Liberal government, because it 
appears they don’t seem to be listening. 
 
And I’m afraid what we have in Saskatchewan now is we’ve 
got a federal government that basically looks at Saskatchewan 
as a province that really doesn’t count in the big picture, 
somewhat as we see rural Saskatchewan trying to live within 
the directions of this government and how it provides funding 
in relation to rural versus urban situations here in the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve certainly raised a number of questions. 
And a question that just comes to mind has to do with legal 
action as a concern was raised regarding a situation in my area. 
And I’m not really going to get into the area. But maybe on a 
broad sense, Mr. Minister, I would like to know how many legal 
actions your department has been involved in either as plaintiff 
or as defendant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well first of all, the hon. member is 
discussing a number of items here. I want to assure you that, 
like the previous Justice minister, our current Justice minister 
needs no prodding on the gun control issue. He’s doing a great 
job. 
 
Secondly, legal actions, if you’re meaning every time we issue a 
ticket for a fishing or hunting violation, there’s hundreds, 
probably thousands, of actions that we are involved in. But if 
you mean court actions, we could perhaps get you more details 
on that. But certainly the job of enforcement officers is legal 
work and so we deal with a lot of it. Sometimes fines are paid 
voluntarily; sometimes we end up in court. And it can be 
everything from poaching to environmental protection 
violations and things like that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I have four pages of about 20 
questions here yet. That could take a fair bit of time in the 
Assembly here. Can I have your assurances that if I pass these 
across, that this time they will be answered? And that you will 
answer them? Because you did actually have these questions 
sent to you in our global questions. 
 
And rather than bringing them all up, I just want a commitment 
from you that all the questions I send across to you, we’ll get 
responses to promptly, if you don’t mind, please. 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I assure the hon. member that we will 
respond to these questions. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
would like to extend my appreciation and thanks to the minister 
and his officials for the time they’ve given us to address 
environmental issues. Certainly some of his officials I’m quite 
familiar with, having worked with them in the past, and it’s 
certainly a pleasure to see them again and to have this debate 
and have the forthright answers that have come forward. 
 
I think the reason we’re getting more square answers is because 
we’re dealing with someone from a background that represents 
honesty that comes by a handshake and where your handshake 
is your word of agreement. And so I thank the minister. 
 
And I would also suggest, Mr. Chairman, that we certainly have 
no further questions and we’re more than prepared to move to 
Committee of the Whole, debate of item no. 92. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to thank 
the members opposite for the variety of questions. I’d also like 
to thank the officials and in fact all the staff of the Department 
of Environment and Resource Management for the fine work 
they are doing. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, 
Don Metz, acting deputy minister, Department of Highways and 
Transportation; Barry Martin, executive director, engineering 
services division; Lynn Tulloch, executive director, corporate 
information services division. And to my left, Bernie Churko, 
executive director of logistics, planning, and compliance 
division, Department of Highways. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m afraid this is one 
department that we’re going to have to raise a number of  



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

questions before we get to voting very seriously on it. And in 
some regards the minister may find that he’s got some support 
over here. If there’s one department that has taken some 
massive hits and given up a lot, it seems to me it’s the 
Department of Highways, probably the last department that 
should be giving up as much as it has over the past number of 
years in view of the conditions of the highways in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly it must have been somewhat disconcerting to the 
minister to have the tourism industry talk about how they’re 
going to promote tourism and at the same time promote a 1-800 
number so you can call and check and see which route you 
should take to get to your destination. 
 
(2030) 
 
I note, Mr. Minister, as I was driving into the community of 
Kipling on Sunday evening, I ran into a number of trailers on 
their way down Highway 48. Actually I was on my way to a 
grad in Windthorst, from the community of Kipling, and trailers 
coming through on Highway 48. And I thought to myself, if 
they aren’t disgusted now, once they get past Kipling and travel 
the rest of the way from 40, Kipling, down Highway 48 to No. 
9, they’re going to be totally annoyed with the highway system, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And I say that partly because you’re quite well aware of the fact 
that No. 48 from Kipling into White City and certainly Regina, 
was in excellent condition about two months ago until we 
diverted trucks off of No. 1 because of a highway flooding 
situation. And to be honest with you, I personally was amazed 
that in a matter of a few hours we had pounded that road into 
the condition . . . and put it in the condition it is today, which is 
a situation where there are many of the areas that were pounded 
open; although they’ve been filled, just continually work their 
way open again. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure how you’re going to address it or how 
the department is going to address it in view of the fact that 
we’ve been fortunate enough to have a fair bit of moisture in 
that area. But while you’re talking about addressing the concern 
with regards to the areas that are pounded out, whether it’s 
Highway 48, whether it’s Highway No. 1, whether it’s 16, or 
any of the highway system in this province, I’m also concerned 
about the fact, Mr. Minister, that there are situations in 
highways where we do have access to some of the nicest park 
systems in our province, and we’re really limiting . . . or we’re 
forcing people to go extra miles to gain access to that park 
system. As a result we have seen in the past, and the concern 
that people in the area have again, is that we may see it again 
this year. 
 
But as people find they have to go out of the way and maybe 
add an extra 30 minutes or an hour to their drive one way out to 
a park network, that they may choose alternate tourism 
destinations. And so that is a concern. 
 
And what I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, is what commitment 
can you make to the people of south-eastern Saskatchewan with 
regards to reconstruction of the short kilometres . . . there’s  

about 16 kilometres, Kipling to Highway No. 9, and from 
Wawota to the Manitoba border. And I think if you look at 
those two pieces of highway, Mr. Minister, if those sections of 
No. 48 Highway were reconstructed, there’s a number of things 
that could happen. 
 
Number one, it would certainly enhance tourism and the 
promotion of the tourism sites within the south-east corner of 
the province. 
 
Number two, it also opens up the door, Mr. Minister, for No. 48 
becoming an alternate route, and a much shorter and quicker 
route, from Brandon through to Regina, although we’re not 
asking you to look at bringing it up to a road condition that 
would handle big highway truck traffic but certainly the tourism 
traffic that may move and the smaller traffic. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could respond and 
give us an idea of what could be done to address this condition. 
And especially 48, Kipling to Highway No. 9, is becoming a 
road that is . . . the road surface or the top surface of that road 
seems to be getting narrower every year as the Highways 
department tries to straighten it out and tries to clean the 
shoulders off and make them look much better. But it’s, if you 
will, it’s almost like going through . . . down one of these ski 
trails that these . . . I forget the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s a black run. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Black run, that’s what I guess that’s what we’re 
calling it, Mr. Minister. 
 
And it certainly, I think, has reached the point where if we 
could have run that heavy truck traffic down it just another six 
or eight hours, there’d have been nothing left of that road. And 
it might have put it in a position where we’d have finally got 
the construction that would be needed, that would create the 
tourism and the business for the area. Plus it would certainly get 
the people of the province that use that road or would desire to 
use that road off of your back and my back as far as the 
condition of that particular highway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for that 
question. The people of Saskatchewan are quite understanding. 
They know the amount of roads that we have in the province  
25 per cent of all the roads in Canada, 3.7 per cent of the 
Canadian population to try and upkeep that road network and to 
try and upgrade it as needed. 
 
Then we look at the other side of it where we have extra 
economic development now with the oil industry booming in 
the last three years. The forestry industry. Certainly we look at 
mining industry improvements. 
 
We also look at some changes in demographics in the province 
of Saskatchewan. We look at elevator consolidation for an 
example. And I know that you will know about that in your 
area. 
 
We also look at rail-line abandonment and the new Liberal Bill 
C-14 which will allow the railways to abandon lines a lot  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

quicker than usual. 
 
So we have some things to contend with there. 
 
We also have to look at the last 2 years. We’ve had more 
moisture than we had in the previous probably 10 years. So 
we’ve had the moisture problems  wet falls, long, cold 
winters, and of course wet springs. So it’s created certainly 
some pressure on our highways system. You know it’s 
impossible to reconstruct every highway that perhaps we think 
needs reconstruction. You’re looking at 100 to $150,000 per 
kilometre. Thin membrane surfaced roads, we have 8,000 
kilometres in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know if you ask every MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) in this building, on your side, the Liberals, or on our 
side of the House, each of us would have a highway that we 
would like to see reconstructed. And I know in your case  
you brought it to my attention more than once  Highway 48. 
 
But we’re just not able to do it all at once. So what we have 
been doing is spending the majority of our funding in the 
preservation and maintenance. This year of course we have 
been delayed by a couple of weeks because of the weather, and 
certainly our crews will be there to maintain the highway as best 
we can, until such a time that we can in fact afford 
reconstruction. 
 
The other thing I want to say is that we have to look at new 
ways of doing things. If we look at our interest bill each year  
$851 million for example  that would for instance, twin Gull 
Lake . . . or all of No. 1 10 times a year each and every year. 
But we can’t cry over spilt milk. 
 
And then we take a look at what the Liberals are doing when 
they’re cutting us in areas of health care, social programs, and 
education, and we as a government then have to back-fill that. 
Certainly each department has to share in that. In fact all the 
people of Saskatchewan have to share in that. 
 
And so there is not a whole big pile of money at the end of the 
rainbow. So some of the new things that we’re looking at is 
partnerships with the private sector. And we’ve had some 
success in that area. We’re looking at tire inflation, new 
technologies like central tire inflation programs. We’re looking 
at the possibility of designated roads for grain hauls. We’re 
looking at regional transportation councils where the regions 
will decide the priorities of road construction. 
 
And hopefully by doing  spending, I guess  our limited 
funds better or in partnership with the rural municipalities and 
the urban municipalities, that we can spend that limited amount 
of funds more wisely. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and as I indicated, I’m 
quite well aware of, and most people are quite well aware of, 
some of the complications that arise regarding the highways and 
trying to maintain highways. And certainly I think, as I 
indicated earlier, with your department taking the hit it has over 
the past number of years, it becomes a major concern. 
 

And of course, Mr. Minister, the big concern out there is the 
fact that highways basically affect rural communities and rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s the large urban centres who basically have 
our key highway networks between our large urban centres and 
it’s our smaller rural and urban communities that basically carry 
the load of the poorer highway conditions. And so I think every 
effort has to be utilized in trying to maintain an infrastructure 
that certainly can provide for the future. 
 
And as you say, as you indicated, the fact that we’re going to 
see more grain moving down the highway network, it’s going to 
mean awhile before we could probably build a highway and 
build a pretty good highway that would carry a lot of the lighter 
traffic and the tourism and small-business traffic. 
 
As we get heavier units moving down, larger units moving 
down the roads because of the shift in the way grain is moved 
in to our system, it means that these highway networks and 
stretches of highway that could have been built for a lesser 
dollar, all of a sudden need the full load or the full expense to 
put that level of highway underneath or on the roadbed to 
maintain that heavier traffic. 
 
And I think your department may have met with Sask Wheat 
Pool regarding the high through-put elevator going in at 
Fairlight and the problems that are going to arise fairly quickly 
regarding the 48 west . . . or east of Wawota, pardon me, and 
certainly No. 8 north and south from that elevator. 
 
I guess the thing I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, I just noticed in 
the paper that the federal government is in the process of 
sending out cheques for compensation for the changes in rail 
traffic and rail handling and how much money is actually . . . I 
know it’s . . . if I understand it correctly, some of that money is 
going to be passed on to the Department of Highways for 
upgrading of highways; a fair bit of that money is going to rural 
municipalities to . . . for them to maintain their road networking 
system. How much money will be coming into your department, 
and how do you see yourself utilizing that money? 
 
And the reason I ask the question in that manner is, if you take 
that lump sum today and spend it on a few miles, you’ve got 
nothing for tomorrow. And I guess that’s the biggest problem 
with the fact that the government, the federal government, is 
doing the one-time pay-out even for producers. If the idea was 
to help them supplement their transportation by taking the funds 
that would be put in their hands, if they use . . . all utilize it 
today to maybe cover today’s expenses, they’ll have nothing 
tomorrow to help them with regards to the cost of transporting 
their grain to market. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’ve got a program in 
place or in mind as to how you’re going to utilize the funds that 
are coming from the federal government regarding the changes 
in the railway handling and how large those funds are. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thanks to the member for that 
question. The federal government has announced a transition 
fund, I guess, to compensate the provinces for the loss of the  



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Crow. It’s a bit strange to me that the loss of the Crow will cost 
the producers of our province about $320 million a year  in 
fact more than that. That’s not counting road damage to 
highways or rural municipalities. And so we’re going to lose 
that  in compensation for that they’re going to give the 
province 84.6 million, once. So we lose $320 million per year, 
plus road damages to municipalities and highways, but we’re 
going to get this $84.6 million, once. 
 
The $84.6 million will come like this, it is my understanding at 
this point in time. This year in 1996 there will be $20 million 
that will come to the province of Saskatchewan; $10 million 
will go to the municipalities, unconditionally. There will be $5 
million that will go to municipalities for rural roads that will be 
determined by the board. And there will be $5 million that will 
go to the Department of Highways that will be determined by a 
board. 
 
The board composition is made up of three members appointed 
by the federal government. There will be two members 
appointed by the Saskatchewan government; there will two 
members appointed by SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities); and there will be one member appointed 
by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 
 
The applications will come into the Department of Highways in 
regards to the rural roads program. We will just pass those 
applications on to the committee and they will decide which 
will get priority. 
 
In the case of Highways, we have made up a list of potential 
candidates. That comes to $165 million. So we’ve got $5 
million and we’ve got projects worth $165 million that would 
qualify. So you can see that it’s not a large amount. And so 
what we hope, I guess with participation on the board, is to try 
and make sure that the money is used in fact for roads, and the 
roads that deserve the highest priority. 
 
When you mentioned Highway 48 for an example, that would 
be one of the highways that would be on the list. But the board 
will of course determine which is the highest priority of 
candidates. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you were speaking, 
you mentioned that there’s eventually going to be $84.6 million 
come to the province to make up for the loss of the Crow and 
for rail transition. And I believe you mentioned that $20 million 
is coming this year, but that’s split  the 20 million is the total 
dollar coming in, which part of it goes to the rural 
municipalities and part of it comes to your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess there’s a concern, and there’s a number of 
questions come out of this. But number one, the first concern I 
want to raise, when it comes to . . . you talk about maintaining 
what we already have. My question is, how do we maintain 
what we already have when we continually see a reduction in 
the number of highway maintenance crews throughout the 
province? And the community of Rocanville just called the 
other day, and they’re apparently losing the crew that they have 
 and I’m not even sure if it’s just a one-man crew already  
but my understanding is, things are going to be moved into the  

Moosomin area. 
 
And we’ve seen a substantial reduction. I just noticed by the, I 
believe it was the Regina Leader-Post about two weeks ago, 
that there was a major sell-off of highways equipment. And as 
we see this and we see the reduction in crews, one has to 
wonder how we can even just maintain what we already have 
with the amount of reductions that are taking place as far as 
maintenance crews and the amount of equipment, heavy 
equipment, that is available to be used to just meet the need of 
the highways and the highways maintenance as we notice it, 
just travelling across the province these days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for the 
question. Certainly we restructured the Department of 
Highways this year. I mentioned earlier that the federal 
government, the federal Liberals, were pulling from the 
Saskatchewan government over $100 million  110 or $114 
million in health care, education, and social programs. So we all 
went back to our departments and looked internally to find what 
efficiencies we could find internally so that we could hold our 
budgets as close to what we had before as possible. 
 
We were able, because of reorganization, to find $6.2 million. 
Now some of that was the reorganization of the crews, but I 
want to say to the member opposite that we still have 107 
depots across the province. I believe it’s 96 crews. We did close 
29 depots across the province, and certainly there were some 
reductions in employees. One of the things that the larger crews 
will allow us to do in summertime . . . for instance, there will be 
larger crews so that the deep patching that we do now will be 
handled much more efficiently and effectively by larger crews. 
 
Winter maintenance, of course, we look at more modern 
equipment now  and you mentioned the sale of the 
20-year-old equipment and the smaller equipment that we had 
just recently. The newer equipment are faster, larger; and we 
also in the process centralized, or I guess evened out, the 
workload of the crews. It used to be where one crew would 
have about a hundred kilometres to look after; another may 
have 275; one might be over 300. What we’re trying to do is 
have the workload about 300 to 350 kilometres per crew. We 
believe that the maintenance will be equal and perhaps better 
than it was in the past. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked about a 
number of depots that were closed. I’m wondering if you could 
give us a list of those depots, and actually I’m not all that 
concerned if you just read them off; if you could pass us a list 
of the depots, it certainly would be appreciated. My shorthand 
isn’t all that good trying to keep track of it all. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, you did send out a bit of a brochure, I think 
about a month and a half ago, with regards to a number of 
projects. How many new miles of construction . . . how many 
miles of construction of new road or highway construction is 
being . . . taken place this year? How many miles of just 
resurfacing is taking place? 
 
And then of course the other will be a significant amount in 
maintenance. And maybe you can inform us today as to  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

whether or not the amount of maintenance is going to, as a 
result of weather conditions we face, since you originally let out 
that . . . or sent out that information, whether or not you’re 
finding yourself in a position where you’ve got even a higher 
level of maintenance that is needed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I can send to this . . . the member this 
information, but I would probably like to read it first. 
 
The grading budget is $9.8 million  $9.88 million. It’s 113.8 
kilometres that would be the grading for new roads, 113.8. That 
would include, for instance the South Saskatchewan River 
crossing at Outlook, the approaches. It would include 2 
kilometres west of Langham to North Saskatchewan River 
bridge; the widening from Meadow Lake to 2.2 kilometres east, 
and other projects like that. 
 
Then the paving of that grading work is . . . we have a budget of 
$10.2 million, 56 kilometres. The preservation, which would be 
resurfacing  we have resurfacing so that if you don’t need to 
reconstruct the base of a highway but you resurface it  that 
budget is $15.47 million and 209.4 kilometres. We’re going to 
be spending 8.7 million on bridges. And we’re going to be 
spending 9.2 million on airport servicing, and basically that 
would be . . . or, pardon me, 800,000 for airports. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to a lot of the 
maintenance that is going on or taking place right now, Mr. 
Minister, have you involved a number of private companies in 
the maintenance work that has taken place, and if so, how 
many? And also if you could give us a bit of a cost comparison 
as to the cost per kilometre for maintenance with private 
contractors versus department maintenance crews. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The majority of the maintenance is 
certainly done by the crews. We haven’t got a percentage 
breakdown, but believe it’s about 1 per cent that we may tender 
out to a private contractor. We could get you that list. We 
would prefer to do that after the maintenance season because 
we don’t know how many we would, you know . . . that would 
apply to. 
 
Normally where we get a private contractor is on a specific job 
that might need a lot of deep patching for instance, or a real bad 
piece of road. 
 
Our budget in maintenance this year is about $83 million. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I appreciate that, and I think, Mr. 
Minister, I would suggest and certainly wouldn’t discourage 
you from the fact of hiring some private contractors. Around 
the area I noticed a contractor in Kipling has received some 
work, work he hasn’t had for a long time. In fact he basically 
had reduced his construction business to almost nothing, and 
then the son came back; and the fact that they’re able to get 
some of this work, I think, has enhanced the possibility of his 
son continuing in the equipment business and the construction 
business. 
 
The one thing I would like to note, Mr. Minister, is the fact that 
when I . . . three weeks ago coming in, I left home early, and I  

was actually on my way in, by a project, at quarter to seven in 
the morning and this crew was already out working, whereas I 
didn’t see any Highways crews out until a little later than that. 
 
And so if there are private crews who are willing to work and 
there’s work handy, and rather than having to send large 
Highways crew and they’re busy on another end, and if you’re 
able to at the end of the day show that you can stretch your 
dollars a little further and get some of the projects done, I 
certainly would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to take a look at 
some of the contractors out there who I’m sure right now are 
more than willing to look for some projects. 
 
And my understanding is on many of the projects that are even 
coming up, that a lot of the projects are being bid so low you 
begin to ask yourself how some of these guys survive in the 
first place. But if they’re willing to work, I guess we should 
give them the opportunity to work. 
 
Mr. Minister, we were talking about rail transition funds and 
about the Crow benefit disappearing and the fact that this . . . 
even in this coming year, we may see a number of kilometres of 
rail bed in this province being totally abandoned. Something 
that’s been raised by producers in my area, and I’ve heard it 
from producers outside of the area as well, is the possibility of 
going to the federal government and asking the federal 
government that they allow this rail bed to become just 
available to anyone who would like to utilize it. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that all the rail bed across this 
province, and certainly across this country, was built by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan and of Canada by funds from the 
federal government  by tax dollars. 
 
(2100) 
 
I remember not that long ago the rail bed just south of . . . on 
our area, the CN (Canadian National) line from Maryfield 
through to Regina, and it’s on a . . . basically just used from 
Maryfield through to Kipling, and then they come in from the 
west right through to Glenavon and back. And there’s a section 
that isn’t being utilized. But there was a substantial dollar put 
into that rail bed, and to my knowledge none of that money 
came from CN. All of that was federal money if I recall even by 
the papers and by the billboards that were up about how the 
taxpayers’ money was working for them. 
 
So it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that it would only be 
right and proper now, as the federal government walks away 
from the Crow benefit program, and as many of these rail 
companies are indicating that they want to walk away and 
abandon a lot of these rail beds, that these rail beds should just 
be left available to any producer or any group of individuals, 
such as we see Southern Rails, to have access to them. And 
that, Mr. Minister, would certainly alleviate some of the traffic 
on the highway system, the highway grids, if the rail bed was 
there and the business groups could put forward propositions 
and have access to that rail bed and begin continuing the 
transportation of rail down those road beds or rail beds that 
were there to the main line. 
 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

So I would certainly be interested in knowing your views on it. I 
think it would be certainly fair and proper to ask the federal 
government to take a serious look at that, because my 
understanding is the rail bed is going to be left to the railway, 
and whereas a few years ago they would just gladly walk away 
and pick it up and basically give away the material on the rail 
bed, there’s some fairly good economic gain and value in 
reclaiming that rail bed as far as the ties and the steel on the 
beds. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering what your views are on that 
and if you’ve approached the federal government with that idea, 
in view of the fact that it may be an alternate means of cutting 
down on some of that heavy truck traffic just by having it there 
and having small companies running units up and down and 
moving the grain off of these branch lines on to the main lines 
for the major companies to move to port. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I certainly . . . I do not disagree 
with you. I think it would be nice if the railways would allow 
the rail beds to stay with either the province or the 
municipalities or with producers. However if we look back at a 
Tory administration in Ottawa not too many years ago, who in 
fact helped upgrade the majority of the grain-dependent branch 
lines in the province of Saskatchewan, also stated very clearly 
to the railways that it’s yours to do what you wish. And so there 
is a bit of a problem there. 
 
The new legislation, Bill C-14, when a railway abandons a 
section of line, we’ll have to offer it to the private sector or 
some interested party, and there is a five-month, I believe, 
window if I’m not mistaken. After that the federal government 
would have 30 days to show some interest in that abandoned 
line. The province would have 30 days, and then the 
municipality would have 30 days. 
 
You mentioned approaching the federal government, and we 
have approached the federal government on Bill C-14. 
Manitoba, Alberta, and Saskatchewan  the Highways 
ministers of each province  went to the federal government 
and talked to the Transportation Committee, the Commons 
Transportation Committee, and asked for changes in Bill C-14. 
The answer of course was no. We went to the Senate committee 
and made the same appeal, and again the answer is no. Bill 
C-14, the Liberal government in Ottawa certainly favours the 
railways, and we are very disturbed and concerned about that. 
And we will continue to make our points. 
 
One of the areas that may look at the rail beds would be the 
transportation councils. If the regional transportation committee 
in a certain region believes that the rail bed is a priority in their 
particular area, they may want to pursue that. So I agree with 
you. It’s very disturbing. The federal government are not 
interested in participating, and so I guess we have to play the 
hand that we have been dealt. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that, and I’m not 
sure I’m just totally in agreement with the fact, your last 
comment, about just playing the hand we’ve been dealt. I think 
the province of Saskatchewan is certainly sitting in a position 
where we are a fairly . . . have a fairly sound resource base. 

And I think for too many years, too many other parts of the 
country have certainly taken advantage of our resource base and 
resource revenues. Alberta certainly showed the federal 
government a few years ago that it wasn’t prepared to just 
continue to accept the fact that what it was dealt. And maybe 
it’s time the prairie provinces certainly stood up. I think they are 
still seriously looking at a challenge to Bill C-68, the gun law. 
 
And the other thing is, Mr. Minister, maybe we need to take a 
look even in this regard because of the fact that when it boils 
down to . . . and you mentioned some of the points and some of 
the areas where Saskatchewan has faced some fair reductions at 
the hands of the federal government . . . that it boils down to 
this fact  that the votes in this province don’t mean a lot to a 
federal government any more. 
 
And certainly there’s more to be gained in eastern Canada 
because of the headquarters of the rail companies than there is 
out of a bit of rail bed in rural Saskatchewan. And yet at the 
same time the million population in this province are going to 
try and have to put up the resources, if you will, to maintain the 
road system and the road network, to address the concerns that 
are going to fall upon us as this rail bed is abandoned and as it’s 
lifted up and more traffic, heavy traffic, is put on our road 
system. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, there are grounds, and maybe that 
should have been part . . . maybe it’s too bad we didn’t have a 
bit of this debate prior to the Premier leaving last night to 
reinforce that and have him . . . Well I saw the Prime Minister 
on TV talking about this first ministers’ conference isn’t going 
to become a very political and open debate; it’s going to be a 
cordial meeting. 
 
Maybe it’s time for the Premier to stand up and say listen, Mr. 
Prime Minister, people in Saskatchewan are residents of 
Canada. You expected the people of Saskatchewan to stand up 
and support you in your unity debate. Well it’s time you 
listened to the population of the province of Saskatchewan with 
regards to transportation problems that they’re facing. 
 
I’m more than prepared, Mr. Minister, and I think my 
colleagues are, to give you all the support you need in 
addressing some of the offloading that’s coming your way and 
certainly the fact that your budget is being cut to a bare 
minimum, and as a result we see some of the problems that are 
surfacing today with regards to our highways system. 
 
So what I would suggest to you is, never say never; continue to 
stand up and represent the people of Saskatchewan as long as 
you have the authority as the Minister of Highways. And then if 
for some reason the Premier decides to either elevate or demote, 
encouraging the next minister of Highways to carry on  pass 
on the torch and say it’s for you to carry now and we’re hoping 
you continue what I’ve begun. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would certainly encourage you to stand up 
firmly for the people of Saskatchewan with regards to the type 
of funding and the help that is needed to maintain our highway 
system. 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

Mr. Minister, I’m raising a question that may seem trivial, but 
it’s certainly brought up, and the interesting thing is, Mr. 
Minister, it’s brought up by some of the strongest NDP (New 
Democratic Party) supporters in my constituency. It’s regarding 
this little spring in the valley, the Qu’Appelle Valley, and all 
they’re asking for is for the Department of Highways to whip in 
with a truckload of gravel, or a couple of loads, and improve 
the site a little bit. 
 
The site used to be . . . had been fixed up into a nice picnic area 
with washroom facilities, picnic tables, barbecues. In the last 
couple years they’ve been totally taken apart. The washroom 
facilities have been left, and it’s got a spring where a lot of 
people do continue to gather, stop and get their drinking water. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, because it hasn’t been maintained, 
because there isn’t gravel on the approach and down in around 
the spring area, if it happens to get wet, it’s very difficult to get 
in and out of that. And certainly there are a number people quite 
concerned about that. And I’m asking, Mr. Minister, if indeed 
the Department of Highways could commit on an annual basis 
to at least making sure that that’s maintained, that you quickly 
run through it, put a bit of gravel into it, whether it’s one or two 
loads a year, for the benefit of the general public who would 
stop by there. 
 
And maybe as well, Mr. Minister, something could be worked 
out to even provide bathroom facilities versus what we run into 
at the present time taking place down there. So I’m wondering 
if you could just respond to that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 
question. And certainly we will take a look at that particular site 
in regards to the gravel and the condition. Perhaps the member 
may want to check out in the community as well if there is an 
organization that might be interested in, you know, helping with 
looking after . . . I know in some cases, some roadside parks, 
for instance, have been taken over by local communities or the 
fish and wildlife federation for certain reasons. 
 
The member knows that every single dollar that we have, we 
would like to spend it directly on the roads. And certainly if we 
have some partnership with local communities or local 
organizations in some of these projects, it certainly helps us 
spend our dollars on 
roads. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately I’m not 
exactly sure of your comments about the fact that we need to 
spend all the money elsewhere rather than . . . I think you did 
indicate you’ll look into it. But I hope it is more than just to 
look into it, because I know I can have a couple of constituents 
on the phone in a couple weeks time when they know that I’ve 
raised the question  and I promised I would  asking me 
what happened, where was the minister? Did he really respond 
or make a commitment? 
 
So I’m asking you to specifically take the time to review this 
scenario. And for the sake of two loads of gravel and running a 
patrol up in there and making the site and access a little better, 
it certainly improves it for me and for you as well. 

Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could give us an idea of the 
amount of individuals working in your department today versus 
1995-94. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The number of full-time equivalents in 
1995-96 were 1,422.3; in 1996-97 that number is 1,266.9. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Excuse me, Mr. Minister. Did you say ‘92-93 for 
the 1,400? Is that what I heard? Or ’94 . . . ‘95-96, I just don’t 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The ‘95-96 number was 1,422.3 and the 
1996-97 number is 1,266.9. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Do you have a number for ‘94-95? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We do not have that number here but I 
certainly can get it for you. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well based on that number that you’ve just given 
to me, Mr. Minister, and I certainly appreciate . . . the reason 
I’ve asked for those numbers is I’ve been kind of wondering . . . 
as I acknowledged earlier on in our debate, I can see where the 
department was four years ago with funding and where it is 
today. 
 
And I don’t know if the cost of the projects has gone down. 
Certainly everything else has gone up so I can appreciate the 
difficulty in just trying to maintain a road infrastructure that we 
have at the present time, and that’s why I’ve asked for the 
numbers. Because the numbers kind of bear out what we’ve 
been seeing as far as the reductions that your department is 
taking and I would almost suggest that your department is 
probably taking a more major hit than any of the other 
departments. 
 
If indeed with the services that we’ve seen cut in the area of 
health care and if the Department of Health would be spending 
based on what they’ve reduced their services to individuals, 
then it would seem to me that there would be more money 
available to your department. Unfortunately while services are 
cut in Health, the expenditures continue to be at the same level. 
So you do have a legitimate argument as to why it’s difficult to 
meet your commitments; I’m not sure if the Minister of Health 
has a legitimate argument in that manner. 
 
Mr. Minister, another question that I would like to ask is based 
on . . . you mentioned about $800,000 for airports. I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, what does this involve. Does this 
involve small grants to some small rural airports or is most of it 
eaten up in our large airports system, Mr. Minister? I wonder if 
you could give us a bit of a breakdown and what is available for 
small rural airstrips? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The $800,000 is actually for 
construction . . . reconstruction of the Stony Rapids airport. The 
maintenance part of airports is separate from that. There is 
$103,000 that’s spent on small, local airports, in small 
maintenance grants. 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, is there any funding available for 
communities that are looking at upgrading their current 
airstrips? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No, not at this time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Minister, and to your officials. They tell me that you’re going to 
be here until about 10:30, so I’ll have time to get in some of 
these questions that our constituents have been asking about. 
And it will of course probably keep me on the paper rather than 
into some of the general things that we talked about the last 
time we were here, and why your financing is in trouble. 
 
So I do want to get specific on some of the issues though. Now 
as you will recall, Mr. Minister, the mayor from Gull Lake, 
Gerry Elmslie, has corresponded with you on different 
occasions, and he’s of course been on my doorstep more than 
once, talking about Highway No. 37 and the road condition that 
Highway No. 37 has gotten into from the heavy commercial 
traffic that comes in off No. 1 Highway as well as of course the 
surrounding area. 
 
In particular of course, this is a lot of live loads of oil, and these 
live loads of oil of course are very hard on roads but very 
welcome to our community. We’re very happy to have the 
commercial enterprise in our community, but we do have to 
recognize that this heavy traffic seems to be breaking up our 
roads a little more than we would have expected. 
 
I think possibly the problem is that the pavement wasn’t heavy 
enough to start with to hold up that much heavy traffic. And 
specifically I think the mayor is concerned about the road as it 
passes through the town, between the No. 1 Highway and 
coming into the town. 
 
There’s about a mile of road sort of into the town there that I 
guess he has the feeling that Highways is responsible for, or at 
least partly responsible for. He doesn’t feel that the town should 
pay all of the costs at least, because while the commercial 
enterprise is welcome in the community, obviously the town 
doesn’t benefit directly from the oil that is being taken out to 
the dumping station south of town and put into the pipeline of 
course to serve that oil to the pipeline system that goes on into 
the rest of the world. 
 
The reality of course is though that this traffic has been picking 
up with the increased activity. 
 
The mayor makes the point, and I think a good point, that the 
reason that the oil activity is picking up is because there’s an 
awful lot of new wells being drilled. And new wells, by their 
very nature, are pumped into tanks. And the oil pumped into 
tanks of course has to be delivered from those tanks to some 
dumping station in order to get it into the system so it can be 
sold. As time goes by, and wells that are good and productive 
are proven to be good and productive, pipelines are put in and 
that trucking necessity drops. 
 
His point of course, is that in these initial stages an awful lot of 
money is taken in by the government through the sale of the  

land leases to the oil companies before they drill. There’s an 
awful lot of taxes on the vehicles and on the equipment and on 
everything involved with the industry. So the government 
benefits very greatly, while the town itself does not directly get 
any way to tax that extra heavier traffic that’s coming through 
on that road. 
 
So, Minister, you are aware of the problem, I think. And I think 
the mayor though is still looking for an answer to getting that 
part of the road fixed. Now there’s no use me stopping there 
with No. 37, because obviously there are other people that have 
other concerns about other parts of the road. And the condition 
of the road north of Gull Lake, through the area that would head 
up towards Hazlet and up to Cabri, has been a serious concern 
of other people because they, unlike the mayor, have to travel 
on the rest of the road. I guess the mayor might be travelling up 
there as well, but his concern is with the town part. But the rural 
people and the rural municipality feel that there has to be some 
more work done on that road. 
 
I remember Mr. Peterka, who used to work with the Department 
of Highways, told me that we had to get something done with 
that road somewhat urgently because his experience, having 
worked all of his life with Highways and having retired with 
Highways before he went into private business, and he is now a 
trucker and has a private business of his own that puts him onto 
the roads quite a bit, but he says his experience working with 
the Highways all those years tells him that if we don’t do 
something with that road fairly soon, that the costs of repair will 
escalate dramatically. 
 
He said there’s a breaking point, in his experience, at which a 
road can still be repaired at a reasonable cost. And after that, if 
it gets wore out or broke down any more then you’re into 
phenomenal costs because you have to go in and start ripping 
up and building road base and all that expensive stuff. And in 
that sandy soil north of Gull Lake, I think you will understand, 
if you think about the type of texture that we have in that soil, 
it’s extremely hard to get a good road bed, so it will be 
expensive. 
 
So for those people that are inquiring about those areas, Mr. 
Minister, I wonder if you could tell us what your plans are for 
improvements and repairs to those sections of road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I thank the member for the question. 
Certainly No. 37 north of Gull Lake, you’re aware that we have 
some concerns with that road. It’s a thin membrane surface 
pavement and with the added traffic  the oil industry that you 
mentioned; certainly grain hauls  the thin membrane surface 
breaks, especially in the spring of the year and especially in the 
weather conditions that we’ve had this year. 
 
We have no plans to upgrade at this point in time. We will 
continue to maintain it as best we can until such a time that we 
can maintain it. 
 
We have put Highway 37 on the list in regards to the 
agricultural transition fund, but you have to remember that we 
have $165 million worth of projects on that list, and we’re 
going to receive $5 million, at least in year one. So you know,  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

whether that will be the selection or not, we will have to wait 
and see. 
 
You talked about communities that are over a thousand people. 
There is no urban assistance program at this time. We continue 
to review that and it is a priority with this government, and the 
community may be able to apply through the $5 million of the 
transition fund that will go to the municipalities, because urban 
municipalities can also apply for that fund, depending if the 
grain transportation is a part of the problem in that community. 
 
But I also want to say I know you’re concerned about 37. I 
know the member from Moosomin is concerned about 48. And 
I’m sure the member from Cannington will have some other 
highway and the member from Rosthern will have another one. 
And we can’t do everything at once, and certainly you will 
realize that. 
 
One of the areas that I think will help  as we develop the 
transportation committees. The south-west of course is very 
important in this project because they are the pilot. They’ve 
been working together, 107 municipalities over the last two 
years, looking at the transportation needs in the south-west, 
priorizing what the priorities might be. Certainly maybe the 
priority of the area might be 37, for example. I don’t know that. 
 
But certainly I think that will give direction to municipalities 
and to Highways in a system that we can maybe spend our 
limited funds more wisely. 
 
Tire inflation may be a coming thing that may certainly help 
Highway 37 or highways like 37. Designated roads might be a 
possibility in that particular region where the truck traffic may 
be able to be diverted to another road and the expense of that 
road shared somehow. And that would save 37 maybe for 
lighter vehicle traffic. 
 
Those are some of the new things that we’re looking at now. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s good to see that 
you’ve got some thought on the future, although the way that 
you portray the future leaves out the present. And the reality is 
that there is an inland terminal being built just down the road 
from Gull Lake; 37 obviously will be a heavy traffic road to that 
terminal from the north and south. 
 
We have been told that membership in that terminal ranges in 
the several of hundreds, and that their membership covers an 
area from the U.S. (United States) border on the south, from the 
Alberta border on the west, and north to the river; as far east, I 
guess  I’m not even sure  past Swift Current, I guess. 
Somebody mentioned the place and I can’t quite remember it 
right offhand. But it’s a very big area. 
 
But obviously, a lot of that grain coming from the north and 
south will hit 37 Highway. And as you say, if that grain is 
diverted off of that road, where’s it going to go? It’ll go onto 
municipal roads. So very quickly then, you’re going to have the 
municipalities with a bunch of broken-down roads as well. So 
we’re not only going to have one road wrecked, we’re going to 
have several. 

Because the municipal roads, quite frankly, for the most part 
were not built to take this heavy traffic either, and they don’t 
have any pavement on top of all. 
 
Now south of Gull Lake, we do know that that road was built 
with some intention of heavy traffic, there was some extra work 
done there a few years ago. And that actually has been holding 
up quite well. And if you’ll check back through the records 
you’ll find that they did some very heavy packing of heavy 
amounts of gravel and sand into the road bed before the 
pavement was put on. That seems to be working quite well and 
you might want to consider that in your plans for how to 
construct some roads in that area that might last to these heavy 
traffic areas, without having to invest in a foot of pavement. 
 
Obviously you can go that way. You can go to cement, I 
suppose, maybe, and that sort of thing too. But that seems to be 
a cheaper way to go because there are a lot of rocks and sand in 
the area and that does seem to be holding up. So you might 
want to look at that. 
 
As far as your long-term plans, we believe that’s good. My 
question though, when you said over a thousand, does that 
mean that towns under a thousand qualify for some other kinds 
of assistance? And if so, I think we’ll have a quick census in 
Gull Lake. So maybe I’ll let you answer that before we get into 
some other questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank you for the 
compliment on looking at the future. I think you would know 
Ron Gleim, from your area. And Ron is certainly a support of 
the future directions that the department is taking, hand in hand 
with SARM. 
 
I know Ron  I believe  is a brother to Ted Gleim who 
certainly I believe was a Conservative candidate at one time in 
that area. 
 
An Hon. Member:  A member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  A member, pardon me, that’s right. 
 
Communities that are over a thousand people do not qualify for 
any assistance on highways that run through their communities. 
Communities that are under a thousand, certainly Highways are 
responsible. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, the new census probably 
will help you there, and our community as well. And I don’t 
apologize for taking a special interest in this community 
because it is my home. And we have lived in the community 
and around the community all of our lives. And so as to know 
that there is a conflict of interest here, I’m telling you this. 
 
But we do qualify because our population has dropped. 
Unfortunately we are now under the thousand, and I believe 
that it is about 956, or something like that, comes off the top of 
my head. I’ll double check that for you, but I think, Minister, 
that we do qualify for that assistance now because we are under 
the thousand. And I think the census will confirm that, if we 
can get a hold of those figures. I don’t know how long it takes  



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

to do that. But there must be some up-to-date figures as well. 
So I just want to let you know that, and I’m sure the mayor’s 
going to be letting you know that as well when I send him a 
copy of the transcript, so that he will become aware of the fact 
that there is that dividing line. So you can expect that kind of an 
approach. And we certainly are going to do everything we can 
to get our community the best possible roads because we do see 
a lot of traffic that will be starting to come when this terminal 
gets finished this coming fall. 
 
(2130) 
 
I want to just quickly get into some other areas  because now 
I’ve just been informed that I’m going to be reduced in my time 
a little bit because the other members have some questions to 
ask as well  in general, because I’m saddled with the 
responsibility of trying to critique the whole province, but there 
are roads much like Highway No. 18. Now I believe that you 
sent over a copy of a criteria list of how you determine which 
roads should be fixed and how often. 
 
And maybe you can just run through that a little bit, what this 
criteria is. And while you’re doing that, maybe you could talk 
about the list of projects that you came up with this year. Now I 
know I’ve read something some place, and I don’t know if it’s 
the one that you supplied or somebody else, but maybe you can 
run over that. And if you’ve got a copy, maybe you could send 
that over. 
 
Now when talking about that, take into consideration that when 
I looked through that, I didn’t seem to find highways like 
Highway No. 18. I don’t think it was on the list either to be 
fixed or to be destroyed or to be rebuilt or anything. I couldn’t 
find it. Now maybe I didn’t have your list. So I’ll let you clear 
this up. 
 
And of course I do have to specifically ask you what your 
intentions are with that road because I did correspond with you. 
You did send me a letter saying you were going to send a 
couple of crews in. But I did have a call yesterday from one of 
the councillors at Frontier and he said he hasn’t seen these 
crews. And I know the man will exaggerate a little, maybe even 
a lot. But when he tells me that you can park a Cadillac car in 
some of the holes, I suspect they must be getting fairly big. 
 
And he does make comments about how the petroleum industry 
and heavy hauls there now are swinging out onto the municipal 
roads and they’re starting to get beat up pretty bad. And the 
farmers are getting upset with the petroleum industry, and you 
know what kind of ill feelings that sort of thing can kind of 
build into. 
 
So tell us about those things and then I’ll get on to some other 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, the components include . . . This 
is when we decide highways, and list the highways and in what 
order that we would like to see them repaired. We take the 
capital cost to construct or upgrade the roadway, the annual 
maintenance and long-term preservation costs of that roadway, 
the change in traffic, safety benefits to society, the change in  

cost of operating a vehicle on the roadway, the change in level 
of services measured by improved traffic flow and reduced 
travel time, society’s preference for travel on dust-free surface 
or on four-lane facilities, economic growth in the provincial 
economy arising from highway improvements. 
 
Now you mentioned Highway 18 and that it’s not on the list, 
and that’s correct. At this point in time there are 96 highways 
on the list to upgrade. Those would be billions and billions of 
dollars. Highway 18, because of the components that I’ve listed, 
has not made it to the top 96 at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, how could a road make it to 
96 if it’s in such bad shape that you can’t get enough vehicles 
on it to get the traffic count up. I mean the antelope run through 
that country but they don’t count, and they’re about the only 
ones that can get over this road any more. 
 
Then again I have to bring to your attention the reality of rural 
life which I think you seem to have forgotten. And the reality of 
rural life is that sometimes you have to build a road for a few 
people if you want to have any people living in an area at all. 
And you know very well that in the deep south-west there aren’t 
very many people, and at the best of times you’d never have a 
very heavy traffic count. You’d never have a very opportune 
way to meet the criteria that you’ve set. 
 
So we have to then determine, is it worthwhile to spend money 
on a highway to serve a few people in order that there can still 
be some community left, or should we let that community 
disappear? Should we end up like North Dakota where we have 
50-section farms, 40-section farms, and no people left. Should 
we allow that to happen? I’m asking you the question. 
 
I don’t think we should. I like big things. I really, truly do. I like 
bigger farms, but there’s a limit. There’s a limit to how big 
things should get in order that you can still preserve some social 
structure in a community. In the south-west I think we have 
reached that maximum goal in order to still have enough people 
left so that those that are there can still preserve their sanity by 
still having some people to have contact with. 
 
Now you may not have seen this but I live in a fairly rural area, 
and I have seen people who have lived alone too long who have 
cracked under the strain. This is not a pretty thing to be 
involved with, Mr. Minister, but it happens to people who live a 
hermit-style life. The loneliness drives them crazy. And it will 
do that to individuals faster but it will do it to families as well. 
And we can’t allow that to happen, Mr. Minister, without at 
least giving it some considered thought. 
 
And in that area of the province, if we don’t invest some money 
so that those people can have some security and some way of 
justifying why they would ever stay there at all, then we’re 
going to find ourselves with a vast area of land that simply will 
be not populated any more. 
 
We will have daytime crews coming in of course, for these oil 
wells, but they leave at night. If they’re not going to be attached 
to those family groups that are there to run the ranches and the 
farms, once they’re gone, then everybody that comes in there  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

will only be coming in in the daytime, and God help anybody 
that gets caught in there at night because they’re going to be 
alone. There is going to be no help. There’s going to be no 
traffic. 
 
I have seen things on those highways happen that could very 
easily take five or seven hours before somebody else would 
come along. Now if you think of yourself rolled over in the 
ditch and no possibility of any population around, those kind of 
things really worry me. Because big is better in some areas, but 
there has to be a limit to it, and this is the only way you can 
limit it in the south-west corner of the province. 
 
I know that’s also true of northern Saskatchewan and I know 
that your problems are humongous. They’re very big and very 
troublesome. But you have to give some consideration, I think, 
to some balance. You can’t have all of the money going in to 
northern Saskatchewan. We also have to preserve some of the 
southern part of this province as well. And if we don’t do it 
fairly soon those populations are going to be gone. 
 
When I told you that the population of Gull Lake has dropped, 
I’m telling you about a town that has a good secondary industry 
base  that being the petroleum industry. And we have had 
aggressive people that are working hard to make it a central 
location, not only for the grain terminal business and the grain 
to come in from a large area, but also for the oil that is being 
put into these pipelines. I credit those people with an awful lot 
of gratitude from the community for having had the initiative to 
go out and do those things. But we also have to do it in some of 
the other communities. 
 
And my point was that if the population is dropping in a 
community like Gull Lake in rural Saskatchewan where there is 
all of this activity that can possibly be mustered up, what 
possible chance is there for any community to be left in a town 
like Consul, Saskatchewan  in a town like Consul where 
Highway No. 21 runs through the U.S. border and Highway 13 
has become so full of holes that people are afraid to let their 
families drive on it? 
 
Now that community has seen itself depleted over the years to 
the point where most of the people there now have families and 
relatives living in Medicine Hat  to such an extent that they 
have a street in Medicine Hat that is fondly referred to as Little 
Consul, because everybody that has left there pretty well is 
living down a couple of streets over in Medicine Hat. I don’t 
blame people for going there, but we have to somehow stem the 
flow or we won’t have a community left in south-west 
Saskatchewan at all in some of those places. 
 
I really think, Minister, that you’ve got to rethink your criteria 
in how we determine where roads will be built. 
 
Because there’s an old movie that I saw some time ago and it 
said: if you build it, they will come. Of course it had to do with 
a ball diamond. But in this case it’s a road. If you don’t build a 
road, they will leave  because they have no way of getting in 
and out of those communities, they have no safety, and they 
have no security. And without that, young families will not set 
up. If you don’t have young blood and young families start up,  

then that community and those communities will all die. They 
will disappear. People will gradually be gone. 
 
I refer you to the town of Antelope, a thriving community of 
some 35 years ago. Today it’s a flat, bald piece of prairie where 
now an elevator is being built. Other than that, nobody’s there 
 it’s gone. It disappeared. 
 
I refer you to any number of towns like that. You know them as 
well as I do. Do we want them all to be like that? Do we want 
to have simply six or seven towns left in all of south-west 
Saskatchewan, because that, Minister, is the kind of load that 
we are putting on your conscience tonight. 
 
It is the highways that it has to start with. Without highways, we 
can’t save those communities. So, Minister, is there any plan or 
thought of changing or making exceptions to your criteria? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I should maybe . . . What I will do 
to the member opposite is send you a traffic volume map. It 
shows all the highways in Saskatchewan and the traffic 
volumes. 
 
And I noticed that you talked about Highway 18, and I note that 
the traffic  the daily average traffic count on Highway 18  
is around 50 vehicles per day. If you were a Highways minister, 
I guess I would have to ask you, with limited funds, would you 
. . . how much would you put into Highway 18 versus Highway 
16, for instance, where you have 6 or 7,000 vehicles per day? 
 
I think we have to be realistic here and we have to look at 
where the traffic goes, and look at the criteria that I mentioned 
earlier and take that into consideration. Does it mean that we 
can just let those highways like 18 deteriorate to nothing? 
 
The crews apparently are on Highway 18 today. We are looking 
at new methods of maintenance so that the seal could perhaps 
last longer, but our priority would be to try and maintain and 
preserve that road as best we can. 
 
But to go in there and spend a whole lot of money to 
reconstructing a highway, I can’t justify that and I don’t think 
you as a member of this legislature could do that neither. I mean 
what we have to try and do is the best we can with the limited 
funds. Certainly concern about areas like that, but we still have 
to be realistic in where we spend our money on roads. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I do want to disagree 
with you on one point. If I were the Highways minister, I would 
put money into those kind of roads and I would justify it this 
way. If you’re going to have a petroleum industry that’s going 
to come into the area and buy hundreds of millions of dollars 
worth of leases from the government, that the government gets 
all of that money, I as the Highways minister would go to my 
cabinet and say, those people that live in that area and those 
construction companies and those petroleum companies deserve 
to have some of that money spent on the roads so that they can 
get their work done. They don’t deserve to be ploughing around 
out in those areas with caterpillar tractors on what we used to 
call highways. 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

And quite frankly I believe that you have let the people down 
when you don’t go to your cabinet and make that argument and 
win it. It is a fact of life that the people down there know how 
many millions of dollars are going into general revenue so that 
you can buy everything else in this province for all of the other 
people, but you neglect the very people from where the money 
is coming in, from their area. And they know that. 
 
They live alone and they may live in remote communities, but 
they’re not stupid. They do know how to figure and they do 
know how to watch the newspapers and they know how to add 
up the billions of dollars that this province has to spend. And 
they know that you’ve got 5.2 billion, and they know that $800 
million of that is paid in interest because you people don’t 
know how to manage money. And they figured that all out. 
They tell me. I didn’t have to figure this out. They’re coming to 
me and they’re telling me, this is how you should be doing it. 
And I’m just passing this on to you and I know you don’t like to 
hear it, but the truth of the matter is I am their messenger and 
I’m bringing you the message. 
 
(2145) 
 
And they say you’re treating them badly, and this is coming 
from all over the province — all over the province in the rural 
areas — because you are neglecting the areas from which the 
wealth of this province comes. 
 
What if all of that millions and millions of dollars dries up and 
those people don’t buy these land leases any more. Then you’d 
be in a lot of trouble to provide the services like you say to the 
highly travelled Highway No. 16 that goes to the constituencies 
that you need for the next election. You wouldn’t be able to do 
that. So you’re going to have to learn to be a little bit fair about 
this, Mr. Minister, and you’re going to have to argue harder for 
your department because you are underfunded. 
 
I can’t help but say that I don’t sympathize with your position, 
with the amount of money you have, because quite frankly 
you’re underfunded. Your department is underfunded. Your 
Premier and your cabinet are letting you down, and I’ll fight 
along with you every day on that because obviously with the 
money you have, that’s all you can do. But you’re not getting 
enough money from your cabinet for the roads. It’s not fair 
proportion. And you’ve got to take this argument to your 
cabinet and you’ve got to win this argument, that rural 
Saskatchewan is worth the investment because it will bring 
back the revenue that you can spend in the cities. 
 
Now I know Bob Mitchell, or pardon me, the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education  my apology, I’m not supposed to 
mention his name  but anyway, I know that he comes from a 
farm. And I know that if he thinks back to his roots, he will 
understand that rural people are important. And I know that he 
used to practise law in Maple Creek and he must have friends 
there yet, because sometimes people remind me of the days 
when he was there. 
 
So, Minister, if you talk to the other colleagues in your cabinet 
and remind them of their childhood and their youth, most of 
them have some roots somewhere in rural Saskatchewan. One  

thing about a province like Saskatchewan, we all have roots and 
most of them do go back to the farms and to rural parts of this 
province. And even though the populations are smaller, doesn’t 
mean the value of those people and those areas has lessened to 
the whole scheme of things. 
 
And it lies, first of all, at the Department of Highways because 
this is the place where you can provide transportation for people 
to be able to come and go. There’s other things, of course  
things like trying to get entertainment for people in remote 
areas. Those are important things too. 
 
But roads become first and foremost, because we don’t have an 
air ambulance service that goes out and helps folks. We depend 
on those highways for our safety and our security. 
 
Minister, you know that as well as I do. You’ve been out in that 
country, and I know that there are a hundred communities in 
every corner of the province that will identify exactly to this 
comparison. And you’ve been out there yourself. I know the 
folks out there met with you last fall and I’m glad you were out 
there. 
 
And just in passing, I think some of the folks might have 
neglected to give you credit for the fact that you do sometimes 
get out of the office and I do know for a fact that you were in 
Eastend, Saskatchewan, last fall. I do know you were out in 
quite of few of those areas and drove on all lot of those roads. 
And therefore I know that you know that the road conditions 
are not good. 
 
And I give you credit for being out there, and I want people to 
recognize the fact that we know you were there and we 
acknowledge that. But it also then puts a responsibility on you 
to think harder about how you’re going to convince your 
cabinet to give you some of the dollars to work with. 
 
There are some other ideas, as a last-ditch effort, that I would 
pass on to you when you asked how I would do it. And I’m 
going to stand here and do that because we’ve said that we will 
offer alternatives where we can. 
 
I don’t particularly like the idea that you might steal my ideas 
and look good, but realistically I guess our first priority and our 
first job has to be to try to help the folks. 
 
So here’s the thing. In some of these desperate situations, you 
might consider going out and talking to the municipalities. You 
might actually want to meet with them and try to come up with 
some kind of an agreement where you would share 
responsibility for some of these secondary or lesser-used roads. 
 
Now I know they will resist that at first because they don’t want 
to accept the responsibility of putting money and equipment 
into Department of Highway roads. But in situations of extreme 
necessity, maybe they would. Maybe it’s worth taking a look at. 
Maybe it is possible that if you spent a little time and went out 
and talked to some of these municipalities, they might be 
willing to strike a bargain with you. 
 
Now they might not be willing to take up all of the  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2905 

responsibility of cost, but they might be willing to invest some 
money in some equipment and share some costs with you. They 
might expand . . . For example, I understand that you’ve been 
invited out to the RM (rural municipality) of Frontier. Maybe 
they’re thinking in terms of if they can get the minister out 
there, maybe they’re already thinking in terms of well we’ll try 
to nail his back to the wall, or some other part of him, and 
convince him that he should fix this road. 
 
But if he doesn’t go along with that, before he gets out of here 
maybe then we will try a secondary approach. I don’t know this, 
but I’m suspecting — because I used to be a reeve — that 
they’ve got some sort of aces-in-the-hole kind of ideas that 
they’re going to try to put past you. These are smart people. 
 
They’re going to try and get something out of this if they can 
get you to come out there. And they might be thinking along the 
lines of maybe he would go along with sharing the cost of a 
truck that they would run to go out and patch the road, or 
maybe put a stockpile beside that road where it’s handy and the 
municipal crew would go out with their own truck, if they 
happen to have one already, and load some up and fix it and 
simply not charge for it or maybe charge you minimum wage or 
something like that. 
 
And when your crews are tied up at Val Marie and can’t get 
there, or if your Eastend crew . . . and I’m not even sure where 
the crews all are, but obviously they’re not on that road often 
enough. But I’m glad to hear you say that they were there today. 
That really is good to hear because yesterday of course they 
weren’t and if they’re there today I congratulate you for fast 
action and we give you credit for that. But at those times when 
they can’t be there maybe the RM crew wouldn’t mind fixing it 
up. Maybe the council would go along with that. 
 
So can we perhaps, Minister, explore some of these alternative 
possibilities. Are you open to those kind of suggestions at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly we are. I mentioned the 
transportation committees and in the south-west we certainly 
have a pilot project. We are working very closely with the rural 
municipalities and the urban municipalities and the department. 
One of the areas that we look at is cooperation. So we’re 
certainly interested in that. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we 
need to discuss a few things about Highway 312. As you know, 
that project was partially completed and there was some 
reasonably good paving done from about the Hepburn corner 
through to about the Laird corner and that seems to have held 
up fairly well. 
 
The rest of it, all the way from Laird corner across to the bridge 
and over to Wakaw, even though it was built up a couple of 
years ago, has turned itself into a disaster. And I think that 
particular area of rural Saskatchewan has some unique aspects 
to it that need to be looked at in a special way when we look at 
completing that highway and finishing it off in a reasonable sort 
of a fashion. 
 
I think in many other rural areas limited population is always an  

issue and this is one of those areas in rural Saskatchewan where 
population is growing. It has never decreased a whole lot and 
there’s a lot of other things that are starting to happen there that 
I think we need to keep in mind when we look at 312 and 
maintaining the condition of it and finishing it off as well. 
 
A lot of dairy work in that area, which means that you have the 
regular milk pick-up with heavy trucks going down 312 to all 
the dairy farms. We’ve just had two hog operations, one very 
close to 312 and one a little ways off. Those hog operations are 
of a large size, some of the bigger ones in Saskatchewan, and 
they also tend to put a lot of pressure on there. 
 
The other thing that I think Highways may have been thinking 
and I’m not sure  you can explain this to me a little later on 
 but when the stretch was finished off decently from the 
Laird corner through to where it joins up with Highway 12, that 
I think may have been done because of the feeling of a lot of 
those grain trucks and the grain hauls would be going through 
close to Saskatoon to the high through-put. What seems to be 
happening though is, there is a lot of that grain that was going 
there is now coming into Rosthern and putting a lot of pressure 
on that particular stretch of roadway. 
 
So we have a very vibrant rural population, a lot of use of those 
particular roads; added to that that Rosthern happens to be the 
centre for the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and a 
few other of those sorts of government services, all of the 
traffic from the surrounding communities filter through into 
Rosthern, down Highway 312. 
 
There’s another component that I think is critical here. And the 
problem is something that’s brought up with all the highways in 
Saskatchewan. But I think I just need to underline the fact that 
that area is in no way isolated from that. And that is that that’s a 
key tourist area in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Heart of the old North-West has been one of the more 
vibrant tourism concepts that has taken place in Saskatchewan, 
and Highway 312 happens to be essentially the east-west link in 
that, taking people from the Batoche area, the Fish Creek area, 
and then across through to Seager Wheeler, Fort Carlton, and 
over to Redberry and the pelican situation over there. So this 
highway has many different components to it. 
 
And if we look at what’s been happening on it, that could have 
been finished the way it is, as I said, from the Laird corner 
through to 312. I think the deterioration that’s now taken place 
probably wouldn’t have taken place, because it is getting to be a 
bit of a sad stretch of road. 
 
And so I’d like you to comment on those kinds of bits of 
information that should be taken into consideration when we 
look at Highway 312. And I’d also like to have you fill me in on 
exactly where the future lies with 312 and where it is in the 
plans to completing that section. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well we now want 312. And we have 
No. 18 and No. 37 and No. 48. And the member from 
Canora-Pelly, I think No. 5. And I think the member from 
Lloydminster is 303. And Meadow Lake is 21, I know for sure. 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

If you look at the traffic count on 312, it’s about 350 vehicles 
per day and it certainly is, you know, a fairly busy road. And we 
also have to . . . if we remember back a few years, the rail line 
was abandoned in that area, and certainly you can now start to 
see the impact of rail line abandonment. That’s a very good 
example. 
 
312 is on the BCA (benefit/cost analysis) list, but it’s not very 
high at this point in time. I believe a portion is 64th on the list 
and another portion is 87th on the list, so it’s going to take 
some years to get to it, that’s for sure. But we will certainly 
maintain and preserve it as best we can until such a time that we 
can in fact do some reconstruction. 
 
But that’s part of the challenge. I mean you know the Rosthern 
area. Now most of the people that phone me want No. 11 
twinned. And so I don’t know what your preference would be 
between twinning Highway 11 or reconstruction of 312. We 
certainly can’t do all the roads in Saskatchewan, and so we have 
to priorize it. 
 
And that’s why we have the list. That’s why we have a reason 
or rules to get to that list or a set of principles so that we can 
determine which is first on the list, which is second on the list. 
 
But we have to do it that way because, as I tried to demonstrate, 
every area of the province has a road that that’s their, you know, 
is their priority. And in some cases, like in the Rosthern area, 
you have to juggle  I mean 312 or Highway 11. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And obviously, you know, you 
posed the question about which one of those two. And both of 
them have some very valid reasons for that. I guess if you’re 
going to ask me which one, I would without hesitation say 
Highway 11 would probably come before that, and that’s 
because the number of lives that have been lost there. And I 
think if we deal with those, we’ll take the potholes second and 
save the lives first. 
 
A question that came to mind coming back from British 
Columbia about a year ago and talking to someone that’s 
working on Department of Highways there — they have an 
interesting piece of equipment there that apparently is up for 
rent from time to time to other jurisdictions across Canada. And 
it’s a unit that basically does the reclaiming right at the start, 
picks it right off, runs it through its own system, reconditions it, 
and lays it back out. And that’s just all one unit. 
 
And I guess the interesting thing about that one is it seems to 
alleviate a lot of the construction and the traffic and all those 
sorts of things that happen around a repaving project. I just 
passed a repaving project in Saskatchewan here on the weekend 
and it basically was two, three miles of ongoing equipment, 
where at a certain part they were taking the old top off, and then 
there was some more equipment working and, you know, miles 
later down the road there was some paving going on. 
 
And so you had literally quite a number of miles taken up with 
this particular operation. And on busy highways, that ends up 
posing some very serious problems, whereas this other piece of 
equipment basically takes up about a hundred yards of roadway  

and then just keeps on going from beginning to end. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department is aware of that piece of 
equipment, if they’d look into it. And is it prohibitive as far as 
the cost is concerned, or why aren’t we looking at it? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you for the question. That’s 
certainly an interesting process. And we have tried it. On 
Highway 55 we have a section that we did, I believe it was last 
year or the year before. And we are looking at the results of 
that. In the Dundurn area we did a section about two years ago. 
 
We have some concerns with it. We don’t believe there are 
much savings, at least at this point in time. Right now when we 
reuse the pavement, we take it to a plant and process it and then 
put it back, and it’s not all in one process. But the costs of the 
machines, and if you look at total cost, it virtually seems to be 
the same. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I appreciate the fact that you’ve 
looked into that and that, you know, if it isn’t cost-effective, 
then I guess there’s no reason to use that in Saskatchewan. 
 
Back to a concept that we sort of dealt with briefly when we 
were talking about Highway 11. What is the trend in 
Saskatchewan as far as deaths on the highway? Are those 
increasing, decreasing? And if there is a change, to what is it 
attributed  either an increase or a decrease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, I’m going to give you a couple of 
statistics, I guess. Accidents on all roads in Saskatchewan 
compared to the five-year trend, 1990 to ’94, the total accidents 
are down by 11.6 per cent  30,191 for a five-year average 
versus 26,677 in 1995; persons injured are down by 6.2 per cent 
 7,920 versus 7,427 in ’95; persons killed are up by 1 per 
cent  154 versus 156; accidents involving alcohol are down 
by 15.7 per cent  1,866 versus 1,572; accidents on provincial 
highway road system only  that’s just the highway system — 
the total accidents are down by 2.3 per cent; persons injured are 
up by 9.2 per cent; persons killed are down by .7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And I think I also asked if there 
was a rationale or reason for that trend and I would hope it’s 
not because they have to go slower because of the conditions of 
the roadways. 
 
Two questions sort of coming out of that, and I’m not sure if 
you have those statistics handy, and that is, is there any 
correlation between types of vehicles . . . and what I’m asking 
is, do we find that there is a decrease let’s say in the number of 
large trucks involved in these accidents? Well then we have to 
sort of say, okay, why are large trucks not involved in as many 
accidents; something good must be happening there. Or the 
reverse. 
 
And do you also have any breakdown on . . . as you mentioned, 
there is a change, and I detected a decrease sort of, that seemed 
to be in general. Is there an age category that we can make a  



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

comment on and say, this is an age group that used to have a 
certain percentage of fatalities and now they don’t. So is there a 
difference that way as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I certainly don’t have those figures here 
tonight, but the general conclusion or principle . . . conclusion I 
guess, is that there are less trucks, large trucks involved in 
accidents, but those accidents are more serious than smaller 
vehicles  cars and half-ton trucks. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, a couple of questions that just 
were brought to my attention. One in particular comes from a 
young teacher who happens to travel up . . . has travelled over 
the highway by Craven. And he noticed that there’s a sign up on 
that, I believe, it’s Highway  I’m not exactly sure of the 
number  but it goes off No. 11 up to Craven. There’s about 
11 miles in there for resurfacing. And his question, coming 
from the Kennedy area where his parents live and the fact that 
Kenosee Lake has a much higher usage as far as tourism and 
promotion, he’s wondering why No. 11 is getting resurfacing 
this year versus doing something really to No. 48. And I’m 
wondering if you could respond to that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly preservation. We’re 
trying to preserve Highway 11, the main link of course, between 
Saskatoon and Regina. And to preserve that road from falling 
into conditions like a thin membrane surface road, like 48, 
certainly deserves some attention before it falls into that state. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, are you talking about the one that 
goes off 11 through to Craven? I can understand No. 11 being a 
main access road between two large centres but there’s . . . and 
I just don’t know exactly what the number of the highway is 
that goes off through Craven, I believe it’s along the valley 
there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I guess maybe you should . . . I’d ask 
you to check that out because I don’t believe there’s any work 
being done on either Highway 99 or Highway 20. So you know, 
if you could check that out and get back to me, we’ll certainly 
get back to you then. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Certainly, Mr. Minister, I’d be more than pleased 
to do that. I’m basically just going by a quick conversation. I 
haven’t had a chance to really check it out myself but going by 
a concern that was raised with me personally, and of course this 
individual is comparing . . . He comes from one area and sees 
the resurfacing in another area, and in his view, it seems to me 
that it would be more appropriate, one area over the other. And 
of course, that’s an argument you’ve had all evening as to 
what’s more important than the other. 
 
Another question that comes up on an ongoing basis, Mr. 
Minister, is the amount of taxes that are collected from the sale 
of gasoline in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To have the exact number, you would 
have to ask the Department of Finance, but it is very close to 
$400 million, if you take the fuel tax and licence fees. I know 
you're going to likely ask, so what do you spend? We spend in  

the neighbourhood of 200 million, about close to 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Toth:  You’re exactly right, Mr. Minister, and a mind 
reader now. But what I was going to reiterate, Mr. Minister, you 
certainly would have the support of the travelling public if 
indeed the Minister of Finance just allowed you to utilize all the 
resources, or the revenues generated from the gas tax and didn’t 
give you any other revenues. And it would certainly give you a 
fair amount of funds that could be used directly related to the 
highways in this province. 
 
So I just wanted to assure you that the public of Saskatchewan 
certainly raises that on an ongoing basis and their question has 
always been, well why are we not putting at least as much into 
highway construction as we’re spending and putting into the 
general treasury out of gas taxation. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Minister, for your responses. I believe my 
colleague has a few more questions, he’d like to respond, and I 
certainly appreciate the comments you have made. 
 
I just wanted to reiterate one thing. When I was talking about 
Highway 48, I must dare not forget about the fact that in the last 
little while I’ve had a number of individuals who are involved 
in driving ambulances or riding in ambulances. I’ve heard 
drivers and as well as nurses have basically said to me, we’d 
sure like it if the Minister of Highways would come down here 
and go with us on one of our emergency trips down 48; maybe 
the message would be passed on a lot quicker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I want you to know that I very much enjoyed being 
the Highway critic for our party over this past year, and I very 
much enjoyed following your work schedule and the things that 
you do. I sincerely wish that you had a bigger budget. 
 
And I sincerely believe that you won’t be able to do your job 
properly until your cabinet gives you the money that you will 
have to have, to work with. I know that won’t be easy and I 
know it’s going to be a difficult argument for you to make, but 
there is absolutely no way that you can do your job without 
money. We have to understand that. 
 
But there is every opportunity, I think, for us to believe that 
there is money available now. The economy of this province is 
improving. The prices of grain have gone up. Prices of oil have 
ranged from 20 to $25 when the oil industry of course has very 
easily made it known that they can survive at $16. 
 
All of those sectors are important to the economy. I know that 
there are shortcomings in some other areas but still, the 
economy seems to be going along well. There seems to be a 
general increase in what’s happening, and so I say to you, you 
have to lobby harder with your cabinet. 
 
We cannot let you off scot-free though. Because if you’re to do 
your job right, you must win some of your arguments. And 
while there are probably another three hours of questions that I 
have on my desk, and I know very well that the people of 
Saskatchewan would want me to ask each and every one of 
them, there also comes a balancing act for us to do. And that  



2908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

balancing act of course has to be recognized in terms of some 
day saying, enough, we have to quit and get on with other 
things. 
 
You’ve got other jobs to do and so do I. And so I’m going to 
save these questions until next year. I don’t know if my leader 
will allow me to be the critic for our party for Highways next 
year or not, but if I don’t get any roads fixed, probably not. 
Well anyway, there you go. So my job is dependent on you, I 
suppose. 
 
Well I guess I look forward to the opportunity to doing this 
again through the summer and on into next year, and hopefully 
that will be my job and we will be able to go nose to nose on 
some of the problems again then. 
 
I challenge you, Minister, though, to go out to those 
communities that have asked you to come out. And I know it’s 
tough to work into schedules, but if you do come to any place 
that I’m around, I offer you the hospitality, both of my 
four-wheel-drive truck and my office. And we certainly will try 
to get you wherever you have to go. I offer you the hospitality 
of our party in all other parts of the province. Every one of my 
colleagues would be quite happy to take time off to drive with 
you, or to provide transportation for you, or to make contacts 
for you so that you can get out to visit the folks. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, having offered you everything that we have 
that we can possibly give to give you an opportunity to do your 
job better, I’m going to say that I do appreciate the work that 
you have done, and I hope that you can do better. Have a good 
year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The TV 
audience has decided, Mr. Minister, that they would like to ask 
you a question. Just got a phone call from a gentleman out in 
the Kindersley area who says that there is some maintenance 
being done on Highway 21. 
 
He believes that there is about 8 to 10 kilometres to be fixed 
and the flags are up ready for the work to start happening. But 
approximately 300 yards  I think it’s yards, maybe it’s feet 
I’ve got written here  about 300 units of measurement in 
front of where the repairs are supposed to start, there’s a great 
big dip in the road. And obviously this great big dip isn’t going 
to get fixed because the construction isn’t designed to start until 
about 300 feet or yards afterwards. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could look into that and see to 
it that this big dip on Highway 21 about 10 kilometres north of 
Kindersley actually will be repaired while the rest of the road 
right in the area is fixed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I would think that it would be a good 
idea that we look at it and we certainly will do that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you for that commitment. I’m 
sure this gentleman who is probably still watching will be 
greatly pleased with your response and that the bump on his 
road will be repaired. 
 

Now if we can just get the television audience to phone in and 
pinpoint every bump in the province, maybe we can get a 
commitment from the minister to get those fixed also. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Just keep those phones ringing. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Just keep those phones ringing, that’s 
right. 
 
Mr. Minister, railroads are a safety hazard in this province. We 
need the railroads. We need the rail system. But every year there 
are a number of people who are killed at level crossings, 
particularly at night time, Mr. Minister. I know that there was a 
report that was presented dealing with railroad safety. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day I was in Alameda at night and there 
was a train going past at the level crossing on No. 9 Highway. 
There was some light-coloured cars with reflectors on the sides 
of them. Those cars were easily spotted from a fair distance 
away because of the reflectors in the light. Right behind them 
came a set of black tank cars. You couldn’t tell that those cars 
were there at all, Mr. Minister. It was simply a continuation of 
the highway in the night, but yet the flashing reflectors clearly 
lit up that there was something happening in front of you. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, has any consideration been given to talking to 
the federal minister  because obviously railroads are a federal 
responsibility  of having reflectors placed on all cars. Now 
perhaps in Ontario where there are electronic lights, where 
there’s flashing lights and bars that come down at the railroad 
crossings, people can see that the train is there because the 
flashing lights are there. But in rural Saskatchewan that doesn’t 
happen, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the simple X on the side of the road saying there’s a 
railroad crossing doesn’t indicate to you whether or not there’s 
a train there. And if you happen to have cars in front of you on 
the train that are black and unmarked in any way, shape or 
form, you simply can’t see them on a black night. 
 
And we have too many of those, Mr. Minister, in this province. 
We have too many level crossings with no markings. So have 
you talked with the minister of transportation in the federal 
government with the idea of putting reflectors on all railroad 
cars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you very much. The member will 
know that as a result of the 14 fatalities in 1995 I set up a 
committee this last year to look at railway crossings safety, and 
the committee reported to me in April ’96 with several 
recommendations. Some of the recommendations are, a public 
awareness campaign, changes to driver educational materials. 
The report also recommended immediate action with SARM 
and the Government of Saskatchewan and Transport Canada for 
funding of reflectors on passive railway crossings  that’s the 
backside of the railway signs, so that as your lights hit the 
backside if a train is going by, you will see the reflection . . . 
you know the reflection will be . . . 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2909 

An Hon. Member:  Flickering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Exactly, flickering. 
 
Some other recommendations were to also review some of the 
engineering standards at railway crossings. The report also 
recommended a zero tolerance and higher fines for persons who 
violate railway crossing safety laws. The report also asked the 
federal and provincial governments to look at . . . and railway 
companies, to provide annual grants to support railway crossing 
safety. 
 
Copies of that report have been sent out to many, many 
stakeholders, and we’re receiving reports back and other ideas 
back. I met with Mr. Harrison, the president of SARM, last 
week, and we did send in a joint submission to the federal 
government, Transport Canada, to help us with the 
reflectorization of the passive railway crossings. 
 
Part of the problem with putting reflectors on the car itself is 
that in many cases we have American cars on our system. We 
have our cars on their system. Apparently dust and dirt will get 
on those reflectors and they will not maybe be as good as what 
we think they might be. However, and also the cost of putting 
reflectors on the cars is very costly because there’s a process 
that has to be put onto the car itself before the reflectors are put 
on. 
 
What we’re requesting is that the railways look at that when 
they’re repairing the cars, and not just pull every one off . . . or 
replacing a car, that in fact that can be done at that time and it 
would be less costly. 
 
So we’re acting on that concern. I think we’ve done a lot of 
good work in that area and we will continue to monitor progress 
on that report. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could indicate to us whether or not any of these reflectors 
have been put on the backside of the railroad crossing signs any 
place in the province. I don’t remember seeing any of them. 
Have any of them been placed to test whether or not the driving 
public can see them flashing or them flickering as a train is 
going through a crossing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We have not put any up but I believe 
SARM have tried it in a few locations and are supportive of it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Something 
certainly needs to be done because we simply have too many 
level railroad crossing accidents. And I realize some of them 
occur in the daytime and not at night. But those that occur at 
night, if we can do something to prevent it then we should. 
 
The government is more than prepared to impose new rules and 
regulations on drivers who consume alcohol because of the 
number of fatalities . . . that are injured in that, and I think this 
is another area of safety that the government should be 
reviewing. 
 
I listened to my colleague bring up some of the concerns from  

Highway 48. Highway 48 also runs through part of my 
constituency, although it isn’t a large portion that is in disrepair. 
I just want to point out though, I’m not going to lobby too hard 
for Highway 48 at the present time, because there is a group in 
place that is prepared to do that for themselves. The Highway 
48 Boosters have started up an organization and have contacted 
you, I know, Mr. Minister, because I have their faxes here. And 
they list all the good reasons why you should be doing some 
repairs on Highway 48. 
 
I just wanted to mention that to you so that you could give them 
serious consideration when it comes time to allocating your 
highway budgets, Mr. Minister, along with every other highway 
in the province that is in equal difficulty, Mr. Minister. 
 
Last winter there were some changes made to the winter 
maintenance programs, Mr. Minister. There seemed to be either 
some confusion or some difficulty with the program when it 
changed. As you will recollect, I ran into a bit of a problem, 
along with a number of other people, heading down Highway 
33, the first storm of the season in late November or early 
December. It was mentioned a time or two in the newspaper 
that the road had not been cleaned on a Sunday afternoon, 
evening, just after a major storm. 
 
I wonder if you can explain the changes that you made to the 
winter maintenance programs and the changes that you made 
after the complaints were received about Highway 33 and those 
other highways which were not cleaned on the weekends. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I recall the concern, and I believe it was 
just after we had changed the policy. I think it was the first 
storm after. And in fact, what we had said is that surveillance 
will be carried out seven days a week during periods of severe 
weather conditions and where there is uncertainty about road 
conditions. No surveillance will be performed on days when the 
weather conditions are good. That’s our policy. 
 
Well I believe some of the crews, when they received that, 
understood that there would be no surveillance on Sunday and 
in fact no ploughing on Sunday  if I can remember the 
concern  and of course the roads were not ploughed. But 
since that time certainly that has been corrected and we 
continue to move on. 
 
Timing of ploughing, we’ve changed that a bit. We don’t 
normally go out now until the storm quits or there is an 
excessive snow build-up because if you go out during a storm, 
first of all it’s very dangerous. Second of all, economically it’s 
not always that wise. 
 
In the regards of removing snow pack, we will not for instance 
use salt until the temperature is a certain degree, like if it’s 
minus 20 degrees, salt does not work very well so why are you 
putting it on the road. So we watch that a lot more closely now. 
And not only does it save winter maintenance dollars but it also 
is just smarter. We’re spending our money more wisely. And so 
we believe that it’s going to be quite effective. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Driving 
around this winter, particularly with my eldest son chasing the  



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 1996 

various hockey rinks around the province with hockey, I ran 
into a number of roads . . . while there hadn’t been a storm in 
the area there had been a significant amount of drifting and 
there were major snow drifts across the road, some of them 3 
and 4 feet high, where there was one lane of traffic left to go 
through this drift. The rest of the road was perfectly clear. 
 
You know I can certainly understand why the Highways 
department wouldn’t be out clearing the rest of the road. But in 
about a six-mile stretch of highway on Highway 361 east of 
Lampman, there were about two or three of these drifts that 
were very significant drifts; they were probably 10 feet wide 
and stretched right across the highway up to 4 feet with one 
path through them. 
 
In the daytime you could see it coming, you could see vehicles 
coming from the other side. But if you didn’t know those drifts 
were there at night and you were travelling down the road and 
oncoming traffic and you happened to meet at that drift at the 
same time, somebody was going to be hopefully just simply 
stuck in the ditch and nothing more than that. 
 
I wonder if you could explain why the crews were not out there 
clearing those drifts off. It wasn’t just a situation where it had 
just happened that day; those drifts were there for three or four 
days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  You probably have to give me some 
more information. Perhaps you can do that tomorrow and I can 
take a look at it, because I haven’t heard of that complaint at 
this point in time. But we’ll certainly check it out. 
 
The drifts should not be on the road for that length of time, 
there’s no question about that, and whether it was missed or 
whatever . . . But if you could give me the details, certainly I 
would check that out. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. One 
final issue here. Another highway that needs fixing. This time 
it’s No. 8 Highway south from Carievale to the U.S. border and 
I have quite a number of letters which I’m sure you received the 
same letters. 
 
An Hon. Member:  48 north to Moosomin. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  And not 48 north to Moosomin  48 
runs east and west. 
 
But particularly the area from Carievale to the U.S. border. 
We’re encouraging tourism in this province, Mr. Minister, and 
one of the things that we need to do to get tourism into this 
province is to allow them to have a road to drive on. That 
particular stretch of road takes a very severe beating from the 
heavy traffic that travels on it. I know that we discussed this 
particular stretch of road last year. We have the highway counts 
on it. 
 
The highway counts  I’m wondering if you did a count here 
this past summer or within the last year  and if you did, and if 
you could give me the locations of where your count meters 
might have been placed, because I think it’d be particularly  

important for that first stretch from the U.S. border north to the 
first corner which is about a mile, I believe. 
 
Because a large amount of the traffic will turn at that corner and 
take the grid road into Carnduff and then some place further 
north where the oil traffic would be on it. Do you have that kind 
of a measurement, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I can supply you with those details. In 
fact the department have very good details on the traffic counts 
in that area but we don’t have the exact figures to the locations 
that you’re talking about. But we will certainly supply them in 
the next day or two. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, because I have 
received a number of letters from the businesses in the area on 
both sides of the border concerned about that particular stretch 
of road. There is an attempt to get that particular stretch of road 
tied into the North American trade corridor to come up into 
Canada. The road on the U.S. side of the border is one of the 
better roads in north-western North Dakota, and unfortunately 
as soon as it hits the border, we can no longer say that. 
 
So I think that’s an area we need to take a very serious look at 
to encourage trade up and down through North America. I can 
see the member from Estevan is paying particular attention to 
this because he has a vested interest in seeing to it that perhaps 
the traffic goes through Estevan and up that highway there, but 
he’s a little concerned about my figures here. I have in here, if I 
can find it in short order  and I may not be able to because I 
just saw. . . oh there it is  it shows the depth of the hard 
surfacing on the roads on the major highways in north-western 
North Dakota that come across the border. And on 83 Highway 
it’s 4 inches; on 256 it’s 2 inches; on 28 up to Sherwood is 5 
inches; Northgate is four and a half; and Portal, for the member 
from Estevan, is 4 inches. So the major thickness is up to the 
Sherwood port. 
 
And while the member may want to dispute this . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well we only wish, but it isn’t, but this is 
information prepared by the North Dakota Department of 
Transport, Mr. Minister. So it is the best highway in north-west 
North Dakota coming into Canada, into Saskatchewan. And 
unfortunately when you cross the border you hit a road that you 
can barely drive. That’s why everybody turns a mile north of the 
border and takes a good grid road into Carnduff. 
 
So I think it’s important that the measurements be made in the 
right places, Mr. Minister, to determine exactly how much 
traffic is there from the border itself, and how much traffic is 
there further up the road towards Carievale, and the oil traffic 
and traffic then moving into Carievale, to get a proper 
determination as to the traffic levels on that road. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 



June 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s certainly a 
pleasure to stand here and thank the minister and his officials 
for coming and responding to the questions we raised. And 
while we’re certainly just somewhat disappointed, we can 
appreciate the difficulty the minister is having. And in fact I 
would suggest between the department and the minister, they’re 
working as well as they can in regards to the stringent strings or 
the tight strings that the Minister of Finance is placing on them. 
 
So a thank-you to the minister, to his officials, and to the 
Department of Highways personnel for the efforts they are 
making in trying to maintain the current system we have in 
place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  First I want to thank the third party for 
the questions they had tonight. Certainly they were . . . they 
have a lot of highways that they would like fixed and maybe 
they have a liberal calculator that they could sometimes add the 
costs of all the roads that they would like fixed. 
 
But I really do appreciate the cooperation and the questions. 
And I would also like to thank my staff for coming tonight and 
being a great deal of help. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:36 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

EVENING SITTING 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................2890 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections ...............................................................................................................................2883 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Environment and Resource Management  Vote 26 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................2883, 2891 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................2884 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................2885 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2887 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Budgetary Expense 
 Environment and Resource Management  Vote 26 ............................................................................................................2893 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation  Vote 16 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................2893 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................2893, 2907 
  Goohsen .........................................................................................................................................................................2900, 2907 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2905 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2908 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Budgetary Expense 
 Highways and Transportation  Vote 16 ...............................................................................................................................2911 
 


