
























































May 29, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1995 
 May 29, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
officials from the Finance department here tonight. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And me. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  And to the minister certainly. 
 
I do have a few questions about this year’s Saskatchewan 
savings bonds. I notice that while last year’s sales exceeded 
your expectations, they were well below sales of the previous 
year. And given this, I wonder if the minister could tell us 
whether you expect sales will be above or below the sales goal 
of fiscal year ‘95-96 for our current fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  If the member from Thunder Creek 
will refer to page 53 of the budget address, you’ll note that we 
have estimated $100 million for this year. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, Mr. Minister. Could you give us a brief 
explanation as to why the target is set where it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member might or might not 
appreciate this, but I think the member from Rosthern would 
appreciate it when I say this is a conservative figure, 
intentionally done so. I see the member from Rosthern does 
approve. 
 
It is the fifth year; it is over a billion dollars in savings bonds, 
so it is well supported. It is a conservative figure, and it is very 
difficult to estimate. But based on past years’ sales, sales of 
similar bond issues this year, this appears to be reasonable. It is 
very much a guestimate. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, well that being the case, Mr. Minister, 
and also with respect to the savings bond, I wonder if you could 
provide some insights into any plans you may have to ensure 
that bonds are in fact renewed so that capital isn’t lost as 
subscribers would search for better rates of return elsewhere. 
 
What level of total capital do you expect to see invested in 
savings bonds after this year’s sales are complete in July? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We have no reason to expect there 
will be an inordinate level of redemptions and an ordinary level 
has been provided for. So there’s no reason to believe an 
inordinate level of redemptions will take place. 
 
Moreover, with the improved credit rating, the bonds have a 
higher value automatically than they had when they’re bought. 
And that makes the redemption less likely. You buy a bond of 
someone with a B rating  it goes to an A rating, you’ve got a 

better bond. And its intrinsically worth a little more. 
 
Prior to the upgrade there was no reason to think there would be 
any inordinate level of redemption. And that’s even more so 
with the upgrade. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well that being the case, Mr. Minister, and 
given that with any savings bond campaign there would go with 
it an advertising campaign, I wonder if the minister might tell 
the House whether such a campaign is budgeted for this year? 
Has a competition already begun to award a contract to a 
successful bidder at this time? 
 
And secondly, how much, roughly, is budgeted for an 
advertising campaign such as this? And having . . . given the 
minister’s most recent response too, that perhaps savings bonds 
are in fact more saleable with our province’s credit rating 
improving, might you make some comment also in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This is now a fairly mature program. 
I remember when we began this program some years ago, we 
were extremely nervous that it might not be successful. People 
might not want the bonds They may not buy them. I remember 
there was an enormous amount of trepidation. 
 
That’s not the case now. This is quite a mature program. The 
advertising program will be similar to last year. The amount 
spent will be similar to last year. And the assumption about the 
sales is the same. So it’s a fairly mature program. There’ll be no 
change in advertising. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, with respect to a campaign of 
this nature, getting again to the advertising campaign  and 
you’ve mentioned in the past a good deal of trepidation on, you 
suggest, on your part  would you elaborate just a little bit 
more about this? Are you referring to trepidation on the part of 
the department, or is this with reference to the communications 
coordination unit of the Executive Council? 
 
And might you also just elaborate just a little further about what 
sort of analysis would be undertaken to determine both cost 
effectiveness of such an advertising campaign but also just to 
assure the people of the province that campaigns that have been 
undertaken in prior years actually achieved their targeted goals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I refer to the first year we did this 
which was 1992. The trepidation was simply the fact that we 
had not had a bond sale for some time. And there was concern 
being expressed at the time about Saskatchewan’s 
creditworthiness, and there was a good deal of nervousness 
about how well it would sell, how much would sell. In fact it 
was a runaway success as people sort of flocked . . . people 
kind of rallied around the flag really, I guess the best way to 
express it. And it was an the first year  was an enormous 
success, as the figures showed. 
 
Since that time we’ve come to be quite comfortable and quite 
confident in it. But no, when I referred to trepidation, I was 
referring to the first year when we did the first bond sales in an 
atmosphere in which Saskatchewan’s creditworthiness was  



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

being called into question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, but would you just 
elaborate for us a little bit further as far as what firms may have 
been invited to bid for a campaign of this nature. Would you be 
able to just provide to the House here this evening perhaps a list 
of potential bidders that might have been invited to this year’s 
competition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Agency of record is Phoenix 
Advertising. That was tendered in the normal course and the 
competition was won by Phoenix. Phoenix is the agency of 
record. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to turn your attention to provincial sales tax 
compliance, in particular in so far as recreational vehicles and 
those types of things are concerned. As I understand that, for 
example, on snowmobiles there is a compliance, sort of 
mandatory, in that in when a person wants to license a 
snowmobile then provincial sales tax must be documented to be 
paid before licensing is allowed. 
 
I’ve had a number of concerns expressed from people in the 
ATV (all-terrain vehicles) kind of dealerships that are 
increasingly popular in the quad-runners, ATV kind of vehicles. 
And they’re telling me that in many instances when they’re 
asked to compete and bid for sales that they can match the 
sales, and then people say, but what about the 9 per cent 
advantage against Alberta dealers? 
 
And so what I’m asking you, Minister, is other than the nice 
compliance of saying, as Saskatchewan citizens holding the flag 
we’re expected to comply voluntarily, is your department 
considering any type of program similar to licensing for ATVs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, I don’t think we’re considering 
extending the requirements to licence off-road vehicles beyond 
what it is now. That would be using a sledgehammer to kill a 
fly. In effect that would be putting the public to a fair expense. 
 
I recognize the problem the member raises, of enforcing 
payment of sales tax. The department has a system which we 
have . . . the basics of which have been in place for a long time. 
We have upgraded it; we actually added some additional 
enforcement staff along the way. 
 
But it remains a problem. Tax avoidance remains a problem, 
which is not new and will be with us probably almost 
indefinitely. You’re never entirely rid of the problem of 
enforcement of payment of taxes. We are doing what we can. 
As I say, we have added staff but the problem goes on and we 
have every sympathy with dealers who have to compete in an 
atmosphere in which people chisel on the payment of taxes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, it seems that it’s a shifting trend 
. . . or not necessarily a shifting trend but there was a time 
where the ATVs were relatively new and in fact they went from 
the three-wheeled type of ATVs  were found to be very 
dangerous  to the quad type of units and that seems to 
become a very dramatically increasing part of recreational  

vehicle sales in terms of the percentage of business that’s going 
on. 
 
And so it’s becoming an increasingly significant issue for 
recreational vehicle dealers. The other thing of course is as this 
is happening  and I recognize it’s not a particular problem for 
your department, but for your government  as these things are 
becoming increasingly powerful, increasingly roadworthy, 
increasingly something that’s accessed, that a lot of the issues 
that have been there for the snow tobogganing kind of vehicles 
are becoming the same issues for the ATVs. And I wonder 
where your department is or your government is, I guess a little 
more broadly, because this is all wrapped into a whole issue 
that’s increasing in significance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I want to say  and I don’t think the 
member would dispute this; indeed I think this underlies your 
comments  basically Saskatchewan people do comply with it. 
And they do so out of a sense of integrity. 
 
In percentage terms the problem is fairly small. In an individual 
instance it can be quite galling, admittedly, to a dealer to have 
to compete with someone who brings it in; doesn’t pay the tax. 
 
Back in the days when I first joined this cabinet, I joined as 
associate minister of Finance. The member from Regina 
Dewdney was the minister at the time. One of the things I often 
did to assist the minister, I often met with dealers to try to 
discuss this very problem. 
 
We encouraged them to work with the department  if they 
knew of people who had owed tax and hadn’t paid it, to inform 
us. And one or two convictions in a district does a lot for tax 
compliance in the district. 
 
So we encouraged them to work with us. We met with them. 
We were always open to suggestions. But the suggestion which 
was occasionally put forward, that we might license them, is 
very difficult. There are all sorts of problems with licensing 
vehicles which aren’t designed to travel on the road; all kinds of 
problems. And not the least of which is, it strikes people as 
being unfair that they pay a licence for something that doesn’t 
travel on the road. It just strikes people as being unfair. 
 
So that is a difficult suggestion, but we do work with the 
industry. We have met with them, and certainly I did, and I 
know the current minister has met with them. Anything at all 
we can do to step up compliance, we’re more than willing 
recipients of the suggestions. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, staying on provincial sales tax and 
a little different venue, there are, I think, a great many small 
businesses in particular, and maybe all businesses, are not all 
that thrilled about acting as tax collectors on behalf of either the 
provincial or the federal government. It’s sort of not one of the 
happy things that small businesses are expected to do as part of 
the cost of doing business. 
 
I have brought . . . have been brought to my attention in a  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

number of instances where small businesses have got 
themselves into a difficult situation very often, and perhaps 
most often, because of their own negligence, their own concern 
about cash flow and things of that nature; where they’ve come 
into a situation of arrears in terms of submitting provincial sales 
tax remittance to the department. 
 
I wonder if you would outline for us a bit tonight what your 
policy is in terms of how you deal with individuals in this 
regard; and if they get behind, what kind of . . . your steps are in 
terms of enforcing compliance of remittance of sales tax that’s 
been collected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That will occasionally happen, and 
anyone who has had to meet a payroll at the end of the month, 
as I think you have and as I have, has some sympathy for 
somebody in small business. When you’re drawing a pay 
cheque, you’re looking forward to pay-day. When you’re 
signing them, at times you dread pay-day. So that’s the voice of 
experience. 
 
So we have every sympathy for small-business people who can 
get caught in a bind on occasion. The advice which we have for 
the people who do is work with the department. Last thing on 
earth we want to do is put someone out of business if for no 
other reason and the fact that you . . . then you’re quite assured 
you’re not going to get anything. Any creditor, last thing you 
want to do is put your debtor out of business and you don’t get 
it. 
 
So our advice to people who have a problem is contact the 
department, work with the department. We are anxious that they 
continue in business  that is our source of revenue in a sense, 
for some crass reasons, perhaps. So if a small-business person 
has a problem, we invite them to work with the department, to 
contact us. It’s like having a problem with your banker; the 
worst thing in the world you can do is to avoid him or her. And 
it’s the same thing here. If you’ve got a problem with sales tax, 
the worst thing you can do is avoid us. Contact us. We’re more 
than willing to work with you and more than anxious to see the 
problem resolved in a way which leaves everyone surviving and 
indeed thriving. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I wonder if there’s some 
interfacing between departments. For example, if there are these 
type of individuals that get themselves into a real jam, either 
through negligence or inexperience or start-up costs or all the 
rest of the things that are facing small business, and you get into 
a situation where you’re dealing with a client or a business 
person that is required to submit PST (provincial sales tax) and 
has gotten behind the eight ball, is there interface between 
yourselves or within your department? Do you have programs 
of counselling and some advice, and some type of a program 
that may be of assistance to the small-business person, either 
within your department or in cooperation with other 
departments of your government, that would assist this 
small-business person to maybe get back on track as, as you 
say, Minister, it’s much better to salvage a small business than 
to see them go out of business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, there are a variety of resources  

which the government has if someone comes in. There’s 
counselling available. I don’t think there are counsellors 
directly in the Department of Finance, but there are counsellors 
in government to which they can be referred. More often 
however, rather than that . . . the department may advise that. 
 
But more directly, the department usually tries to . . . sometimes 
there’s a reassessment done; sometimes we can give the person 
a break. Sometimes you’re not going to collect it anyway, so it’s 
a case of taking . . . a dollar in the hand is worth a good deal 
more than, sort of, a kick in the pants, if you don’t get anything 
at all. So we may be able to do a reassessment. We may be able 
to compromise some of it in an appropriate case, and all those 
things are possible. Certainly payment schedules which look 
feasible to all concerned are always considered. But there is 
counselling available. I don’t think directly in this department, 
but there is counselling available in other departments, in the 
Justice department and so on. And it may be suggested the 
person contact them. But in terms of handling the debt, that’s 
more normally done directly by working out payment schedules, 
reassessments, etc. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, tying in 
a little further with some of the questioning and comments 
made by my colleague from Melfort, and with respect to the 
revenue section here in the estimates, there is an increase in 
spending, in particular in terms of that section. 
 
And I wonder is, going along with this, does this translate into 
simply more auditors going out and, so to speak, going after 
small businesses in the province? And then I wonder if, with 
the help of your officials, if you could provide us with the 
number of businesses that have been audited with regard to 
sales tax by the branch in the last year. Could you tell the 
committee whether there’ll be an increase or decrease in that 
number for this year. And could you provide as well a 
breakdown as far as how many of those businesses would be 
qualified as a small business versus larger firms, if possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member may have . . . I may not 
have spoken with the precision that perhaps I should have. We 
did hire a couple of more people, but that was not in the fiscal 
year under consideration. That was the year before that. 
 
The member is quite correct, there is an increase this year. That 
is due to the need to update our computer systems. As is the 
case with everyone, we have this looming problem with the year 
2000. And it is a fair problem in this department where dates, 
interest rates, and so on, all play such a role. 
 
So this sum, the increase to which the member refers of about I 
think $500,000  the increase is $580,000 to be precise  and 
it’s a one-time increase intended to allow the department to 
come to terms with the problem associated with the year 2000 
and the dates. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But going back, 
with respect to the auditing of businesses, could you still 
provide us with some detail in that regard. The number of 
businesses audited in the previous fiscal year and the number 
that you project will be audited in this current fiscal year. And  



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

as I did relate to . . . if you could, a breakdown as to which may 
be a small business versus a larger firm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There aren’t any records kept as to 
the size of the audits. I’m going to read into the record in a 
moment some information with respect to the number of audits. 
I don’t have any information with respect to the size of the 
audits. 
 
The opinion of the officials, their experience would suggest that 
it’s done proportionally. They try to audit some large ones, 
some small ones, and try to audit a proportional number of 
each. There are obviously far fewer larger firms but the amount 
they would owe would be far more. So they try to audit . . . they 
try to do it proportionally, some big ones, some small ones, in 
proportional numbers. 
 
That having been said, the number of field audits in the year 
1995-96 was 500 . . . was a total of 1,689. That covers 4.2 per 
cent of those who are registered; they did 1,689 and that, as I 
said, covered 4.2 per cent of the businesses. We don’t have 
precise estimates as to the size of the firms they audit. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that number. 
Could you just elaborate for us, in terms of your audit work, do 
you approach a certain sector of businesses and where you do 
 let’s say for lack of a better word  a blanket audit of firms 
of a certain sector? 
 
I know earlier this year, late last year, I did receive some 
correspondence from a small business in my constituency. In 
their instance they were a small meat packing plant that had 
been audited by the department with respect to remittance of 
PST. And I know their major concern with it was the fact that 
they felt they were being singled out in the process versus firms 
within that sector where perhaps they may have had to have 
paid the price and others may not have. 
 
And would you just be able to make some comments about 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The methodology is not dissimilar to 
what the income tax department does in Ottawa, or what all 
other provincial governments do. They all basically follow the 
same process. No industry’s ever singled out, and no one is . . . 
they’re very, very careful to ensure they’re not harassing 
anyone. 
 
On the other hand, there are priority audits and non-priority 
audits. The priority audits tend to be the larger firms or those 
which for some reason or other there’s some reason to be 
concerned about. And it might be because of unexplained 
changes in reporting and so on. Perhaps they haven’t been . . . a 
firm hasn’t been reporting regularly and hasn’t been remitting 
tax regularly, and they seem to be carrying on business. That 
might be a cause for concern. 
 
So there are . . . in fact there is a breakdown here. Of the 1,689 
audits, 548 were classed as non-priority; a little over twice that 
number were classed as priority. As I say, those are larger firms 
and firms which for some reason there is cause to be concerned  

about their reporting habits. But that’s as precise of information 
as we have. We don’t have really detailed statistics in that area. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to 
priority audits and what determines that, and I know you’ve 
mentioned one of them being larger firms as a target and 
another one being firms that give you cause for concern, and 
you cited as reasons for that in instances where they haven’t 
reported on a regular basis, let’s say for example. 
 
What about in an instance where a firm has in fact done that. 
There’s been a contact made by your department to them, and 
they’ve afforded a satisfactory explanation. In the future, does 
their firm’s name continue to be flagged where they would be 
getting these persistent calls in this regard or is there a system 
within the department devised that would make a note of what 
has been a satisfactory explanation afforded previously so that 
they wouldn’t be the subject of a persistent campaign on the 
part of the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  As I said, the methodology is the 
same used everywhere. They’re scrupulously careful to avoid 
looking as if they’re harassing people. The Department of 
National Revenue got that reputation a few years ago and it 
caused enormous problems to the Department of National 
Revenue. They’ve been for years trying to get rid of the 
reputation. 
 
So everyone else since then has been extremely careful to be 
scrupulously fair. That reputation of harassing people is easy to 
acquire and very hard to get rid of. That having been said, the 
department does, where they do an audit and there’s some cause 
to be concerned, there is . . . the records are kept. If there’s no 
cause to be concerned and if the people are as clean as driven 
snow, then they keep records just . . . they don’t want them 
audited again. They don’t want them coming up in a random 
audit again. 
 
If, on the other hand, there is some cause to be concerned and 
the tax hasn’t been remitted properly, yes, the records are kept 
and the situation is monitored and, take our example: returns 
weren’t filed when they should have been, the audit was done 
and, sure enough, there’s tax owing. 
 
(1930) 
 
Yes, then they will follow up on that and ensure that for a 
reasonable period of time the matter is . . . the accounts are 
discharged properly. So they do keep track of the records, (a) to 
avoid harassing people, to avoid going back, to avoid having 
them picked at random too often if there’s no problem; if there 
is a problem, for proper follow-up for the benefit of everyone. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And with respect to 
the federal government and National Revenue and in particular 
GST, we would have to share some same opinions in that 
regard. I would have to admit that we have had a number of 
constituency concerns about that as well. 
 
But with . . . just going back one more time with respect to the 
audits. And I may have misunderstood earlier as far . . . The  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

number that you gave me, I believe, was for fiscal year ‘95-96. I 
don’t know if I ever heard a projection that you may have for 
‘96-97 for the number of audits that may be undertaken by your 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It looks to be about the same. I said 
that a year or two earlier we had increased the staff by a couple. 
In that year, in fact the number of audits was increased from 
1,300 to 1,600-plus. So ‘94-95 we increased the number of 
audits to 1,651; ‘95-96 it remained at the same, 1,689. Our 
projection is that it will be in the 1,600s for the next few years 
unless and until it appears to us that we’re having a problem 
and the tax isn’t being properly remitted, which is in fact what 
happened earlier. And we did step up the auditing a bit, and we 
think the problem is now resolved. And we’ll expect the 
number of audits to remain constant. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
appreciate you noticing the difference in the new seat. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to go back to the challenges, I would 
call them, of the year 2000 that are facing everyone that’s 
dealing with a computer-based technology. And as I understand 
the numbers, and I may have misunderstood you, I think you 
said that it was over $500,000 or . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  580,000 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  580. I added 489, and I don’t know if we’re 
right or wrong or done the wrong numbers . . . but just to make 
sure that the number’s right on the record. But having said that, 
Minister, can you explain to me  it seems like a huge amount 
of money  can you explain to me please, some of the issues 
that are surrounding that whole thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It seems to me like a huge amount of 
money, I must say. 
 
I’m not a computer expert. I relate to computers like I relate to 
cars: I put the key in the ignition, it starts, I drive; if I’ve got a 
problem, I call someone for help. And that’s what I do with a 
car and that’s kind of what I do with a computer. I don’t fix 
them myself. So I have sort of a layman’s understanding. 
 
But I gather the problem is it isn’t terribly expensive to fix in 
the computer. The dates are written in the chips. And in fact, if 
you just want to do a test on your own computer, try putting a 
date into the computer beyond the year December 31, 1999. Try 
changing the date to your computer beyond that. Unless it’s a 
very recent one, the date that will show up will be either April 
1, 1980 or April 1, 1982  whatever was programed into your 
chip originally. 
 
That’s relatively easy to fix. What I guess is very complex is the 
fact that that date is written into so many different files. So you 
not only have to update the computer, you have to reprogram 
the computer so that when it sees the old date, it is able to make 
the correction in each and every one of the files. And I guess it 
is an enormously complex program to write, and it has to be 
individually written for each computer system. 
 

Thus the Department of Health has one problem because they 
keep track of birth dates, and that’s how they keep track of a 
whole lot of things. That’s one problem. 
 
These folks here have a different set of problems. They collect 
interest and pay interest all according to dates, and so they have 
a different problem. But I gather the problem is, you don’t just 
have to change the chip  that’s relatively easy  but you’ve 
also got to write a program which when it sees any given date 
will make the correction. And since everybody’s system is 
different, the program has to be written for each individual 
computer. 
 
That’s how it was explained to me. It is an enormously complex 
problem for what is conceptually very simple. It’s conceptually 
a very simple problem. Dates . . . doesn’t go beyond the year 
2000. It’s simple to understand, but enormously complex to 
actually fix it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, in the estimates here we’re 
looking at almost half a million dollars for the Department of 
Finance, and you’ve mentioned the Department of Health and 
other areas of government; is this half a million dollars dealing 
with a government-wide computerized system? Or is it dealing 
specifically with the Department of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It may or may not be some comfort 
to you to know that the Department of Finance is probably out 
in front in dealing with it. I don’t have with me and I don’t 
think I could give you a comprehensive figure for the whole 
department. I don’t want to deceive the member. 
 
What I said in response to a question to someone, I’m not sure 
whether it was you or your colleague from Thunder Creek, the 
department is spending 580,000 on this. That more than 
accounts for the figure. The figure, you’re right, is not 580,000 
 580,000 is what the department’s spending on the problem. 
 
Across the government, I don’t have a precise figure, because 
many of the departments aren’t as far along in dealing with it. 
We’re the first government in Canada which has a 
comprehensive program for dealing with it. You may recall my 
colleague and I, the Deputy Premier, announced 10 days ago a 
contract with a subsidiary of IBM/ISM to do a comprehensive 
review of the whole government’s programs. 
 
If you ask my colleague next year, I think she’ll probably be 
able to give you some kind of a guess as to what it’s going to 
cost the whole government. At the moment in fact it’s the very 
thing which ISM (Information Systems Management 
Corporation) is assessing in partnership with a committee which 
has been established under the auspices of my department, 
Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
This question actually belongs in Intergovernmental Affairs. I’ll 
answer it anyway, unsatisfactorily, because we don’t have the 
information. Ask me next year in estimates. I expect I can do a 
much better job of estimating the total cost for the total 
government. We’re just now beginning to explore the problem 
in most areas of government. 
 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

This Department of Finance is well along the way, and in fact 
are in advance of most others. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, it seems to me, and I, like you, are 
a lay person in terms of computer technology but dabble 
enough to understand some of the fundamentals, but it strikes 
me is, that there is always a risk at being either too far or too 
behind what changes are being contemplated in the industry. 
 
And it would strike me as that the year 2000 comes as no 
surprise to anyone, so I would think that huge, huge companies 
like Microsoft and things of this nature, where many of us are 
using a lot of their software, hardware, etc., products, must also 
be sensitive of the year 2000. And I wonder if there is a risk at 
being too far ahead as well as too far behind, in terms of we 
may be investing a ton of money on something that there will be 
a simple solution to shortly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There certainly is a risk in doing it 
too soon and doing it too late. The risk in doing it too soon is 
someone is going to invent the whatchamacallit and do it for 10 
cents. The risk in waiting too long is the problem may 
overwhelm you; you may be too late. 
 
All you can do is get the best advice you can. The best advice 
we get from virtually everyone is that the problem is now only 
three and a half years away and the time is nigh when we need 
to begin to deal with it. 
 
We are told that if we leave it much longer, the problem is 
going to increase in cost in a fashion which would have to be 
described as exponential. So we’re told we’ve waited plenty 
long enough. If we wait any longer the cost is going to increase 
very dramatically. So take the best advice you can and you act 
upon it. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. From what I can 
gather from the statement . . . first of all, Mr. Minister, I’d like 
to welcome you and your officials. Just some questions on the 
northern involvement with your department. Am I to understand 
that the role of the Finance Department is to collect all taxes 
and all royalties and all income that the province has and then 
redistribute this entire wealth to various levels of government? 
Is that the correct assumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m told that’s not exactly accurate. 
The Energy and Mines collects revenue from energy and mining 
companies so your statement is largely true, but not entirely 
true. I’m told that Energy and Mines is an exception to it. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay, so I guess the next question is, who 
ultimately has control over the finances and the allocation of 
those finances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Ultimately you do. The members of 
the Assembly . . . this Assembly authorizes expenditures and 
the government expends it, so who has ultimate control? It’s 
you and me, brother. When we vote the Appropriation Bill, we 
authorize the expenditure, and that allows the Department of 
Finance to then parcel out the money to the departments who  

can spend it. 
 
So it’s you and I that . . . when we pass the Appropriation Bill 
in a few days. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess when it comes to northern 
Saskatchewan in reference to what we call the old DNS 
(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) line that you’re 
probably familiar with, what would you say that the highest six 
or seven allocations of funding to northern parts of the province 
. . . in terms of the financial expenditures for the Department of 
Finance and what are these amounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m getting some assistance from the 
member from Cumberland, the minister of northern 
Saskatchewan. I am assured that it’s the same ones it is in the 
South. The highest expenditures are Health, Education, Social 
Services, and, of course, regrettably, we all regret the fact that 
interest is now number three, and northern people have got to 
pay their share of that expense as well. It’s the same 
expenditures as it is in the South. There’s nothing, I’m told, 
unique about northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess one of the questions that the Minister 
of Education answered is that she allocates roughly $27 million 
for Education. Do we have a ballpark figure for Health, and for 
Municipal Government, and for Social Services, as to what you 
may spend in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Department of Finance wouldn’t 
have that information. The figure of $27 million  I advise 
caution on that figure. It may not be accurate. It may be perhaps 
in the ballpark but I’m told it may not be accurate. 
 
But the department wouldn’t have that figure. What the 
department does is . . . You’ll see in the Estimates, the 
Department of Education is allocated so many hundred million 
dollars. They get it, they spend that, and the department doesn’t 
. . . they don’t report . . . the department here doesn’t control 
and it doesn’t have the . . . it really doesn’t have information as 
to what they spend where. 
 
All they are concerned about is that they spend it on that which 
is authorized by law  that’s the auditor’s concern. And the 
department here of course is concerned they don’t spend any 
more than what they’re entitled to. But when in those extremely 
broad limits, the Department of Finance does not control 
individual expenditures. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Is it fair to assume then the Department of 
Finance does have a record of all the income that it receives 
from certain sectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, the answer to that question, that 
is fair to assume, I say to the member from Athabasca. It’s 
summarized on page 74 and 75 of the document entitled 
“Budget Address.” Yes, that’s fair to say that the Department of 
Finance does have records of all taxes paid. 
 
(1945) 
 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, again, one of the things that we looked 
at in terms of the mining sector there, there’s a number of areas 
that I’d like to get even a ballpark figure, if I may, Mr. Minister, 
on in particular the mining sector. 
 
We understand that the mining sector, when talking about 
taxation  and certainly, you know, looking at some of the 
royalties and fees and the taxes and what is meant by graduated 
royalties  what’s the different structure that you may use 
when assessing mining taxes and royalties and fees that a 
mining company might be looking at paying once they do begin 
operations in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, we can say in general terms  
really detailed questions about individual royalties, you’d want 
to ask individual departments, but I can answer in a general way 
 when we have graduated royalties what . . . these are often 
done at the behest of the energy and mining companies actually. 
It is an attempt to base royalties on profitability rather than on 
raw production. And in most cases you have a base tax and then 
you have an incremental tax which is based on profitability of 
the firm, and in almost all cases it’s much preferred by the 
individual firms. 
 
Let us take the example of lumber companies. In fact this is 
under . . . we’re working on this at the moment. But one can 
imagine that if you charged $10 per stump  and I picked that 
figure right out of the air  it may be 2 or it may be 20. But if 
you charged $10 per stump it may be quite unfair if the lumber 
prices, dimensional lumber prices, are very low or pulp prices 
are very low. It may be unfair to the taxpayer if the prices are 
very high. And in recent years we’ve seen some wild swings in 
both pulp and dimensional lumber. So graduated taxes are an 
attempt to take a base tax, but then have incremental taxes 
which vary with profitability. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So am I to assume then, Mr. Minister, that it 
would be to the advantage, based on this graduated royalty 
scheme, to have profits and tremendous profits of the 
development of the northern resources for government purposes 
or for government coffers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I don’t know that it is necessarily . . . 
well, yes it is in a way. I think your question was, is it in the 
interests of Northerners to have graduated taxes? It is in a way 
because the argument which the companies make is, okay, you 
say you need 20 million from uranium or some such figure. 
Again, I picked a figure out of the air. 
 
If you can pace it according to profitability you’re very likely to 
maximize the number of jobs. Because firms then can keep 
people on the payroll when the lumber prices . . . when the 
commodity prices go down and they can . . . and so the 
employment is not quite so cyclical. 
 
So yes, it’s in the interest of Northerners in a way. We’d 
probably get the same amount of royalty. But it does  by 
allowing firms to even out profit and cash flows  we also 
enable them to retain employees in tough times. And that’s 
obviously in the interest of Northerners and Southerners. 
 

Mr. Belanger:  The other question I had is  and we’ll kind 
of bounce back and forth here because there’s some things that 
I have I got to make sure I’m correct on before I ask the 
question  but have you got a general ballpark figure, within a 
few million, of what you actually earn as a government in 
royalties, taxation, and land leases from the northern resource 
companies, which include your forestry companies and your 
mining company? You’ve got to have that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, we don’t. As I think the member 
has anticipated by the nature . . . by the way you’re developing 
the questions, the nature of graduated income tax makes that 
difficult to do. If you’re charging $2 per stump  to take this 
example out of the air  you can allocate that according to 
territory. But if you’re charging 50 cents per stump, plus a 
graduated royalty depending on profit, you don’t know where 
that comes from because that depends upon where the company 
does its business. And you’d have to have an intimate 
knowledge of the company’s affairs to be able to place it. So I 
think the member’s anticipated this answer. 
 
The movement to graduated royalties has meant that it is almost 
impossible for us to allocate revenues by area of origin because 
they’re company specific, not area specific. So I think the 
member has correctly anticipated the answer. The answer is no, 
we can’t do that with any degree of precision. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well I guess we’ll try it from a different 
angle here, then  not so much from the sector but obviously 
we don’t have a mining company that’s mining for uranium 
based out of Moose Jaw, so is there perhaps information, Mr. 
Minister, as to the mining companies operating within 
Saskatchewan whose primary functions are north of the 
northern administration district line, that file income tax returns 
and statements to the Saskatchewan government, that have to 
do with the development of northern resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, the member’s correct in a way. 
That’s fairly shrewd. All of the uranium comes from an area 
north of the old DNS line, if you want to use that line. I think 
it’s accurate to say that all of the coal comes from the area 
south of that. Thereafter you’re into some pretty tough country, 
trying to allocate them. 
 
If you look on page 74 of the document entitled the “Budget 
Address,” you will find the figure for uranium in the ‘96-97 
period  the estimate for uranium is 20.7 million. Yes, that’s 
correct. All of that would come from the area north of the old 
DNS line. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  That 20.7 million, that is simply for the 
royalties and the taxes that they pay for operating on the land. 
This is not to do with corporate or personal income tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, that’s not corporate income tax, 
no. That is resource . . . that is the royalties on the 
non-renewable resource, yes. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay, so some of the employees of some of 
these northern mining companies that may live and operate in 
Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon  there would be no way to 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

determine their personal income tax contributed to the fact that 
the uranium industry operates in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, we wouldn’t have the 
information. And Ottawa, if they have it, they certainly 
wouldn’t release it. No, we don’t have that information. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Again going back to the mining sector, the 
20.7 million that you indicate that’s being possibly anticipated 
from northern Saskatchewan revenues, is that for all the mines 
now or any potential mines in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer to your question is yes, 
that’s what the department estimates will come from uranium in 
the 1996-1997 year, which is this upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Is there any information in terms of the five 
highest income generators in northern Saskatchewan? Do you 
have that information as to where you get most of your dollars 
in terms of whether it’s corporate income tax or people filing 
E&H (education and health) tax, or is it just simply the mining 
sector and the forestry sector that’s contributing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I can only answer that in the most 
general terms. They would likely be the largest mines and 
perhaps the forestry industry. But I wouldn’t have that 
information and I’m not 100 per cent certain that the 
department would feel free in making that information public. 
What an individual pays in tax is not public information. 
 
If you want me to identify the five largest taxpayers, I don’t 
think the department would do that. We don’t release  and I 
say to the member from Athabasca  we don’t release 
individual tax information. I think your question would have us 
doing that. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And 
I’ve got other questions at a later time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Minister, I believe it’s on page 7 of the budget address 
document, but the budget suggests that there’s some $630 
million to be spent on capital projects through the Crowns and 
the government. I wonder if it would be possible for the 
minister to provide us a breakdown of these capital 
expenditures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  All right. The member will have this 
year’s copy of Saskatchewan Estimates. If you turn to page 25 
of those Estimates, the member will find the capital 
expenditures in the line departments of government. I won’t 
read those out; the member has those. 
 
I don’t think you have this document so I’m just going to read 
these quickly into the record. There is an additional . . . and that 
figure comes to 175.526 million. Then the Crown corporation 
estimated capital expenditures total 455 million. And I’ll just 
read those quickly into the record: CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) is in for 37 million; SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) in for 6; SaskPower in 
for $144 million; SaskTel in for 165; STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) 4; Sask Water 32; SaskEnergy 67; 
which I am told adds up to four fifty-five. That is the 
breakdown of the capital expenditures by government 
department in the Estimates book. And I’ve just read into the 
record the breakdown of investments for the Crown 
Investments Corporation, for the Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, as I understand it they’re all 
capital projects. Would you have a further breakdown as to 
what would be construction projects in that total? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer . . . sorry, I got into a 
side bar conversation here about tonight’s business. No, we 
don’t have the breakdown. The Department of Finance only has 
the globals. The process is that the departments ship into 
Finance a statement of their needs, and they do it in global 
terms. 
 
The Department of Finance and Treasury Board then juggle 
those figures all fall and so on, and then we settle it but we 
never do get the detail. The detail remains in the department. 
They send in their estimates, we determine what figure we can 
make available to them, but we never do get the details. The 
details you’d have to get from the individual departments as 
they come forward. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, as well, and I suspect that the 
answer may be the same as to which of those projects would be 
subject to CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) 
or arrangements that are made under construction preference 
policies or tendering policies of the government. And if that is 
not available tonight, and I understand that, could we have the 
undertaking for that breakdown to be made so that we might 
reconcile the $630 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the Department of Finance 
would not have that information. I’m just now answering for 
the Department of Finance and I can only give undertakings for 
the Department of Finance. When you ask questions on other 
departments I answer them if I have the knowledge, but I can’t 
give an undertaking from another department. 
 
The Department of Finance wouldn’t have that information. 
Individual figures of the ilk that appear on page 25, those you 
could get from individual departments. The details of the 
Crown investments you’d have to get from the member from 
Rosetown, and I think there is an opportunity actually in the 
House here to question the CIC. I think there’s a statutory grant. 
In any event, if you don’t get it here you’d have to get it in the 
Crown Corporations Committee. But to put this question to 
bed, the Department of Finance does not have it and I can’t give 
the undertaking on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Minister, one final, small point. The 
information you read into the record from a document that you 
suggested we do not have, would we be able to have a copy of 
that page that you quoted from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No. This is not a public document;  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

this is some information they got ready here, generally 
described as briefing notes for the minister. When I was in 
opposition I would love to have had the minister’s briefing but I 
never had them. And then the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  They couldn’t read them anyway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Actually yes, the member from 
Prince Albert’s probably right. If we had them we wouldn’t 
have been able to read them. Now I’m actually reading from the 
minister’s briefing notes; they’re not something that’s made 
public. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have a 
couple of questions now with respect to a concern of a number 
of women in the province related to agriculture. It’s a major 
concern to a large number of women with respect to the failure 
of the government to do something about the farm fuel tax 
rebate. 
 
I know in my constituency I have spoke to a number of farm 
women who have been quite upset about that tax rebate policy. 
As an example, it’s common that one could have a husband and 
wife who operate two entirely separate sort of farm units, 
despite the fact they’re married. One spouse could have a 
poultry operation. The other could farm grain. In other 
instances, many of these couples each have their own individual 
Canadian Wheat Board permit books and file their own separate 
tax returns as stand on their own farm entities. 
 
And in a time period of increasing farm diversification, this is 
going to become more commonplace than it is an exception. 
And I’d just like to ask the minister what the department might 
be doing to review what is a very prejudicial policy towards 
farm women. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This problem has just come to . . . we 
just got the board decision. There’s been some concern 
expressed about it. To be quite candid, I think the Department 
of Justice has not completed its review. And when the 
Department of Justice completes its review and the Department 
of Finance has an opinion, the Department of Finance is then 
going to have to determine what they’re going to do with it. 
 
Any number of options . . . there are quite a number of options 
open to them, one of which might or might not be an appeal, 
depending on what the Department of Justice says about the 
advisability of that. 
 
I think it would be premature tonight to speculate on what kind 
of . . . how this might be approached by the Department of 
Finance. Suffice it to say, it is not a major problem, I guess, but 
it’s certainly a bit of a challenge because it is not the way this 
problem has been handled, and it has enormous financial 
implications for the government. 
 
So it is being reviewed. I don’t think we’ll be able to give the 
member from Thunder Creek anything in the nature of a 
coherent answer during these estimates. This problem is going 
to take weeks and probably months to unravel. And I think the 
best we can do is hope we have a coherent answer in next  

year’s estimates when you’re asking whoever is Minister of 
Finance then these questions. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But could I just ask 
one further question though. You’ve mentioned that it might be 
weeks if not months, and it involves a review by the 
Department of Justice. But have any officials of the Finance 
department got . . . Can we nail it down a little bit more closer 
as far as what time frame we’re looking at here for the outcome 
of the Finance . . . or of the Justice department’s review, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Someone suggested first of the week. 
We’re just not sure first of which week. No, to be serious, I 
really can’t give you a very definite answer. Having got the 
decision, we have 30 days to review it before we need to make 
any decisions with respect to an appeal. I guess there’s a 30-day 
appeal period. 
 
Even after we have that information, we still have to determine 
what we’re going to do with it. If it’s not to be appealed, then 
we need to determine what we’re going to do with the decision. 
And I’m just afraid I cannot be any more definite than that as to 
when the matter will be resolved. It’s a complex problem 
involving an enormous amount of money for the government. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I have a 
few more questions related to it. 
 
Given that you have acknowledged that it could become an 
enormous amount of money for the department, it seems to 
indicate to me that there has been somewhat of an undertaking 
by your department in terms of an analysis of what sort of 
monies it could mean to the department. And certainly what 
we’re hearing here this evening could be inferred that it’s 
almost a given that the department might be appealing the 
outcome of the review if it rules in favour of providing a rebate 
to both spouses in the circumstances such as I’ve described. 
 
Could you provide to the House this evening a little bit more 
detail about what analysis has been undertaken with respect to 
this matter by the Department of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The analysis is really in an 
embryonic stage. We just got the decision; we’ve not got an 
analysis from . . . we’ve not got the decision review from the 
Department of Justice. And the department has not done 
anything in the nature of an analysis on the basis of which, I 
could give you reliable figures about how much it’s likely to 
cost us or what various options might cost. 
 
So I spoke of an enormous amount of money. I really cannot be 
very definite. I can’t tell you if that’s 110 or 100 million . . . our 
consideration of this problem is really in a very embryonic 
stage. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  If a person was to look at it in terms of the 
number of filers currently for the farm fuel tax rebate, if one 
was to speculate that those were going to double, then you’d be 
able to attach a ballpark figure in that regard. I would think 
there must be something that could be provided by the 
department in terms of a ballpark figure with this respect. So I  



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

would just press one more time for an answer, if I could. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  What I can do  it might be of some 
assistance to the member  what I can do is tell you that the 
total amount which we pay out under this program is 36 
million. This is a very precise figure actually for . . . Oh, no. 
This is the amount paid out last year. This is not next year’s 
estimate. The amount paid out last year is $36,622,708; I was 
going to say that’s an awfully precise estimate, but that’s last 
year’s figure. 
 
So that’s what we paid out last year. That will give the member 
some help in knowing the parameters of the problem. You 
really don’t know at this point in time what the additional 
would cost us. We don’t know how many of these farm families 
would both be entitled to them. We don’t have any reliable 
figures which would enable me to speculate as to what the 
ruling might cost us. 
 
That will give you a ballpark. The total amount paid out is 36 
million, so that gives you perhaps some idea of the parameters 
of the problem. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, could not the department 
obtain from a statistics branch of this government some figures 
in this regard that might better able the department to make 
such a determination? And this being just a helpful suggestion, 
given, as you suggested, this is an undertaking that’s in its 
embryonic stage. Could you comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I should perhaps . . . let me make a 
comment about the nature of undertakings. Undertakings are 
often given to provide information where they’re in the 
possession of the department, which are not here and available 
in the House; so we have the information, so we give you an 
undertaking to provide it with you as soon as these gentlemen 
and ladies can collect it. 
 
Where we don’t have the information, we really cannot give 
you an undertaking. We don’t know precisely what statistics are 
available to us, how precise the analysis is. I can’t give you an 
undertaking to provide information the precise nature of which 
I’m not sure we have. Not one of the . . . one of the things we 
need to do is to determine how good our statistics are and how 
accurate information we can give you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And you’ll forgive 
my persistence in this matter, but it is one that, as I said at the 
outset, is of a concern to a number of my own constituents and I 
do want to construct as best a reply as possible in this regard. 
So we would certainly appreciate any further informations that 
could be provided by the department officials, even if it be at a 
later date, in this respect. 
 
Could I  just in that being enough said  could I move 
along. With respect, Mr. Minister, in early March when the 
federal government released its budget there was, and this is 
going back pertaining to audit work again, when they released 
their budget, there was a proposal made that related to some of 
the auditing work done by this branch of the department. 
 

The minister’s general view on the budget, the federal budget, 
that is  and all members of the government opposite has been 
quite clear; you’ve expressed your opinions on a number of 
occasions about it  but that aside, the federal government did 
indicate in that budget that it’s interested in merging some of 
the agencies which audit with respect to tax. So instead of 
having a crew for your income taxes, or PST, followed by 
people from a GST (goods and services tax) office, they were 
proposing one group of auditors and one agency. And it’s my 
understanding, on reviewing the federal budget, that the 
suggestion of amalgamating these enforcement agencies would 
also . . . extends to provinces. 
 
And obviously the revenue branch in your department carries 
out these same sorts of activities as we’ve been discussing here 
this evening. And given that, could the minister tell us what . . . 
in dealing with the suggestion such as this to reduce overlap 
and duplication, could you just make some comments whether 
there’s anything that might be followed up on with respect to 
this, and in particular, this tax enforcement aspect? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, by luck I think more 
than anything else, this matter comes within the jurisdiction of 
the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs right at the 
moment. 
 
In the upcoming first ministers’ conference there may be some 
discussion of administrative arrangements. That is, ways in 
which the Confederation could be made more efficient and 
more effective, respond to some of the feelings  needs  that 
people feel with respect to making Canada work better. 
 
Under a broad rubric of economic union, the federal 
government has put this idea forward. It’s one of a number of 
ideas which have been put forward. 
 
Our general approach is that we are not hostile to the idea. It 
may well have some merit. And an analysis might suggest that it 
could save some money, so we are moderately receptive to the 
idea with quite a number of conditions to attach, not the least of 
which is that any kind of coordination and collecting does not 
mean harmonization. 
 
Harmonization is, at this point in time, not on. But coordination 
doesn’t necessarily mean harmonization, and we are, yes, we’re 
receptive to the idea. It is going forward in the context of the 
first ministers’ meeting later in June and we are not hostile to 
the idea. It may well have some merit. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In this regard and 
in the interests of efficiencies and economizing, while reading 
your paper on economic development it indicates that 
government is going to be reducing regulations and nuisance 
fees something in the order of 25 per cent over the next 10 
years. And, well for starters, I could say that that might be 
considered by some as a rather modest undertaking. 
 
But that aside, would you provide us with a list of regulations 
from the Department of Finance, a list of nuisance fees, if you  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

might, that could be targeted for such an initiative. And if you 
might make a comment with respect to why was this initiative 
so slow to be undertaken. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Each year, when the members of 
Treasury Board begin to prepare the . . . each year when we 
prepare the budget, we review the list of fees and charges. We 
review them to see if some of them should be eliminated. 
Sometimes we’re collecting $5,000 in fees and putting people 
to hundreds of thousands of dollars of expense to pay them, and 
those need to be eliminated. 
 
At each year we review them, and perhaps we think some ought 
to be increased where the government is providing a service for 
which people can pay and ought to pay. So each year the whole 
of the fees and charges is reduced. The whole question of 
regulatory reform is really much broader than just fees and 
charges, and in fact fees and charges is really peripheral to it. 
 
This is being done in Executive Council, actually. It’s a 
question you may want to reserve for the Premier. This is being 
done out of Executive Council. It is ongoing now. 
 
There is some staff who are now doing a review and talking to 
people. I think we’ll be contacting businesses and outsiders, but 
it’s just begun. The process is just now beginning to take hold. 
And I think it will mean a real reduction in regulatory red tape 
and I’d hope it would be all of 25 per cent and perhaps more. 
But it’s just beginning. It’s in Executive Council and it’s too 
early to say precisely what will be done. 
 
But as I say, fees and charges is really kind of outside the ambit 
of this discussion. The fees and charges one is done each year. 
I’ve been on Treasury Board since 1991 and each year we do 
this. Each year we go over the fees and charges, try to eliminate 
those which are nuisances. And quite frankly, we ask ourselves 
on each one, is the person who’s getting the service paying their 
way? If not, should they pay their way? And so each year we go 
over these things one by one  one by one. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
have a line in Finance entitled, allowance for doubtful accounts. 
Could you elaborate on that a bit, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This appropriation is required under 
accrual accounting. The member will know that we’re now on 
accrual accounting and have been since 1993, ‘94, somewhere 
thereabouts. And under accrual accounting you have to provide 
for accounts receivable and thus you need a . . . correspondingly 
you need provision for doubtful accounts. 
 
As I say, it’s part of your financial statements and mine. The 
government, now being on the accrual accounting system, is no 
different. You have to estimate those of your accounts which 
you won’t receive and set up a “doubtful” accounting system. In 
a large institution it’s no different than the accounts which you 
as a storekeeper might have or I as a lawyer will have. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, thank you. Do you have some 
form of a breakdown as to that line? Give us a couple of 
examples, if you could. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The 1996-97 budget estimate is 1.7 
million. The estimate of 1.7 million consists of allowances for 
education and health tax, 1.3 million; corporate capital tax of 
230,000; liquor consumption tax of 70,000; and other taxes 
which would consist of fuel, tobacco, and insurance premiums 
tax of 100,000; which I am told adds up to 1.7 million. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m just curious 
about one item in that same particular area. Bonding of public 
officials . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. It is a little unusual. I welcome the 
Minister of Finance to take over her estimates, and I did that by 
way of explanation so that anyone viewing would understand 
why the Leader of the Opposition stopped mid-question. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome back, 
Madam Minister. I’m just curious about one item under 
miscellaneous payments, and that’s for bonding of public 
officials. I’m just curious; which public officials? That’s 
something that we’ve been discussing in other areas recently, 
and I wondered what particular public officials those might be. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much 
for that introduction. All public servants are bonded. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you for confirming that then. So the 
cost is included in that particular line item for each and every 
public servant, Madam Minister. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I notice that as well under that 
particular item that the implementation of guarantees has been 
reduced by 50 per cent. Forgive me for not knowing what that 
implementation of guarantees is responsible for, and also why 
the 50 per cent decrease for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. First of all this is not a large amount in terms of the 
difference. And the difference is there because the government 
has not had to act on guarantees as it has had to in the past, so 
that’s why there’s the decline. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Madam 
Minister, there’s been an indication that the federal  or 
Federation, I’m sorry  of Saskatchewan Indian Nations will 
be taking the government to court regarding the issue of 
taxation on reserves. 
 
Now they feel they are not obliged to collect the GST or the 
PST. And while that is their position, they feel that negotiations 
are not proving productive to resolving the dispute. And be that 
their position, I wonder if you as minister could explain to the 
House what sorts of efforts the department is taking in the 
coming year or has taken towards resolving this very sensitive 
issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The first nations people, or the Indians in 
Saskatchewan, have said that they want to move to what occurs 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

in other provinces. In Manitoba, for example, status Indians do 
not pay taxes on cigarettes and gas on reserve. In Saskatchewan 
they do pay taxes on cigarettes and gas on reserve. 
 
The province has said we’re willing to look at different models 
of taxation. But if you want to look at what happens in 
provinces like Manitoba, status Indians do not pay taxes on 
cigarettes and gas on reserve, but they do pay the sales tax off 
reserve. So if you want to move to a new model, there has to be 
a trade-off. There has to be a balancing. 
 
The position of the federation has been that they don’t pay 
taxes, period. And so this is a very difficult negotiation when 
somebody starts from the position that we don’t pay taxes. How 
do you talk about trade-offs? What I would be interested in is 
. . . I know the Conservatives have stated their position, which I 
think is not exactly upfront with the electorate, because if 
they’re going to move in one area, if you’re going to charge the 
sales tax off reserve, they’re going to end up giving the 
exemptions on reserve which will be about revenue neutral to 
the taxpayer. 
 
But what I’m interested in is the Liberal position. Because to 
say, as you have publicly, that this is a complicated issue, 
everybody knows. The Government of Saskatchewan has taken 
a position that there have to be trade-offs. If you want the 
Manitoba model, then you take both parts of the Manitoba 
model; if you want the Saskatchewan model, that’s fine. 
 
I would be interested to know in more detail what your position 
is. Because to say it’s complicated is not enough. To say you’d 
negotiate is not enough either, when the Indians begin from the 
position . . . their negotiating position is, we’re not prepared to 
pay taxes. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I guess what is more 
important here to the people of the province is, in matters such 
as this, and when it’s being suggested  such as it is  by 
natives that this issue could be taken into court, once you get 
into court of course there’s always a very significant level of 
risk associated with that. 
 
You’re putting your fate in the hands of the law and to a 
judge’s interpretation of the law. And you know, such an 
outcome may or may not be satisfactory. It certainly is not 
going to be satisfactory for both parties. And I wonder if the 
minister could just tell whether her officials have calculated the 
risk involved here. And please provide the people of the 
province with some comment on this matter because I think 
they want to hear that from you. 
 
They’re not so interested in what the opposition’s position is on 
this matter. They want to know what you as the elected 
government official is doing to protect their interests. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think that I don’t agree with your 
position that they’re not interested in what the opposition says. 
But let me first of all state the government’s position. Then I’ll 
state what I think your obligations are. 

From the point of view of the government, we have said the tax 
system in Saskatchewan has to be fair, not just to first nations 
people, but to taxpayers. We’re not prepared to see any change 
in the tax system which is going to cost the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan more. So from the . . . when you start from that 
premiss, we’re willing to be open. Do they prefer the 
Saskatchewan model in which the E&H is not charged off 
reserve, but cigarette and gas tax is collected on reserve? That’s 
the Saskatchewan model. 
 
Or do they prefer the Manitoba model where cigarette and gas 
tax is not collected on reserve but the E&H, the sales tax, is 
collected off reserve? And by the way, both models cost the 
taxpayer about the same number of dollars. That’s our position. 
We’re willing to talk about that. We’re not willing to change it 
in a way that will be to the disadvantage of taxpayers. And so 
therefore the taxpayers have not suffered. And they won’t suffer 
under this regime. 
 
But what I want to know from the members opposite is . . . I 
don’t think it’s adequate to say, well the government’s the 
government, and they have to take positions. We’re just here to 
criticize the government. The opposition’s role is to provide an 
alternative to the government. And therefore on key matters like 
Indian taxation, it is not enough to say it’s complicated and we 
talk about it because I have said and the chief of the federation 
has said publicly, his position is the Indians have already paid 
their taxes; they’re not prepared to look at trade-offs. So if 
they’re not prepared to do that, then what would you do that 
would be different than what we are doing? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
welcome, and welcome to your officials. I want to just begin by 
offering some congratulations with respect to the provincial 
credit rating upgrade. Certainly that is important to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Anytime that . . . an upgrade is good news, 
and there’s no other way of describing it. 
 
Of course the balancing of the budget of Saskatchewan is 
important, and we support that. We’ve always been on record as 
supporting balanced budgets legislation, balanced budgets. We 
certainly believe that that’s appropriate. We may disagree on 
how you achieve it, but we certainly agree that that is important, 
Madam Minister. 
 
So the credit rating upgrade is good news. I understand  what 
is it?  two, roughly 2 million in savings, something in that 
magnitude, and I think that that is good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like your further thoughts with regard to possible future 
upgradings of the credit rating, and what direction you intend to 
take with regard to future balanced budgets, that type of thing. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party, first of all thank you very much for those 
comments. I think we can all agree that the credit does go to the 
people of the province. Government can provide leadership, but 
if the people are not willing to understand the problem and to 
support difficult choices that have to be part of the solution, the 
government isn’t going to succeed. So I thank you very much  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

for those comments. 
 
Our intention is to abide by our own balanced budget 
legislation which requires a government to do what we just did: 
present a four-year plan to the legislature which ensures that 
there are balances throughout that four-year period and to also 
present a plan to reduce the province’s debt. It’s my own view 
that the public of Saskatchewan simply will not tolerate deficits. 
I think that they learned from the 1980s that deficits are really 
just deferred taxes, as I think one of your former leaders said. 
 
And therefore our goal is to balance the budget of the province 
each and every year, but to do it in a balanced way in which we 
ensure that there are adequate safety nets in place and social 
programs, and to also look at the issue of a level of taxation and 
ensure that there is a fair taxation system that allows the 
province to be competitive. 
 
And I think if we continue on that track, we will see in the 
future upgrades in the province’s credit rating. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Something that I 
hear frequently from my constituents  and I’m sure you do 
from yours  and from people all over the province is the 
concern with respect to the level of debt of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m not . . . I don’t want to get into a debate 
about who’s responsible or who isn’t responsible or lay any 
blame here or anything like that. I simply feel that it is 
important that the people of Saskatchewan understand and 
know what the debt levels that the province has and we are 
faced with here in this province. 
 
People get . . . and I’m sure you get the same types of questions 
that we get all of the time  the Consolidated Fund and the 
General Revenue Fund and the Crown debt and unfunded 
pension liabilities, and what all that means in terms of it. And I 
think it might be useful, Madam Minister, if you were to 
provide an overall direction, overall position, with respect to the 
debt of the province of Saskatchewan so that people have some 
sort of understanding. 
 
I mean I tend to look at it a little bit like your credit card, and 
you know you’ve charged in this area, and you’ve charged in 
that area, and you’ve bought a new capital thing in this area. 
But at the bottom line, you know what the debt is. You know 
what your credit card balance is and what you’re going to have 
to pay, eventually going to have to pay at least, or make 
payments on. And of course there’s interest accruing and all of 
those kinds of things. 
 
So I think it might be helpful, Madam Minister, if you just gave 
a little bit of a summary with respect to the total debt levels of 
the province of Saskatchewan so that the taxpayer out there 
knows exactly, if they were all of a sudden to win a lottery 
tomorrow or the province of Saskatchewan was to win a lottery 
tomorrow and they wanted to wipe the debt off the books, what 
kind of money they’d have to come up with. And I would want 
you also to include in that, Madam Minister, a brief  and I’m 
doing more for the benefit of people that might not understand 
debt, deficit, Consolidated Fund, General Revenue Fund, all of  

those kinds of things  a brief explanation of each one of the 
areas of debt including things like the Consolidated Fund, 
General Revenue Fund, Crown debt, the unfunded pension 
liabilities, things of that nature, and a brief explanation of what 
each one of those are. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party, as of March 31, 1996, the debt of the province was 
$14.3 billion. It breaks down roughly: 8.7 billion general 
government debt; 5.4 Crown corporation debt. A year from now 
that debt will decline to 13.4 billion. By the end of the four-year 
cycle it will be down to 12.5 billion. 
 
I think what’s key as well is what outside agencies say about the 
province’s debt. Yesterday when Standard and Poor’s 
announced their upgrade, one of the reasons that they 
announced an upgrade was because of the province’s reduction 
in its debt. And I’ll quote from what they said in their report: 
 

Saskatchewan’s net tax-supported debt burden has 
declined sharply since its 57 per cent of GDP peak in 1992 
(that is, in 1992 the debt of the province was 57 per cent of 
the size of the economy), falling to 46 per cent in 1996. A 
further drop to 42 per cent of GDP is projected for 1997. 
 

So really what they’re saying is one of the best measures of debt 
is the debt relative to the size of the economy. It’s like saying to 
a household, how much debt do you have? The number doesn’t 
mean much unless you say to the household, well what’s your 
income, what’s your capacity to pay down that debt? 
 
And what they’re saying is there were three main reasons for 
their upgrade. One was the fact that the tax-supported debt of 
the province, that’s the dead weight, credit card-type debt of the 
province, is declining dramatically, and they see it as a 
continual decline into the future. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I appreciate 
those numbers. You failed to elaborate with respect to unfunded 
pension liability. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The unfunded pension liability is 
$3.3 billion. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So when you 
consider all areas of obligation that the province has then, we 
are looking at 17.4 billion? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  They’re separate, Mr. Chairman, to 
the Leader of the Third Party, they’re separate issues. The debt 
that the province has outstanding right now out there in the 
money markets that we have to pay is $14.3 billion. That’s it. 
For some reason or other all the debts had to be paid tomorrow, 
that’s what we would have to pay. 
 
The unfunded pension liability is a different issue. That’s 
something off into the future. We don’t have to pay that 
tomorrow. That can’t be called tomorrow. And so it’s quite a 
different matter. And that’s 3.3. 
 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Mr. Boyd:  Yes, I think certainly we recognize that, Madam 
Minister, but it is a future obligation and if you were to . . . if 
you were in your household wanting to assume that you’re 
totting up the numbers to find out what the total debt of your 
household was, any future obligations you would want to 
consider in that, would you not? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the Leader 
of the Third Party, I think there’s quite a difference. It’s like 
saying my mortgage is this, whatever other money I owe is 
another figure. If something happened, that could be called 
tomorrow. I have future obligations. Let’s assume that I am 
totally committed to sending my children to university or 
whatever. That is a future obligation that is there, I know it’s 
there, I know I’m going to have to pay it. But until the day that 
they actually register, I’m not going to have to pay that. Or if I 
have obligations to other members of my family, that if my 
mother were to pass away I have to take care of my sister, that 
is a future obligation. I know it’s there. I know I’m going to 
have to pay it, but it can’t be called tomorrow. 
 
So there’s quite a difference. That 14.3, if something happened, 
and I can’t imagine what it would be, that would occur that 
would force the creditors to call that, that could . . . the 
province could be expected to pay that. The other is a future 
obligation which is there and we certainly recognize it, and just 
like a family you have to plan for it. No family drifts into 
children going into university without some game plan in place 
or parents passing away without some game plan in place, but 
it’s a different sort of obligation. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well yes, I guess in some regards it is a different 
kind of obligation, Madam Minister. To use your analogy, the 
family that’s preparing for the expenses of children that may 
want to attend university somewhere down the line, that’s a 
wish, essentially, is that you’re thinking that you are going to 
prepare for that eventuality at some point. 
 
On the other hand with the pension liability, that’s a debt that’s 
already incurred, is it not? That is already established; that you 
don’t have an option in terms of . . . you know that at some 
point that it’s going to come forward. I recognize that it’s not 
something that is going to happen right tomorrow, and that for 
whatever reasons the pension liability isn’t all going to be 
forced on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. But nevertheless it is 
a expenditure that is going to have to be budgeted for at some 
point in the future. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s right  over the next 30 or 
40 years. And again, as I say, assuming that you may very well 
be right that it’s a wish that your children go to university. I 
don’t think it’s anything but an obligation of parents to believe 
that children need some form of higher education in this 
particular day and age. And so the parallel I think is an accurate 
one. One of the best ways to prepare yourselves to finance the 
higher education of your children is to ensure that your 
mortgage is paid down and your other debts are under control 
so that you’re in a position to finance that. 
 

So that when Standard and Poor’s says that the government is 
doing a good job of reducing the debt of the province, it is 
exactly the same as preparing ourselves to ensure that we’re 
able to meet those future obligations. 
 
What I would also add on the pension front is that the four-year 
financial plan which the government just presented entails all of 
the province’s pension obligations for the next four years. So 
we have projected out four years. We are meeting our 
obligations and we’re doing it without a dramatic increase in 
government spending. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Does your 
department then prepare an analysis of pension debt, pension 
liability? Like do you have some sort of a calculation or a plan 
in place that you could provide us with, with respect to when 
the pension liability comes due? 
 
Now obviously you threw out the figure of 40 years. I can’t 
somehow think that that would be the case. I wonder, Madam 
Minister, if the pension liability peaks at some point and then 
starts diminishing, or do we continue to see it rise, or how 
exactly does that work? Could you explain that for the benefit 
of the taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party. It depends when people retire. 
 
But certainly, as I say, we have projected out for the next four 
years all of our pension obligations. They’re included in the 
four-year financial plan. If you look at the spending in the 
four-year financial plan it is close to flat, so obviously this is 
not a problem of any magnitude in the next four-year period. 
Beyond that, it depends exactly what choices people make in 
terms of their retirement. 
 
But I think the key thing on the pension issue that has to be 
emphasized again and again is the gate has been closed. That is, 
the problem has been solved to this extent  in 1978 the 
government of Allan Blakeney changed the pension scheme for 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Anybody who joined the government in any capacity after 1978 
 whether as a civil servant or as an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly)  is now in a different pension scheme 
which is totally funded. That is, the member sets aside a certain 
number of dollars; the government sets aside a certain number 
of dollars. What the member gets upon retirement is just the 
money that has been accrued through those dollars. 
 
So the scheme is fully funded and it’s also inexpensive to 
taxpayers, relative to pension schemes that exist in other parts 
of Canada. So I think the key thing is the decision has been 
made to ensure that in the longer term, once the people on the 
old plan have retired through the system and have passed away, 
we have a system that is affordable and which is also fair. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So using current  
now I recognize that it’s difficult to estimate into the future 
without using some sort of parameters about what you can 
expect  but using sort of current pension ages, you know, 65  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

or whatever the case may be, that you would want to use for 
government employees or teachers or anyone else for that 
matter, using the sort of current numbers that you would want 
to use if you were to ballpark the figures out into the future, 
have you a calculation of how that pension debt accumulates 
and starts to drop off? Is there something you can provide us 
with in that regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I think, as I say, the key thing 
that has to be taken into account is all that you can do in terms 
of pension obligations is take your particular point in time, 
which is what the government does and which is what the 
auditor does  each and every year says, here are the people in 
the system. Here is when they are anticipated to retire. Here is 
your future obligations, and peg that at $3.2 billion right now. 
 
But it’s impossible to project that accurately into the future 
because you don’t know of the choices that people are going to 
make. Some people may decide to retire at an earlier age, 
particularly teachers, because a big part of the unfunded 
liability is the teachers’ scheme. 
 
So you can only do it on a rolling basis, whereby this today is 
what we know our future obligations are as far out as we can 
project with the people that we have in the system as of this 
moment. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you provide 
us with a breakdown of the pension liability and where it lies? 
You mention the teachers, and there’s the MLA, and all of that. 
I wonder if you could provide us with a breakdown. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes we can. Actually it’s available 
within the documents that you have probably in front of you, or 
maybe not in front of you, but are public documents. We can 
get you a copy of this. 
 
The public accounts, 1994-95, it’s on page 14. So we’ll get you 
a xerox copy of that. The pension obligations are, as of . . . This 
is March 31, 1995, because the public accounts are always a 
year behind. Teachers’ pension is 2.1 billion liability. Public 
service superannuation fund is 1.1. I’m rounding these off. I’m 
sure you don’t want to go into all the cents here; I’m rounding 
them off to hundredths of millions. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly plan is 24.5. Judges of 
the Provincial Court plan is 17.9. Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company employees is 6.7. Anti-TB (tuberculosis) League 
employees is 4.2. Public employees, the annuity fund, is 2.0. To 
come up with a total of $3.3 billion. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  What were the comparable numbers for the year 
previous to that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Okay, for the teachers in March 31, 
1994, was 2.0  2 billion. The public service was 1.1 billion. 
Members of the Legislative Assembly plan was 24 million; 
judges of the Provincial Court, 16 million; Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company employees, 5.7 million; anti-TB 
League employees, 3.7 million; and public employees, the 
annuity fund, 2.2 million; and I’m rounding those off. 

Mr. Boyd:  Rounding it off then, what would be the 
increase, year-over-year, in the pension liability, and what is 
your projection, year-over-year, of the comparable numbers ’95 
to ‘96? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  If you round it off it’s 3.2 for the 
last year. Round it off, if you want the total rounded off for last 
year. 
 
An Hon. Member:  No, I want the difference. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Okay, it’s about 200 million. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Two hundred million from ’94 to ’95, and do 
you have a calculation of what it is ’95 to ’96? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We won’t have that until the Public 
Accounts is released because you do it at the end of the cycle. 
So we don’t have that estimate, no. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  I’m aware that you do it after the fact, but I’m 
sure your department gives a . . . could provide us with an 
estimate of what that is for the ’96 period. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We don’t have the actual numbers, 
no. We begin when the year ends to prepare the Public 
Accounts. The Public Accounts are released in early fall. So I 
mean, they may be available slightly earlier, but that’s when the 
actual number is available. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  I’m confused, Madam Minister. How then you 
can prepare a four-year plan out into the future if you cannot 
give any kind of an estimate of what the year-over-year increase 
is apt to be. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Because you’re dealing with quite 
different things. What you’re projecting in the next four years is 
the cash payments you’re going to have to make to satisfy your 
pension obligations. What you’re doing when you’re coming up 
with the 3.2 billion is you’re looking way off into the next 
century until the end of this plan to project what your 
obligations are going to have to be. 
 
So they’re quite different numbers. One is reasonably easy to 
project  what you’re going to have to pay out in cash over the 
next four years. The other is much more difficult because 
you’re projecting what you may have to pay out over the course 
of 30 or 40 years. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Is it not though useful for your department and 
for us and for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to know what the 
future total liability is going to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party, it is useful, and that’s why when the Public 
Accounts are released each and every year, we include a 
calculation of what the pension liability is going to be over the 
whole 30- or 40-year time span. But it’s not necessary to do that 
in order to put together a four-year budget plan. You need to do 
that when you actually calculate the whole summary financial 
statements of the province in what the long, long, long, long, 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

long-term future of the province looks like. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  So it’s just a surprise to you at the end of every 
year to find out what the total pension liability increase is? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I don’t think it’s a surprise, and I don’t think that 
you’re reflecting accurately what I’m saying to you if you’re 
saying that I say it’s a surprise. 
 
What I’m saying is there’s two different accounting time 
frames. One is when you put together a budget. The budgets of 
this province have to include a four-year financial plan. You 
have to say over the next four years, here is the amount of 
money we estimate we’re going to have to actually spend. 
That’s one set of documents. 
 
Another quite different set of documents are the Public 
Accounts which come out after the year has ended, and it 
includes all of the liabilities of the government. Not just the 
money they’re going to have to spend in that year, but the 
money they project any Government of Saskatchewan is going 
to have to spend over the long, long term. 
 
And they’re quite different documents. One document comes 
out in February, March of the budget year. The other document 
comes out two or three or four months after the year ends. So 
there’s no surprise. It’s just different accounting methods and 
different accounting time frames. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well let’s sort of back it up a bit then and 
provide some sort of analogy for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
as to how we can arrive at that number, because I think it’s 
rather important for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to know 
what future obligations they are going to be faced with. And I 
would think it would be useful for yourself and for your 
department to have that information available. 
 
It’s a little bit like a future obligation. I understand that. It’s a 
total amount of money that’s going to have to be paid at some 
point. And all the way along you’re making payments on that 
total amount of dollars. So you know you can make the 
calculation of essentially what the total payment is going to be 
based on projections of when people are going to retire and all 
of those kinds of things, but surely you can also make the same 
prediction of what the year over year is going to be, so at the 
end, for each fiscal year, when you report then year in review, 
that that isn’t the only time that that calculation is made? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, that’s exactly what we do. What you said is exactly 
what we do. When the year ends, we look at what our 
obligations are, not just for that short time frame, but into the 
future. What I’m saying is that you are into a different time 
frame. 
 
I can give you the number for the end of last year. And if you 
come back in two or three months when we’ve looked through 
all of the accounts, because the year end has just closed, we will 
give you the number for next year . . . for this year. 
 

But I mean it’s the same as any business. It’s like walking into a 
business the day after they’ve done inventory and said, well 
exactly how much have you got here and what are you 
projecting into the next 10 years? They have to put their books 
together. And when your budget is in the neighbourhood of $5 
billion and you work through it with the auditor, it takes a 
number of months. The members opposite should know that 
because when their counterparts were in power, it took them 
many months, often years, to put together the public accounts. 
 
So come back in two or three months and we’ll be able to give 
you exactly that number. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well, Madam Minister, but you go around this 
province and continually tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
you raised the level of accountability for the people of 
Saskatchewan and that you have set a new standard. And I’m 
just trying to establish what that standard is. You know year 
over year what the future pension liability . . . pension 
obligation, I should say, is going to be year over year, but 
you’re saying to me you do not know what the future total 
obligation is going to be. Is that clear? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. You’ve got to separate out two separate issues. In 
terms of our cash payments, we have projected not just this 
year, we’ve projected four years out, what we are going to have 
to pay out in pensions. In terms of what the unfunded liability 
of the province is, each and every year that is calculated, and it 
will be calculated this year as well. And it will be included in 
the Public Accounts and it will have the approval of the auditor. 
That is, the auditor will say that’s right, this is the unfunded 
pension liability of the province. I’m not sure that I know what 
the quibble of the member opposite is. The auditor has never 
had this quibble. He has said in terms of the summary financial 
statements of the province, we report the unfunded pension 
liability accurately and totally. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  I’m not quibbling with the auditor, I’m not 
quibbling with you, I’m simply asking you, let’s break it out, 
then. What are the cash projection payments out there for . . . 
you say you have them for the next four years, of pension 
liabilities out there. Could you provide us with the cash ones 
and we’ll separate that out. We’ll deal with that one first and 
then we’ll go to the total obligation that the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan have. Could you provide us with a breakdown of 
. . . as you say, you know and you can project what the next 
four years are going to be. Can you provide us with that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, they’re all in 
different departmental budgets so they’re not consolidated in 
one place in the budget. So you’d have to go through each and 
every department to do that. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well I wonder if you would undertake to do that 
for us, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, unless I could see some public interest in telling these  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

people to spend that amount of time digging through that 
information, I’ll have to reserve judgement on that. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well the public interest, Madam Minister, is the 
knowledge of what future pension obligations are. I think that 
should be motivation enough for a government to provide the 
taxpayers of this province with. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would do is I would refer the member to page 
63 and 64 of the Estimates of the province of Saskatchewan for 
1996-97. I think there is adequate information there about the 
pension obligations of the province. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s painfully 
obvious that you don’t want to do that. And I’m disappointed to 
find that you or your department doesn’t make those kind of 
actuarial numbers available so that people within the province 
of Saskatchewan have some understanding. You back it up to 
’94 over ’95 and it’s about 200 million, you said. 
 
I just think it’s incumbent upon the Department of Finance to 
provide numbers of what the ’95 over ’96 . . . and the four-year 
plan, within that four-year plan, so people can accurately 
estimate what, with some degree of confidence of knowledge, 
of what the future obligations in terms of total pension 
liabilities are. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, you will have, when 
the Public Accounts come out, exactly the information that you 
require. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  It’s the year in review always though, Madam 
Minister. It’s not the future. What we should be concerned 
about is the obligations that we have to make in the future. 
What has happened over the last year of course is important, but 
more importantly is, is when you go to write the cheque next 
time, what’s the number on the cheque going to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The member opposite would know that the Public 
Accounts come out, there is adequate opportunity for members 
of the legislature to discuss the Public Accounts. There’s a 
whole committee of the legislature which has not just 
government members but opposition members on it. The 
auditor is before the committee. The committee has adequate 
opportunity to go through, in any amount of detail that they 
desire, the books of the province. 
 
And I guess I would conclude by quoting from the auditor 
himself who said that in the 1980s the books of the Government 
of Saskatchewan were among the worst in Canada in terms of 
what they told the public about the finances of the province. By 
the mid 1990s the books of the Government of Saskatchewan 
were among the best in Canada. So the auditor is saying we are 
being absolutely open about what we are telling the public and 
the Public Accounts provides a process for even more detailed 
examination of exactly those numbers. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Getting back to the 
debt, the overall debt of the province of Saskatchewan and the  

progress that has been made with respect to paying down part 
of that debt and the future direction of your government and 
plans of your government, I think it might be useful if you 
could provide us with detail of the debt year over year, decrease 
or increase, starting with the 1995, ’94, ’93, back to ’91 if you 
would please, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Let me give you some benchmark 
numbers going way back. 1981-82 the debt of the province was 
3.5 billion, almost entirely Crown debt. Let me go back up here 
to 1986-87, 9.9 billion. And you go up to 1990-91, 13.3 billion. 
We go to 1991, the end of ’91, 14.3 billion. And we go up to 
1995, ‘94-95 . . . I’ve got ‘95-96  14.3 billion. And we 
project it out right out to 2000. It’s probably worthwhile 
reading all those into the record because it’s a very . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Which page are you on, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Page 35 of the budget address. 
 
Page 35 of the budget address, the debt in 1995-96 is 14.3; 
‘96-97 it goes down to 13.4; ‘97-98 it goes down to 13.3; 
‘99-2000 it goes down to 12.9; 2000 it goes down to 12.5. 
Which, if you take it as a percentage of the gross domestic 
product of the province, ’94 it was about 68 per cent of the 
gross domestic product of the province. By the end of the term 
it’ll be about 44 per cent  the most dramatic decline in debt 
of any province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Madam Minister, we always in this legislature 
hear a great deal of criticism of the past, previous 
administration, all of that sort of thing, and we hear numbers 
always bandied around of $15 billion  or 14 depending on the 
day  of debt. And using your own figures there, the debt from 
’91 back through 1982 increases about ten point . . . well, it’s in 
fact a little bit less than 10  $9.8 billion of debt. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What I would say  which is an absolutely 
unconscionable way to handle the province’s finances  in the 
1980s the benchmark is, the Conservative governments in the 
1980s added on average a billion dollars a year to the 
province’s debt  a billion dollars per year. That is each and 
every year, the Conservative administrations in the 1980s spent 
a billion dollars more than what they took in. And that’s why 
your children and my children and your grandchildren and my 
grandchildren are going to be paying off for their lives the 
Conservative debt of the 1990s. 
 
No government in Canada was as reckless in its spending as the 
Devine government of the 1980s. And I’ll tell you, if I were the 
Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, I would not be wanting to 
talk about the 1980s and finances, because it is nothing less 
than a disgraceful record. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well, Madam Minister, if you’re asking me to 
defend spending of that magnitude, I won’t do it. But if you’re 
asking me, at the same time that the previous administration 
was doing that kind of thing and spending those kinds of levels, 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

what was your party doing? What was your party advocating? 
What were you people in opposition suggesting at the time? 
What were you doing, member from Watrous, at the time? 
What was the members from P.A. (Prince Albert) doing? What 
were the members from Saskatoon doing at the same time? 
What were they suggesting that the government do at that time? 
 
I don’t recall, Madam Minister, any discussion coming from 
you people about cutting spending. I don’t recall that at all. 
What I recall, and I think what the taxpayers of this province 
recall, is spend more. That’s what you were advocating, Madam 
Minister  your party daily coming into the legislature 
suggesting spend more, spend more, spend more. 
 
That was what the suggestion that came from you people were 
and I think, Madam Minister, while the government has to take 
significant responsibility, I think you and your party bear 
responsibility in some regard too, because at the same time that 
you were sitting in the opposition benches saying spend more, 
spend more, spend more, you also are critical today of that 
exact spending that was happening. And I think, Madam 
Minister, I think you are being intellectually dishonest with the 
people of Saskatchewan to suggest anything else. 
 
And I suspect when I sit down you’re going to stand and do 
exactly that because you do not want, and your party does not 
want, to accept one iota of responsibility for the suggestions 
that you made in opposition during that time frame because you 
know, Madam Minister, that that’s what you were suggesting. 
And the member sitting there open-mouthed from Saskatoon 
knows exactly that was the case. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I was here. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  You were there; that’s right. And the public 
record is available to everyone to see. The public record is 
available for everyone to see. The Hansard is available for 
everyone that wants to get up and have a look at it in the 
knowledge of programs like the 7-7-7, 1986. Remember that 
promise? I think that was something in the magnitude of about 
a billion and a half, was it not? Something in that magnitude 
that promise was calculated at. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, I think it would be useful if you 
could provide us with any kind . . . If you’re asking me to 
provide an explanation of my party’s responsibility for 1982 
through 1991, I wonder if it would also be useful if you would 
provide an explanation of what your party was doing and saying 
at that time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You know, I must say, Mr. 
Chairman, you have to have a sense of humour to be in the 
legislature and hear the revisionist Tory history. The problem of 
the 1980s, why we have a huge debt in the province, was 
because of the opposition NDP. Now imagine that in 
parliamentary history. The problem of the 1980s was the NDP 
was a bad opposition, therefore we have a huge debt. 
 
Mr. Member, you got into it. I did not raise the issue of the 
1980s. You got into it. What we saw in the 1980s was a 
government that on average spent a billion dollars a year, each  

and every year, more than what it took in. A government that 
sold assets of this province, sold profitable corporations for a 
loss, having been advised, and these people will tell you 
advisers said, if you sell it now you’re going to lose money; this 
is the wrong time to sell. But they sold it  the Potash 
Corporation, the uranium assets. 
 
(2115) 
 
People who said to these people, the civil servants, we’re going 
to give farmers a billion dollars, and you figure out how to do it 
because we have no plan. People who kept the books of the 
province so badly that the auditor said, I can’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what their debts are because I can’t get access to 
the books. People who, when they were in government, actually 
went through a whole legislative session, ended the session, and 
didn’t even pass a budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Member, if I were you, I would stick to the idea that you’re 
the new Conservative Party and I would try to divorce myself 
entirely from what happened in the 1980s  the government 
described by The Globe and Mail as the worst government in 
Canadian history. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Well you’ll have to 
excuse me if I don’t want to accept any advice of you about 
how I conduct myself, or how our party conducts ourself now 
or into the future. 
 
If you are suggesting, Madam Minister, that the billion dollars 
that you said were just given to farmers was a waste of money, 
I’d like you to say that. I’d like you to go on public record as 
saying that those monies that were put into agriculture during 
that time frame were a waste of money, and see what the 
farmers of Saskatchewan would think of that kind of statement, 
Madam Minister, at a time when commodities were at record 
lows, when interest rates were at record highs, and they were in 
trouble without a doubt, and without question to the magnitude 
of farm bankruptcies like you had never seen in this province 
dating back to the 1930s. 
 
Stand before us today, Madam Minister, and say that those 
monies were a waste. I’d like you to stand before the people of 
Saskatchewan and provide us with that kind of explanation of 
the waste that you want talk about in terms of farm programs. 
 
Because, Madam Minister, I suspect, I suspect that the farm 
bankruptcies in this province, and probably the member from 
. . . that fellow there; I can’t think of which constituency he’s in 
any more  Tisdale, I suspect that a majority of his farmers 
would not be in business today. I don’t think they’d be in 
business today, Madam Minister. And I don’t think that very 
many farmers in this province would have survived that time 
frame. We were in an era, Madam Minister, of unprecedented 
government intervention and you and your party was there too. 
 
I’m not saying that the opposition was a bad opposition. As a 
result of that there was a billion dollars of debt racked up every 
year. I’m simply saying, Madam Minister, that while we will 
not try and divorce ourselves from the past, don’t you either try 
and divorce yourself from the past. And the kind of statements  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

that you made in this . . . your party colleagues made in this 
legislature about spending. Don’t try and divorce yourself from 
the past either, Madam Minister, or your party’s responsibility 
in terms of the statements that they were making. 
 
Every time there was any even hint of cutting back in 
government spending, you people stood and said, spend more, 
spend more, spend more. The Premier of the day, while in 
opposition, leader of the opposition, used to stand and say, 
don’t tell us there isn’t money for education because there is; 
don’t spend money in terms of any more spending in health care 
because there is more money to spend  that’s the kind of 
things that you people said at that time. 
 
And I’m astounded always when you people stand up and say, 
that at that time frame you were the only fiscal conservatives in 
all of North America. In all of North America, you people were 
the only fiscal conservatives that sat back and said no, we don’t 
want to see spending of that level. Because you know, Madam 
Minister, you know it’s not true. And I know that the people of 
Saskatchewan also understand that it isn’t true. 
 
Yes, we will take responsibility for the debt from 1991 back to 
1982. We will take that responsibility. But I would like you, for 
once, to take some responsibility and try not to divorce 
yourselves from the kinds of things that you were saying at that 
same time frame. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the record speaks for itself. You don’t have to wonder 
about what the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) stands for, you have to look 
at the record. The CCF-NDP was in power in this province 
from 1944 to 1962. What you had there was a history of 
balanced budgets and some of the most progressive social 
legislation that exists in all of Canada. 
 
When the Conservatives were in power, you don’t have to 
wonder what they did, you just look at the numbers. When they 
took over power in this province, the whole debt of the 
province was 3.5 billion, almost all Crown debt; 24 per cent of 
the GDP (gross domestic product), 24 per cent relative to the 
size of the economy. When they had finished with this province 
 and I mean finished; the province had finished with them  
1991-92, the debt of the province was $14.3 billion, 70 per cent 
the size of the economy. They’d taken the debt from 24 per cent 
of the size of the economy to 70 per cent of the size of the 
economy. That’s the record that speaks for itself. And how did 
they do it? Let’s just start filling in some of the details. 
 
They managed to sell the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
at a loss of $360 million. These people know that the 
government was explicitly advised not to sell it then because 
they were going to lose money, but they didn’t care. These are 
just experts. They didn’t listen to any experts; they knew better. 
 
They stripped the Crowns. They took dividends out of the 
Crowns that the Crowns didn’t have. But if they made a 
hundred dollars, they took a hundred and fifty out of the 
Crowns. They took over $300 million out of the Crowns, that 
didn’t exist. 

They racked up losses in the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation to the tune of over $100 million  
that’s a very conservative estimate  by business deals that are 
a disgrace to the province. They lost money in Sask Forest 
Products. And the list goes on, ending with GigaText. 
 
So, Mr. Member, if we want to talk about the Saskatchewan 
budget for 1996-97 and how this prepares the province for the 
21st century, I would be pleased to talk to you about that. And I 
think we could have a fruitful discussion about it. 
 
But if you want to talk about the 1980s, I can tell you, having 
been in this portfolio for a number of years, all I can say about 
the 1980s is the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan ruined 
many, many years for people in this province because of what 
they did to this province in the 1980s. And I think we’d all be 
better off to put it behind us and to move on. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The question that 
has to be asked is what you would have done differently, what 
your party was advocating differently at that time, what you 
were saying at that time. Was is spend less? No it wasn’t, 
Madam Minister. And I think that that can be established easily 
by the comments that you people were making at the time. And 
it continues to amaze me, Madam Minister, that you people just 
want to completely divorce yourself of anything that you said at 
the time. 
 
A government is one thing; an opposition is another thing. 
There’s no doubt about that; we recognize that. But to totally 
abdicate any responsibility for what you people were saying at 
that time, again I can only say, Madam Minister, it’s 
intellectually dishonest, and I think you and your party know 
that. 
 
To move on, Madam Minister, I think that the people of this 
province would be interested in knowing a number of things 
about the future  what your plans are, what this budget holds 
for the province of Saskatchewan, what your thoughts are in 
terms of the Crown corporations, what your plans are with the 
Crown corporations. I understand obviously you’re into a 
review of the Crown corporations now, Madam Minister. 
 
I’m wondering whether your department is developing or has 
developed, and if it’s available we would like information with 
respect to it, as to the relative value of each one of the Crown 
corporations that fall under the Crown corporation review? 
 
Have you determined, for example, what the total asset base of 
SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SGI, and a number of the 
other Crowns are so people here in Saskatchewan . . . I wonder 
what your participation, your department’s participation, in the 
Crown corporation review is going to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party, thank you very much for that question. The 
Department of Finance does not do any of that work in terms of 
evaluation of the Crowns or the Crown assets. That’s why CIC 
exists, the Crown Investments Corporation. It oversees the 
Crowns; it does that sort of work for the Crowns. And so it 
would be really a duplication of effort for the Department of  



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Finance to be doing exactly that sort of work as well. 
 
What the Crown review will look at is it will ask fundamental 
questions in terms of what the public expectations are of the 
Crowns. It will include financial analysis of the Crowns. And it 
will project the best way in which the Crowns can serve the 
people of Saskatchewan in the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you provide 
us with the dollar amount of new revenue your government has 
collected through government increases in utilities since 
January ’92 for SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, and SGI, 
what those increases have amounted to in total dollars? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party, as you would know, that money doesn’t come to 
the government. The money goes to the Crown corporations. It 
is used in the Crown corporations for any variety of purposes. 
 
And the only way that there is a relationship between the Crown 
corporations and the government is the Crown corporations pay 
a dividend to the government which is, in part, a return on the 
investment the people of Saskatchewan have in the Crowns, but 
it’s also money in lieu of taxes. The Crown corporations do not 
pay taxes. If they were private corporations, they would be 
paying taxes. They do not pay taxes. So the dividend is like a 
payment in lieu of taxes. 
 
But we do not have that information because the money doesn’t 
come to us, it goes to the individual Crowns. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  What is the total increased revenue you 
generated by the increase in the sales tax from 7 to 8 per cent, 
and then in turn from 8 to 9 per cent? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, it’s between 80 and $85 million. You have to be 
careful when you look at increases in sales tax revenue. The 
member from Thunder Creek often confuses the facts. If you’re 
getting more money from taxes, he often asked, well you’re 
increasing taxes. You’re not increasing taxes, the economy is 
growing. If the economy is doing well . . . In fact what Standard 
& Poor’s said when they upgraded the province, they talked 
about the exceptionally strong fiscal performance over the past 
two years has resulted in a significant decline in the debt, and 
they talk about booming resource revenues have been 
complemented by strong personal income taxes, sales tax 
revenue growth, etc. 
 
So when you look at . . . it’s about between 80 and 85 million 
just because of the increase in the rate; but if the revenue from 
the sales tax is increasing it’s also a good sign because it shows 
the economy is doing well, people are spending more money, 
they’re confident about the future. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. What is the 
increased revenue that has resulted from increases in fuel taxes? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The general rule is about $24 
million per point. 
 

Mr. Boyd:  With regard to the deficit surtax what revenue is 
generated on an annual basis from it? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That particular number is a 
declining number. It starts at 110 million; 1995 it declines by 
about 27 million; 1996-97 it declines by about another $55 
million because of the reduction in income taxes that was 
funnelled through the debt reduction surtax. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just while I think 
of it, we haven’t received the global questions yet. I’m 
wondering if they are prepared as of yet and if not, can you give 
us some sort of a commitment as to when they will be 
prepared? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I would hope in the very near future. 
I gather they’re essentially completed but they haven’t gone 
through the last stage of the process. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Since the 
prescription drug program deductible has been increased the 
government obviously has saved money as a result of that. Can 
you provide us with detail as to what approximately the amount 
of money you have saved as a result in the changing of the drug 
plan deductible? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the Leader of the 
Third Party, I would ask the Department of Health that. We 
don’t have that level of detail here. They can tell you that in 
more detail. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Would that also apply to the dental program, 
children’s dental program? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, yes, that would. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The Saskatchewan 
Taxpayers Association has calculated that since 1991 the 
average taxpayer in Saskatchewan, the increase in taxes that 
they are faced with, is about $4,500 per family. Madam 
Minister, can you confirm that for us here tonight? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I certainly cannot 
confirm that. I have not a high opinion of the methods used by 
the Saskatchewan Taxpayers Association. Their methods are 
not at all fair or not at all accurate. I could use a stronger word. 
 
I don’t think they’re out to actually enlighten people, because 
what they do is they just take all the revenue coming into the 
government and they divide it by the number of people. They 
don’t consider that included in that is transfers from the 
Government of Canada, royalties from potash corporations or 
oil companies, which of course are not taxes paid by the 
average person. 
 
They also don’t include in that the fact that the economy has 
grown and therefore the growth in the economy has to be 
included. So their numbers are quite unreliable, and I certainly 
would not confirm that number. 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you 
enlighten us then as to what the average taxpayer, average 
family in Saskatchewan, pays today in taxes  total. When you 
take everything into account, provide us with some sort of an 
estimate of what a family of four  two adults, two children; I 
don’t know what you’d consider average family income in 
Saskatchewan would be  but using all of the averages that 
I’m sure are available to your department, can you tell us what 
the average family would have paid in taxes in 1991, ’92, ’93, 
’94, ’95, and what you project into ’96? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I would direct the member’s attention to the budgets. 
The budgets actually include in the back, tables of taxation 
levels and charges that have to be paid by people in the 
different provinces. 
 
I would also direct the member’s attention  because the 
members have talked about taxation levels in Alberta relative to 
Saskatchewan  I would direct them to a recent article by Dale 
Eisler in which he actually outs with the real numbers in terms 
of the levels of taxation between the two provinces. He’s 
quoting the Fraser Institute, not really a friend of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Fraser Institute, and I’m quoting 
from the Leader-Post, May 25: 
 

The Fraser Institute found Albertans on average paid 
higher taxes than people in Saskatchewan. For an average 
family income of $53,678 the Fraser Institute found in 
1995 total taxes paid in Saskatchewan were $25,383. In 
Alberta, the total taxes on an average income for that 
province were $27,136. 
 

So in fact Saskatchewan’s tax rates, according to the Fraser 
Institute and Dale Eisler, are lower than Alberta’s tax rates. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Is that using the same $53,000 of an average 
family? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes. What they’ve done is they’ve 
taken . . . I’m not sure why they chose $53,678. But they’ve 
taken an average family making $53,000. They’ve taken the 
family in Alberta; they’ve taken the same family in 
Saskatchewan. They’ve added the tax bills of the two families. 
They found that the family in Alberta is paying over $27,000 a 
year in taxes; the family in Saskatchewan is paying over 
$25,000 a year in taxes  a difference of, certainly in excess of 
a thousand dollars, more in taxes a year in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  That includes everything, does it, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That includes all taxes. This is just 
including taxes. If you took into account basic utility costs, the 
cost of home heating fuel, telephones, etc., the gap would be 
wider, because you would find that, at all levels, people in 
Saskatchewan would find it cheaper to live here than in Alberta. 
But the number used by the Fraser Institute is just taxes. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  I just want you to confirm that for us. So the 
average family in Saskatchewan pays less taxes than the  

average family in Alberta. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes. And as I say, I can tell you it’s 
from the Leader-Post, May 25, 1996. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Can you table that for us? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, it’s right here. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, could you provide 
us with detail of the total revenue raised by taxation, excluding 
corporations, in the last fiscal year and a detailed breakdown by 
tax, each tax, of the revenue raised . . . projected revenue by tax 
for the last fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we don’t have that breakdown available right here, 
right now. And as I say, you would be falling into the same trap 
as the taxpayers association, because what you would say is 
what the member for Thunder Creek says. 
 
He says, well you’re getting more money from taxes; you’re 
obviously raising taxes. Whoop  the budget just came out; we 
didn’t raise taxes at all. You’re getting more money from taxes. 
And it’s one of the reasons why Standard and Poor’s gave us an 
upgrade, is because your economy is doing very well. People 
are spending more; their incomes are higher; and they’re paying 
more in taxes. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well that isn’t what I was asking, Madam 
Minister. I’m not suggesting for a moment that there’s been an 
increase in taxation. I understand that as the economy grows 
and there’s more taxpayers and there’s more revenue generated 
by individuals and companies here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, obviously there’s more tax because it goes on a 
percentage basis. So I’m not interested in that. I’m interested in 
the amount of taxation raised, excluding corporations, in the 
last fiscal year and then a breakdown of the revenue raised, tax 
by tax. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I think the best way to do what the member’s talking 
about is to look at page 74 of the budget, in which the taxes are 
clearly broken down. Corporation capital tax is paid by 
corporations. Corporation income tax is paid by corporations. 
Individual income tax is paid by individuals. Sales tax is paid 
about half and half. Tobacco tax is individuals. And fuel tax is 
the one that would be partly business, partly individual. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I just want to 
follow up and conclude for now, anyway, with some questions 
with respect to the PST, the provincial sales tax, and the whole 
issue of native taxation that we have raised in recent days and 
has been raised before by ourselves. 
 
I wonder . . . we’ve asked for, from your department, a 
projection of what the revenue . . . and I think it would be 
useful for the people of Saskatchewan to know as well, Madam 
Minister, of what the projected revenue to the province would 
be if status Indians were required to pay the PST for off-reserve 
purchases. Have you or can you provide any detail as to what  



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

that calculation would be? 
 
Now let’s separate out the issue. I know you’re going to 
probably stand up and say, yes but you have to consider what 
the consequences would be of that action, and they may back 
off taxation on reserve. I’m not interested in that debate. I’m 
interested in you providing us with a number as to what that 
revenue to the province would be. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no, we do not have 
that number. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite, and this is where the 
member opposite, I think, has to be held to account because he 
talks about, well he would force Indians to pay sales tax off 
reserve. He’s got to know full well that there isn’t a province in 
Canada  and I’ll take the two Conservative provinces on 
either side of us as examples  in which the government has 
been able to charge the sales tax off reserve without also at the 
same time exempting all purchases on reserve. 
 
And what I can say to the member opposite is, when he goes 
around and he says to taxpayers . . . and I’m going to hold him 
to account because I’m telling him right here in the House that 
he’s not telling the story that is the right story when he says the 
taxpayers are going to save money. They’re not because we’ve 
talked to our counterparts in Alberta and in Manitoba, and if 
you moved to their system, the cost to the taxpayer is about the 
same as the cost of the current system. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  So there’s no revenue gain whatsoever to the 
province of Saskatchewan if the native community was required 
to pay taxes on off-reserve purchases. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  There is no revenue gain because 
the member is not prepared to be upfront about it. In provinces 
where  and this is not something you have to wonder at, it 
exists, it’s a fact, it’s there to be demonstrated  in provinces 
where status Indians pay the sales tax off reserve, and I’m 
talking specifically about Alberta and Manitoba, where they 
would be liable if they had one in Alberta, the same provinces 
also exempt all purchases on reserve, which is not the case in 
Saskatchewan. The cost, because we have talked to our 
counterparts, to the taxpayers, is about the same. 
 
So if the member opposite is saying he would move to a 
different system and he would charge the sales tax off reserve, 
which is what he’s saying, he would have to know full well that 
he would also be exempting purchases on reserve, and the cost 
to the taxpayer would be equivalent. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well then, Madam Minister, if there’s no change, 
why the reluctance  why the reluctance? If there’s no 
difference to the native community, why would they care? Or 
why would you care, or why would any one else for that matter 
care if there’s no difference? And yet we see the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations chief stand and say that they’re 
not simply going to participate in that kind of activity. You 
stand and say that there’s no difference to the taxpayers of this 
province. Why not do it? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think what we have said is that 
there have to be choices made, there have to be trade-offs. If in 
fact . . . because what we have, we have you on one side saying, 
don’t worry, taxpayer, you can have it both ways; we’ll charge 
the sales tax off reserve . . . 
 
(2145) 
 
An Hon. Member:  I never for a moment said that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well then all right. Then you will 
get an opportunity when you’re up next, if you haven’t said that 
— the member is saying from his seat he’s never said that — 
then he will have to answer the question. Is he saying then that 
he would go to the alternative model, which is Alberta or 
Manitoba, be charged the sales tax off reserve, but then you 
would exempt all purchases on reserve. Because if in fact that is 
what he’s saying, that is the balanced approach. But it will save 
no money to the taxpayer. 
 
So you have; you, to date anyway, I’ve heard you saying don’t 
worry, we could charge the sales tax off reserve and not change 
anything on reserve, which would not be possible. 
 
On the other hand, you have the first nations leadership so far, 
saying they’re not prepared to talk about trade-offs on the other 
side. They don’t want to pay taxes either place, on or off 
reserve. To which the average taxpayer says, well if somebody 
uses the services of the province they have to be paying taxes in 
one way or another. 
 
So what we’re saying is what I think is a balanced approach. 
You can choose. Would you rather have the Alberta model? 
Would you rather have the Saskatchewan model? But you have 
to pay some taxes one way or another and it has to be fair to 
taxpayers. Taxpayers can’t find themselves paying more. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Madam Minister, we have said that we believe 
that the native communities should pay taxes on off reserve 
purchases. Pretty much end of story. That’s what we have said, 
and we are saying to you that we think the taxpayers of this 
province support us in that view. And polling indicates it — 
your own polling indicates it. I think that that is the case. The 
majority of people in Saskatchewan believe that that is the right 
thing to do and support that view, I believe, that the native 
community should be required to pay taxes on off-reserve 
purchases. 
 
Madam Minister, I understand, and it just escapes me, but I 
understand there’s one of the Indian bands in the province, and 
I’m sure your officials will be aware of or know the name of the 
band, it escapes me at the moment, one of the bands has refused 
to collect the PST on reserve. Can you provide us with any 
information as to action that your government has taken against 
that band? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I cannot talk about any individual tax file. As the 
member would know, the most confidential, amongst the most 
confidential, pieces of information the government has is what 
taxes people pay. And you wouldn’t want me going around  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

talking publicly about your taxes, and so we can’t talk about 
individual cases. 
 
What I can tell you though, is I can tell you two things. I can 
say that when it comes to the taxes that you and I pay in the 
province  we’re not people with treaty cards; we have to pay 
taxes all across the province  the province is collecting taxes 
all across the province in exactly the same way in every part of 
the province. That is, if in fact somebody on a reserve is not 
collecting taxes, they’re treated exactly the same way as the 
corner store if they were not collecting taxes. I can tell you that. 
 
I can also tell you what the process is if you’re not collecting 
taxes. We notify you; give you an opportunity to say, I’m not 
collecting taxes because I don’t have the money or whatever. 
And then if there is really a hardship case, we arrange a 
schedule of payments. 
 
But if in fact you say, I’m not collecting taxes because I don’t 
believe in collecting taxes, we will give you a series of notices, 
warning you that we will be coming after the money. And then 
we would go and get a letter, legal authority, to actually seize 
the money from a bank account. That would be the process that 
would be followed  would be followed all across the 
province whether it was you, whether it was me, or whether it 
was someone else. And as I say, I cannot talk about a specific 
case but I can tell you about the process. 
 
But I can also tell you, Mr. Member, you never answered my 
question. I said, you’ve always said you would charge the sales 
tax off reserve, but in Saskatchewan the government does not 
collect tax on reserve . . . the government does collect tax on 
reserve for status Indian purchases of cigarettes and gas. The 
status Indians are saying that they do not believe they should be 
paying this tax. If you were the Government of Saskatchewan, 
you would collect the sales tax on reserve. Would you therefore 
exempt the status Indians from paying cigarette and gas tax on 
reserve? Because that’s what occurs in the provinces of 
Manitoba and Alberta where they do collect the sales tax off 
reserve. 
 
But you have to answer the other part of the question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Madam Minister, it’s a jurisdictional question 
that you know has not been decided and would have to go 
before the courts. So we’d be prepared to take that action, to go 
before the courts. 
 
We would . . . It is my belief that they would . . . they should 
pay taxes in both areas. And regardless of what happens in 
Manitoba or regardless of what happens in Alberta, I think that 
they . . . our belief is, is that the native community, if we have 
the jurisdiction to impose it  and that’s unclear  but if we 
did have jurisdiction to impose it, I think that they should be 
required to pay taxes in both areas. The same as whether I’m in 
Regina or whether I’m in Eston, Saskatchewan, I pay taxes in 
both areas. 
 
I don’t think there should be any differences for people in 
Saskatchewan. I think that the people of Saskatchewan expect 
that everyone, regardless of their position here in this province,  

should be required to pay taxes in one area or the other. 
 
And of course I recognize that that’s likely going to be 
contentious and it’s likely going to result in a court case. But I 
think, Madam Minister, that the taxpayers of this province 
would be supportive of that view, that the taxation should be 
levied, if we have the jurisdiction — and that’s unclear, but if 
we do — in both areas. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And you would also be prepared for 
the government to take the case to court and to abide by the 
decision of the court? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well of course, Madam Minister. Of course we 
would be prepared to take it to court, and of course we would 
have to abide by the legal opinion of that day. We wouldn’t 
have any option in terms of that. But what we are saying to you 
and I think what the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are saying is, I 
think you should be prepared to take that kind of action. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again, to leave this issue — 
because we’re saying the same things to each other again and 
again — there isn’t a jurisdiction in Canada that has it both 
ways. They either charge off reserve and give exemptions on 
reserve, or they do what we do. We give some exemptions on 
reserve, but we don’t charge off reserve. 
 
So I don’t think that you can say you’ve done your homework 
and thought about it carefully and say you can have it both ways 
because in a way you’re a little bit like the position the 
federation is saying. They want it both ways too. They don’t 
want to pay anywhere, and you want them to pay everywhere. 
And I’m saying that the position that I think is the reasonable 
one is a compromise position where we follow a model which 
exists in other parts of Canada, or we follow the model that has 
existed here for many years. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well, we’ll agree to disagree then, Madam 
Minister, because I think that we would be supported by the 
majority of taxpayers in that view. And I don’t think it is a case 
of one or the other. I think you can do both. And I think the 
Government of Saskatchewan should take it to the courts to 
find out whether you can do both, Madam Minister, regardless 
you suggest that other provinces don’t do it. 
 
Saskatchewan is unique in many respects, Madam Minister. We 
do all kinds of things here that the rest of the country, and 
probably the rest of the world, don’t do. But that doesn’t mean 
that that stops us from doing the kinds of things as a 
government that governments today and of the past have done. I 
don’t think that that precludes you from looking at that as an 
option. I don’t think you should either. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well as I say, Mr. Member, I don’t 
think that you’re being forthright with the people of 
Saskatchewan because if you talk to your counterparts in those 
other two provinces, they would tell you there are very good 
reasons why they had to make the choice  one model or the 
other model. But nobody can have it both ways. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  What are the reasons then, Madam Minister?  



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

You said that there are reasons that the other provinces don’t 
impose taxes in both areas. Can you provide us with detail of 
what those reasons are? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I’m not going to talk about confidential discussions 
with other provinces. All I’m saying is that there has to be a 
fairness to the system, a fairness to the system. Either you pay 
the taxes off reserve and you get exemptions on reserve, or you 
don’t pay the taxes on reserve and you get exemptions. But as I 
say, both sides have to be fair. 
 
And I don’t think the position of the Conservative Party is a fair 
position. And I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan, when 
given some time to reflect upon it, will see your position as a 
fair one either. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or 
Deputy Chair. I guess the one question I have . . . when you 
have . . . we talk about the billions and billions of dollars that 
this province is in debt. And you look at the situation of the 
breakdown of the debt and there’s no question about it; the debt 
is there. And this debt has been racked up over a number years, 
and the Saskatchewan people have to look at this debt. 
 
In relation to the general government debt, you speak about 8.7 
million. I was a bit confused when you said in the opening 
comments, some of the questions, that we had a $14.3 billion 
debt. And you further broke it down to 8.7 billion and a $5.4 
billion Crown debt. When I added the two, the 8.7 and 5.4, I got 
$4.1 billion in debt. Was that just a simple error? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the best place to look at this is page 77 because what 
you’ll see there is it’s all broken down, because there are three 
kinds of debt, and then there’s an offset. So what you have is 
you look at 1996 forecast. 1996 is the year ending March 31, 
1996. Page 77. 
 
The forecast for 1996 is the year ending 1996. It was exactly 
what happened, not what you thought would happen. The total 
Crown corporation purposes debt was 5.4 billion; the general 
government purposes debt is 8.7 billion, for a total of 4 point 
almost 2 billion. 
 
Then you have another type of debt called guaranteed debt. 
Those are loan guarantees where the government in the 1980s 
said to companies, we’ll guarantee the debt on things like 
Saskferco, 672 million of guaranteed debt. Then you have the 
offsets, which is sinking funds. That is money that has been put 
away in sinking funds to offset that debt. The total there is 511 
million which you have to deduct to get the 14.3 result. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I guess the 
question we have is, you wish to reduce this debt to $12.5 
billion and you mentioned four years is . . . am I correct to 
assume that’s by the year 2000? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, it’s by the end. You have a 
four-year fiscal plan. It’s by the end of the four-year fiscal plan, 
1999-2000. 

Mr. Belanger:  So in essence we’re reducing the debt from 
$14.3 billion down to 12.5 billion which is approximately what, 
$1.6 billion in a matter of four years? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I would say to the member 
opposite, there is a table on page 35 which goes through exactly 
what you’re talking about, the debt and how it goes down each 
and every year. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  In terms of the . . . I’ve got a general idea as 
to what the general government debt is, and you also mentioned 
the $5.4 billion Crown debt that is existing now. And you also 
mention the fact that when you did take over, that there was 
also a $3.2 billion debt in 1982, I believe was the figure that 
you mentioned, in terms of the Crown debt when the 
Conservatives took over. Could you explain to me what that 
Crown debt is in terms of the increase of 2 billion and the 
original 3 billion in 1992? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You’re talking about different years. 
I talked about when the Conservatives took power in 1981-82 
the total debt of the province was $3.5 billion, almost all Crown 
debt. So we’re going way back to 1981, not ’91. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So my question is, at that point in 1982, the 
$3.5 billion that was the debt owed by the Crowns, what was 
that debt for? And now, 12 years later or 13 years later, it’s now 
at 5.4. So how did the Crowns accumulate this debt of $2 
billion since your department took over? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. A lot of that debt is the debt that any private 
corporation would have. If you take a power corporation, they 
would have debt, but it’s not the same kind of debt as 
government debt. 
 
The Crown corporation debt is more like a mortgage on your 
house. There’s an asset underpinning it. SaskPower may have a 
debt, but they also have huge assets in the province that they 
can . . . if they had to liquidate the debt for some reason or 
other, they could sell the assets, and the debt would be gone  
unlike government debt, where there’s no assets that you can 
sell, to speak of, to liquidate the debt. 
 
The Department of Health doesn’t have assets that they can sell 
to finance its operations. So that’s the difference, and the debt 
would be there because the corporations have expanded, and 
they built more power poles and phone lines and these sorts of 
things. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Again, I’m kind of bouncing around here. 
When you talk about page 77, the guaranteed debt, the Crown 
corporations and other, you have a $672 million guarantee, loan 
guarantee, out there. And these are obviously for some of the 
investments that were made. 
 
What portion was made by the Tory government of the ‘80s and 
what portion was made of yours? And how much longer are we 
supposed to be on the hook for some of this guaranteed debt  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

as a province? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I would say to the member 
opposite, is on page 78 of the budget, there is a list of the 
guarantees. And if you’ll look at what they are, the vast 
majority of those would have been loan guarantees taken out by 
the Conservatives. NewGrade for example, the upgrader in 
Regina was a Conservative megaproject. Saskferco was a 
Conservative project. You look at community bonds. You look 
at . . . they would have in here as well some of the other loans 
outstanding. They’re under different categories. 
 
The vast majority of these, beyond basic debt that the Crown 
corporations would have . . . even there, Manalta Coal, that’s a 
Tory obligation. Most of them go back to the ‘80s. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So am I to understand then from the schedule 
of debt, that the guaranteed debt of 672.976 . . . And you’ve got 
the total equity in sinking funds, that in actuality within the next 
couple of years, your guaranteed debt would be offset by your 
equity and sinking funds. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The numbers will offset each other 
but it doesn’t work that way. Because you take the government 
debt, you take the Crown debt, you take the guaranteed debt, 
that’s the level of debt that the government has. Sinking funds 
are not related to guaranteed debt. Sinking funds are money that 
you put aside to pay down the hard debt  that is the Crown 
debt or the government debt  not to apply against guaranteed 
debt. 
 
So the numbers may be offsetting each other but there’s no 
relationship between the sinking funds and the guaranteed debt. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Again, just bouncing around to some of the 
unfunded pension liabilities. You talk about some figures here. 
Is it safe to say that the unfunded liability is roughly 200 . . . or 
rose by $200 million in reference to some of the liability 
pensions that the government has set up for various 
professionals that have worked for government? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, Mr. Chairman, it’s not accurate 
to say that. It just happened to do that this year because of 
whatever circumstances existed this year. But no, it would not 
be accurate to say that. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So suppose we just picked the figure of $200 
million per year, and this unfunded liability, when you match 
the teachers’ contribution as government, or an MLA’s 
contribution as an MLA, and we put that in a fund in a certain 
place, my $300 and the government’s $300, for example, would 
make 600. And if I’m only putting 300 and you’re not 
contributing your 300 for, you know, the reasons you explained 
earlier, is there any interest charged on your $300 that you’re 
holding back from my pension to this whole fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what the member 
described is exactly what happens right now. The government 
. . . you take your money, you put it aside for your pension; the 
government takes an equivalent amount of money, puts it aside 
for your pension. It’s held, the money is invested, and it accrues  

interest. The interest then goes to you when you retire or when 
you leave politics. You can take that money out and put it in an 
annuity or keep it in the plan and the money then goes back  
the interest — goes to you. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  And again, dealing with some of these, 
there’s so many pension plans out there and we’re really trying 
to figure, or I’m trying to figure, how this works. But I’ve seen 
different scenarios where teachers have . . . they get involved 
with investment, some of them get involved with mortgages, 
some of them get involved with loans, and they have the 
teacher’s pension plan. I think in Ontario is one good example 
that they do have a kind of mini banking system. 
 
Do you have any role to play in that particular area within the 
province? Like does the government have any influence and 
control over this pension plan when it comes to investment or 
their own? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the investment 
strategy is set by the trustees for the pension plan. So they 
decide themselves what they’re going to do with their money. 
And pension plans are some of the biggest investors in all parts 
of the world right now. A lot of the Government of 
Saskatchewan debentures would be held by pension plans, not 
just in Canada but in other parts of the world. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So I guess in this essence what you’re saying 
today is that we have a separate public plan for teachers, and 
they have their own private pension plan for teachers, and they 
administer and invest on their own. And by the same token, on 
this other hand, we just simply continue to build a nest egg for 
the retirement of different professionals that have worked for 
government. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  They would be like other pension 
funds. They have a board of trustees that provide investment 
guidelines to their investor. So it’s run by a board of trustees 
just as any other pension plan would be. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Couple of more questions here. In terms of 
this summer when they do the CIC public consultations, Crown 
Investments Corporation, that has been a discussion that’s been 
going on for a number of years and of course there’s all kind of 
philosophical points out there. 
 
The question I have is that in the public consultation of the 
Crown Investments Corporation, you mentioned that they now 
. . . the Crowns do not pay taxes, they pay a dividend each year. 
If these Crowns were private, has there been a study to 
determine whether there is a ballpark figure as to what these 
Crowns could pay in corporate tax if they were private? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  They do not . . . what Crown 
corporations do not pay is corporate income tax. They do pay 
some taxes. They obviously pay sales tax on everything they 
purchase. They pay fuel tax. They pay corporate capital tax. 
They do not pay corporate income tax. 
 
So when you look at the dividend that the government gets from 
the Crown corporations, it’s partly return on the  



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

investment you have, but it’s also money you get because 
you’re not getting corporate income tax. If they were private 
companies, they would be paying corporate income tax. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay. If they were corporate citizens and 
they weren’t owned by the Saskatchewan taxpayer, is there a 
balance in terms of a ballpark figure as to what corporate tax 
they would pay if they were privatized? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No. We would have no idea because 
they don’t report on a tax basis. If you’re a tax-paying company, 
you keep your records according to what you’re going to have 
to pay in corporate income tax. They don’t even keep records in 
that way so it would be very difficult, without doing a lot of 
work, to figure out exactly what that would be. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So you’re saying at this point in time there’s 
no way to determine if the Crowns would pay the same amount 
in a dividend that they would in a corporate tax if they were 
privatized. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Not easily, no, because you’d have 
to . . . you’re taking a company from one environment and 
you’d be throwing it into another environment, and there’s not 
an easy way to make that calculation, no. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Just a couple of questions on the Indian 
taxation issue. And certainly consultation is the norm and 
something that we certainly have to undertake. Has there been 
any determination . . . when you speak about on the one hand 
you have taxation on the reserve and on the other hand a 
trade-off because you have taxation off reserve, has there been a 
study  when you say it’s revenue neutral  has there been a 
study done to determine what the impacts and if indeed this is a 
revenue neutral situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No. And what I’m saying to the 
member opposite  and I’m very interested in where your party 
stands, because we haven’t really gotten a position from you 
and I think the taxpayers deserve to know  is in our 
discussions with our counterparts, there’s two models. 
 
One is, you pay all the taxes off reserve but you have all 
exemptions on reserve. That’s Manitoba and that’s Alberta. 
 
There’s our model, which is you have the exemption off reserve 
but you do pay some taxes on reserve. And our estimate, 
because it’s hard to estimate, is that it’s about the same amount 
of dollars. 
 
But I mean, it’s very nice for the Liberals to say, well you 
should be consulting, but when the Indians have taken the 
position  and they’ve done it publicly  saying we don’t pay 
taxes in either place and we’re not interested in trade-offs, well 
then what is your position? Because consulting works as long 
as there’s some willingness to negotiate. When one side says 
no, I’m not paying taxes, then what exactly would the Liberals 
do? 
 
To say it’s complex, to say you’d talk to people, isn’t really a 
position. And I think the taxpayers deserve more from you. The 

Conservatives have taken a position; I don’t agree with it but 
there it is. We’ve taken a position — it has to be one model or it 
has to be the other. They can choose. 
 
What exactly is the Liberal position? 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well, Madam Minister, I could be here all 
night, but I sincerely want to thank you for your time. And I’ll 
have further questions later. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Madam Minister. 
You’ve recently shown off the laurels of the people of this 
province earning . . . in what they’ve earned in the way of a 
credit upgrade. And we also publicly acknowledge that we 
welcomed the Standard and Poor’s announcement. And I will 
reiterate again that I think the public deserves most of the 
credit. 
 
That being said, while the agency and others released their 
reports, they are still realistic in their outlooks and not just 
bouquets for government. I notice that some have suggested our 
debt is still too high, our economic growth still too modest, and 
our economy is still too dependent upon the primary resource 
sector. While some encouraging things have been said, 
problems obviously still remain. 
 
And with that in mind, I would like the minister to tell us where 
she believes the problems are, and could she outline what she 
intends to do to address these problems with other departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the people of Saskatchewan obviously deserve the 
credit for supporting the government. But I think the 
government also deserves credit for providing the leadership 
because I’m not going to blame the people of Saskatchewan for 
what happened under the Conservatives. They provided the 
leadership. The people did not support them. 
 
But I cannot allow the member to leave on the record what he 
just said. So unfortunately I’m going to have to read the whole 
Standard and Poor’s upgrade announcement because they did 
not have the caveats that the member opposite suggests. One of 
the two most influential rating agencies in the whole world just 
commented on our fiscal performance; they do not have those 
caveats. So I’m going to read into the record what was said: 
 

Standard & Poor’s has assigned its A . . . (negative) 
short-term rating to the province’s promissory notes. 
 
The recent impressive performance of the economy, which 
is still largely resource-based, but continues to diversify; 
 
Strong fiscal results over the past three years, and the 
government’s commitment to maintain fiscal balance even 
in the event of weaker-than-expected revenue growth. 

 
Which they’re saying we are committed to balancing the budget 
even when we have cuts from the federal government. 
 
(2215) 
 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

Exceptionally strong fiscal performance over the past two 
years has resulted in a significant decline in 
Saskatchewan’s sizeable debt burden. Booming resource 
revenues have been complemented by strong personal 
income, corporations, and sales tax revenue growth. 
Spending restraint measures have been applied to all 
sectors since 1992, with total revenue growth above 
expenditure growth in each year. 

 
And I could go on. But what I want to clarify is that beyond 
saying that the Government of Saskatchewan has a significant 
debt, they don’t have qualifications here. 
 
They said, in terms of the economy  the economy’s strong, 
it’s diversifying. They said, in terms of the debt  the 
tax-supported debt is declining and declining dramatically. In 
terms of spending  the government has restrained its 
spending and is committed to balancing the budget. 
 
And to top it off, the investment dealers of Canada were here 
today. They’ve said exactly the same thing in their 
announcements today. 
 
So I know the members opposite always try to look for the 
problem areas but they say, in light of the situation of the 
province, the economy is doing well, it is diversifying. The 
fiscal situation is doing well. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I’m also looking at the 
Standard and Poor’s news release here, and with respect to the 
province’s long-term debt, they do say that the tax-supported 
debt burden which remains high; so they do make reference to 
that very fact in their release. 
 
So I don’t think that it’s not correct that I come before you here 
this evening, and before your officials, and just ask again what 
sort of plans are you undertaking with your department, as I’ve 
said previously, to address any problems that may be 
encountered in the provincial economy? What do you intend . . . 
can you give us an outline as far as what do you intend to do 
with respect to the other departments and what sort of 
contingencies they may have. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, that’s what the whole budget is about. That’s what the 
whole four-year financial plan is about. So all I can say to the 
member opposite is, look through the budget. That’s where it’s 
all outlined to him. 
 
And, you know, to say just after a budget is released, what do 
you plan to do  there’s what we plan to do. That’s what the 
budget is about. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, also with respect to the 
very trip you made to New York to speak with some of these 
credit rating agencies, I do recall now on several occasions I’ve 
asked you for the costs related to that trip. I believe the last time 
I had asked for those your reply was something to the effect that 
you hadn’t been able to convert from U.S. (United States) 
dollars, your bills related to the trip. 
 

So I’m curious to know if by this evening yourself or your 
ministerial assistants or some of your staff who are here tonight, 
if they may have been able to do that. And could you present to 
us this evening the total cost for your trip, which obviously did 
pay some benefits and we’ll acknowledge that on behalf of the 
people of the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, please don’t get into the habit of the member from 
Wood River again in twisting. I did not say that we’ve been 
taking this amount of time to convert from American to 
Canadian dollars. I said it’s very complicated. There’s a number 
of bills to get in, and one of the things that has to occur is the 
conversion. We do not have the final numbers. They will be 
available. Certainly they will be there in the Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  So, Madam Minister, I guess what you’re 
saying is, some of the costs related to your trip have now 
formed a portion of what is our foreign debt. 
 
Madam Minister, I’ll ask you another question with respect to 
that and I hope that maybe some of your officials can help you. 
At the end of this last year, what amount of the provincial debt 
was held in foreign currencies, and could you tell us what 
percentage of the debt you expect to be held in foreign currency 
at the close of this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, if he believes that expenses for business trips are part 
of the government’s debts, I really would encourage him to read 
the budget again to understand some of the basic concepts. The 
answer that he’s . . . the question that he’s asking is answered 
on page 58. There’s a picture there of the government’s debt 
and it’s broken down into the pies exactly as he’s asking. And it 
says, U.S. dollars, 17 per cent. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, can you please provide to 
the House this evening in terms of, if you were comparing that 
to other provinces, where are we in that regard? Are we high in 
terms of foreign debt, sitting at 17 per cent of our debt in U.S. 
dollars, or just . . . can you qualify it in that regard; provide us 
that comparison. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We would be very low. We don’t 
have the information from other provinces. They have to 
provide that themselves. We would be very low. 
 
Saskatchewan tends to borrow money in Canadian dollars, and 
we tend to borrow money on a long-term basis  20, 30 years, 
at least 10 years. And it’s very important that we do that 
because it means that when there is uncertainty, as before the 
referendum, the dollar goes down, interest rates go up. There 
are provinces in Canada  and this is common knowledge, so 
I’m not giving out confidential information  like Nova Scotia, 
which are in very serious trouble because they have so much of 
their debt in American dollars. When the Canadian dollar goes 
down, they’re in serious trouble. Their costs are going up 
dramatically. 
 
So we would be very much on the low end of that. And we’re 
on the low end on purpose because we don’t want to take risks  



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

with taxpayers’ dollars  that if the dollar goes down we will 
be in trouble. Or if interest rates go up dramatically in the short 
term we will be in trouble. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, you made reference to 17 
per cent of our foreign debt being held in U.S. dollars. Can you 
also outline for us this evening, is any of our foreign debt held 
in any other currencies? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No. Again, Mr. Chairman. I would 
really direct the member opposite to the pie chart on page 58 
because it states very clearly the question that you keep asking. 
What it says there is of all the debt of the province, 83 per cent 
is in Canadian dollars, 17 per cent is in U.S. dollars, and that’s 
the only foreign currency exposure we have. 
 
So the pie chart I think is quite clear  83 per cent is Canadian; 
17 per cent is American. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I’d also encourage your 
officials to do some research with respect to 17 per cent of 
foreign debt being the low end compared to some of the other 
provinces, because I don’t believe that is necessarily the case. 
 
Could you also provide a figure for us as far as how much of a 
loss or gain that you expect with respect to foreign currency 
exchange over the coming fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We have assumed no change in the 
foreign exchange rate. I would take the member up though on 
his comment. You should look at other governments. You 
should look at the Government of Canada, what percentage of 
their debt is in foreign currency. You should look at the 
Government of Manitoba. You should look at the Government 
of Nova Scotia. There’s three good ones to start with. You 
would definitely find Saskatchewan is on the low end because 
we don’t want to do any more . . . we don’t want to risk foreign 
exposure on debt. 
 
But I would challenge the member opposite on that statement. 
You look at the debt of Canada and you find out how much of 
it is in foreign dollars and you’ll find it’s substantially more 
than 17 per cent. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I would 
acknowledge that is correct, that there is a higher percentage of 
our national debt that’s in foreign currency. 
 
Now just from what response you’ve given us just now, you’ve 
mentioned two or three, perhaps, other provinces who perhaps 
carry a higher percentage of debt in foreign currency than 
ourselves, which would suggest to me that you have in fact in 
front of you the information I asked for in a question earlier. 
 
So would you mind just continuing to read into the record 
where does our province rate in that regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I have nothing in 
front of me except the budget of the province of Saskatchewan. 
I know what I said because of public commentary. It’s a matter 
that’s in the press  it’s been in the press that Manitoba, Nova 

Scotia, the Government of Canada . . . Here’s what I have  
the budget. And if the member opposite would look at the pie 
charts, he would not have to keep asking me the same question 
that I answer again and again. So there’s no document here 
beyond this. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Madam Minister, the fact that we have 
to ask questions again and again, what that comes down to is 
the fact that we get very few responses from yourself. And also 
that relates to the global questions that we’ve asked. Now 
we’ve asked for those previously. My colleague from Wood 
River has requested those. At that time we were told that we 
would have them soon. 
 
We’ve not seen them yet this evening, despite our request. I 
think the third party has made a request for some global 
questions to be answered. I do believe that your constant 
shirking of answering our questions is something that is notable 
for the record. And I would just like you to undertake for us this 
evening, to tell us  do you have any of the answers to any of 
the global questions that we’ve placed to you? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, we don’t. And I tell the member 
opposite, we’re not shirking the questions. The problem is the 
members . . . and there’s no problem. If you didn’t read the 
budget, it’s fine. But the questions that you’re asking are in the 
budget. 
 
So when you ask me a question, I refer you to page 58 in the 
budget. You say 17 per cent of the Canadian debt . . . 
Saskatchewan’s debt is in U.S. dollars. Then you come back 
and you say, well then how much is in other foreign currency? 
And I say well, if you look at the pie chart, you’ll realize that 
it’s 83 per cent Canadian. 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. I simply want to ask the Minister 
of Finance not to hold up an exhibit. I know that from your 
reaction, the minister can . . . understands the rule of the 
Legislative Assembly. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  So the information is available in 
the budget. And all that I do is refer you to the page and give 
you the answer. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, the minister can hold up that pie 
chart all she wants all night long. I don’t think there was a 
single answer to any of our global questions in that pie chart. 
 
So what I would maintain again is, do you have any of the 
answers to any of the questions that we posed? And could you 
at least table some portion of the answers to the questions that 
we placed to your department? I think we’ve been more, more 
than patient with you in this respect, just as I’ve been more than 
patient with you as it relates to the costs for your trip to New 
York. 
 
This is the fourth request I’ve made for those. I don’t think that 
it’s too much to ask on behalf of the people of this province, to 
get a few answers out of you and your department. Would you 
please make some attempt to make some answers to us here this 
evening? 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, this government is 
absolutely open with information. We do it as a courtesy to the 
opposition to actually answer in a pre-arranged way, certain 
questions. But there hasn’t been a question that you have asked 
that you are not going to get an answer to. You will find out the 
government puts in the Public Accounts, each and every year, 
every minister’s travel. So the information will be made 
available to you. It’s a matter of timing. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, you did not answer the 
question that I just posed to you moments ago, and that is: will 
you table the answers to whatever questions that you have been 
able to prepare answers for, with respect to the global questions 
that were placed before your department some time ago now? 
 
I think on behalf of the people of this province it’s the very 
least that you could do, to at least make some attempt to answer 
some of those questions. And you cannot shirk your 
responsibilities in this regard any longer. We need to have a 
least some indication that you’re acting in good faith, that you 
are making some reasonable attempt to answer some of these 
questions that we’ve put to you, and I think that we should be 
able to at least see some of these questions’ answers tabled to 
us this evening. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the House Leader says that whatever package you 
have sent across will be available to you Friday. As I say, this is 
a courtesy to the opposition, where we take the information that 
you request, we do the best we can to put it down in writing. 
But we also go through a process here in which we answer your 
questions. So I think it is not accurate and it is not fair to say 
that you don’t get answers to your questions. You do get 
answers to your questions. The House Leader says you’ll get 
whatever else you’ve asked for in writing by Friday. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I do believe that you are 
familiar with the procedure of answering global questions. This 
is something that your department has had to undertake for 
several years, I understand, prior to this year. And I don’t think 
that it’s unreasonable, as I said previously, to expect a certain 
number of the answers to have already been tabled. We have 
the undertaking now of your House Leader to provide these 
answers to us by this Friday. Why couldn’t you, as Minister of 
the Department of Finance, tell us that we’d have those 
questions by this Friday? Are you not in control of your own 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, personal comments of that sort really don’t work in 
politics in Saskatchewan. You would know very well, as the 
House Leader is now telling me, that you requested this 
information at a very late date, which is fine. And the House 
Leader has assured you you’re going to get that information. 
 
But I will say again, this is a courtesy that the government 
provides whereby we say we will answer these written 
questions. So I mean I don’t understand why the personal 
insults are required. You requested information. You requested 
it late. The information will be coming as soon as the 
departments can get it together. 

But you are also, every time you put in these detailed requests 
for information, are taking tax dollars and asking these people 
to compile information. They also have other jobs to do, and it 
takes a certain amount of time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, as a courtesy to your 
department, our House Leader sent a letter of communication to 
your House Leader some two months ago requesting those very 
global questions that we’re now asking for answers for. And 
out of courtesy to the taxpayers of this province, you could have 
at least tabled some of the answers here this evening, so we 
certainly will be looking forward to you and your officials 
coming back. And if it’s this Friday, so be it. And we do expect 
that the answers for those global questions will all be available 
at that time, as per the commitment of the Government House 
Leader in this regard. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the people of Saskatchewan who are watching this 
have to consider that we’re talking about a $4.5 billion budget, 
and what you’re focusing on is what time you ask for 
information and what time you got information. That is also on 
the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just so it’s on the record, I would 
perhaps suggest to the opposition, first of all let me say with 
respect to the globals, we got the thing finalized in April, to be 
fair to all concerned. And since that point in time they have 
been working on them. They’re a lot of work. I think some 
departments have been perhaps slacking off, but I think most of 
the departments have been working reasonably hard. Certainly 
my Department of Intergovernmental Affairs was, and they just 
got them completed. 
 
Most of them, I understand — I spoke to the staff about this at 
5 — they’ve got them, they’re now compiling them, and I’m 
told with some degree of certainly we can guarantee you’ll get 
these things on Friday. 
 
I would therefore suggest to the opposition that we do the same 
thing as we did with respect to the Justice estimates last week. 
Finish up your questions. In view of the day and the session  
this is day 61  in view of that, finish up tonight and we’ll stop 
the clock. Finish up all of your questions except with respect to 
the globals. We will undertake that we will bring back these 
questions for any questions that might arise out of the globals, 
but when they return, we would have a gentlemen’s agreement 
that the only questions that would be asked would be questions 
which arise legitimately out of the global questions. 
 
So that’s my suggestion to the opposition  we do here what 
we did with Justice, but finish up all the other questions you 
have. Because quite frankly, it’s my view it’s most unlikely 
there’ll be any questions arising out of the globals. But I could 
be wrong. 
 
So why don’t we do that. Why don’t we treat this as we did 
with Justice? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. In response to the 
Government House Leader’s request, you’ve put me in a  



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

terrible position as I’ve already . . . and I’ll also be on record 
here as making a commitment to the third party this evening 
that in fact it wouldn’t be voted off because they too are waiting 
for the globals, keeping in mind that the globals are something 
that have been . . . I think this is the third or the fourth year that 
the globals have been a consistent package. Really I think they 
should be here in April. 
 
But we would like to aid in all ways that we can in moving this 
along. So not to do what they’ve done in Justice because you 
put me in a bad spot in making a commitment and I won’t break 
my word with the third party. But in fact as when the global 
answers come back, in aiding along this legislative process, 
what we’ll do is take a look at the global answers, and in fact if 
we feel that everything’s been thoroughly covered, then we too 
would just as soon not have the officials back, and we’ll really 
speed this process up. 
 
But you’ve really caught us in a bad spot this evening, so I 
guess given the lateness of the hour and the fact that we’re 
already sort of handcuffed on this issue, we’ll just have to come 
back with those globals. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:38 p.m. 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Finance  Vote 18  

Aldridge .......................................................................................................................................................1995, 2003, 2005, 2020 
Shillington .......................................................................................................................................................................1995, 2023 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1996 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2000 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................2005 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2018 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2024 

 


