
























































June 25, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3121 
 June 25, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Before orders of the day, I wish to 
table a report by the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
pursuant to The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act and The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
And also I table a report by the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner pursuant to The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Act. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Perhaps with leave, I will move that 
we proceed to government orders. So I’ll ask for leave for a 
motion to proceed to government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, 
to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my immediate 
left is Diana Neill, who is legislation officer with the policy and 
planning branch of the Department of Health; and to her left is 
Rick Hischebett, who is a lawyer with the Department of 
Justice, who’s the legal adviser to the Department of Health; 
and immediately behind me is Steve Petz who is the associate 
deputy minister of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
Welcome to your officials again this morning. Some questions 
. . . a number of questions arise out of this Bill, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I think before we get into it, we have a number of 
amendments that we will be proposing as we go through it, and 
I think I’ll just go through those very quickly before we start, 
Mr. Minister, and alert you to those and then they can be 
distributed. 
 
The first amendment . . . I’ll be moving these amendments 
actually as we go through the Bill clause by clause. And the 
first amendment, Mr. Minister, will be to clause 8 and I’ll just 

read it quickly for your information. It will: 
 

Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill by deleting from 
subsection 19(3.3) being enacted all the words that follow 
the words “Court of Queen’s Bench” and replacing them 
with the words “a statement of claim claiming the amount 
set out in the statement or any portion of that amount that 
is outstanding, plus interest calculated in accordance with 
subsection (3.2).” 
 

The second amendment will be in clause 10: 
 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 
after subsection 26.1(2) the following: 
 
“26.1(2.1) An agreement required by subsection (1) may 
not require an affiliate to provide services the provision of 
which would violate the ethical or religious tenets of the 
affiliate.” 
 

Keeping in clause 10, we’ll: 
 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill 
 
(a) by adding to subsection 26.1(3) being enacted after the 
words “The district health board for the health district in 
which an affiliate provides service” the words “or the 
affiliate”; and 
 
(b) by deleting in subsection 26.1(5) being enacted the 
words “and the district health board has not requested the 
minister to appoint a mediator pursuant to subsection (3)” 
and replacing them with the words “and no request has 
been made under subsection (3) for the appointment of a 
mediator”. 
 

And of course lastly, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Clause 22 of the printed Bill 
 
Amend subsection (1) of clause 22 by deleting the words 
“on proclamation” and substituting the words “upon 
consideration and acceptance by the Committee of the 
Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 
regulations proposed pursuant to clauses 40(1)(b.1), (c), 
(c.1) and (d), subclause 40(1)(h)(x.1), and clauses 
40(1)(j.1), (k), (m.1), (p.1), (p.2), (q.1), (q.2), (q.3), (q.4), 
(q.5), (s), (s.1) and (s.2).”. 
 

Mr. Minister, the last amendment was regarding the regulations 
of course and that’s where we’ll start this morning right off the 
bat, where affiliate is described to some extent on the first page 
of the Bill. It talks about, an affiliate means a person prescribed 
as an affiliate. Prescribed, I guess, Mr. Minister, means in 
regulations. 
 
Do you have the regulations already in place? Is affiliate already 
prescribed? Can you table that today or can you tell us what an 
affiliate will be prescribed as? 
 



3122 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I do not have the regulation in place. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, are there any regulations in 
place for this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, there cannot be any regulations until 
the Bill is passed and given Royal Assent and proclaimed. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think regulations can be 
in place before the Bill is proclaimed. And I think it is an 
opportunity for us as elected officials in this Assembly to have 
a look and see what is going to be prescribed in the regulations. 
And I think, given the length that has taken . . . or given the 
amount of time that the health reform has been in place, and the 
districtification process, that you and your department have had 
ample time to talk to the people and see what needs to be in the 
regulations. 
 
So I don’t agree that they can’t be in place. And I’m just 
wondering why you’re not willing to have some regulations in 
place so that we can look at them and debate them and come up 
with a reasonable and suitable list of regulations, and 
particularly for this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’m not trying to be difficult. But the 
fact of the matter is regulations cannot be in place, as the 
member says, until the legislation is passed, which enables the 
government to come up with the regulations. 
 
What the member obviously is saying is, do we have a draft of 
the regulations. And the answer is no, we don’t have a draft. 
But I would say to the member that although I agree with the 
member that it is sometimes useful and helpful to have a draft 
of regulations, regulations can be changed at any time by the 
cabinet of the day in any event. They’re not written in stone. 
 
But if it will save the member any time, I will freely say to the 
member that it is contemplated that affiliates that are presently 
receiving money from district health boards will be prescribed 
as affiliates pursuant to this legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, keeping with the regulations 
just for a second, there is another term where you talked about a 
northern municipality within the meaning of The Northern 
Municipalities Act. Can you explain what a northern 
municipality is and how is it described in that Act? 
 
(1015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  A northern municipality is a unit of local 
government in northern Saskatchewan, the area of 
Saskatchewan covered by The Northern Municipalities Act, and 
as I know the member will know, this Act deals with several 
different sorts of deficiencies or changes needed to The Health 
Districts Act. 
 
This provision relates really to an oversight in the original 
legislation which in this clause that it is amending refers to 
municipalities, hamlets, villages, but by oversight did not refer 
to municipalities within the meaning of The Northern 
Municipalities Act. So this amendment is simply intended to  

correct that oversight. 
 
And some of the amendments in this Bill are really of a 
housekeeping nature, and that happens to be one of them. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Just for my own information, for the purposes 
of this Act and for The Northern Municipalities Act, I guess, 
where is that line where the northern municipalities start? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m looking at The Northern Municipalities 
Act and I don’t see a description here of where the line is. But 
if it would be of assistance, I think the line is the bottom 
boundary of the Athabasca and the Cumberland constituencies. 
I think the member is familiar with those. 
 
That happens to be the same line, but I just don’t know what 
line of latitude that happens to be. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. This Bill addresses 
some issues as it relates to the district health boards and 
certainly through the process of the health reform, the district 
boards and how they’ve been structured have been a major 
concern of a lot of people throughout the province, and are 
certainly continuing to be focal points for much criticism, 
whether it be for the cuts that they’re now having to entertain 
because of a lack of funding by the provincial government, or 
whether it’s for some other reason. 
 
When district health boards were originally set up, as you know, 
we had fully appointed boards by the provincial government, by 
the minister of Health. And now you’ve gone to a system of 
partially elected and appointed boards as well, which still is a 
bone of contention in a lot of people’s minds as to why we 
don’t have a complete elected board, or appointed, as opposed 
to the mixture. 
 
In this Bill you address some concerns related to that, I think. 
And one of them would be, a further number of people have to 
nominate a board member. What do you think having 10 people 
recommend someone would do as opposed to having 5 or 35? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The move to 10 would make the 
appointment’s nomination process similar to the election 
nomination process, and it was thought that there should be 
consistency as between the two. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Do you believe that there’s any value into 
having those 10 people nominate, as the appointment will be 
made by yourself as minister, regardless? This would involve, I 
guess, some more bureaucracy, some more red tape. Do you 
think that there is an advantage for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, there’s a great deal of value. I can 
think back to the appointment process last fall, and in some 
cases, for example, persons were nominated by seniors’ 
organizations or perhaps mental health organizations, or other 
organizations that have credibility in the community and that 
are of assistance to the minister in making these choices, so that 
a diverse range of interests, of views and groups, can be 
represented on the health boards, which is part of the intent 
behind having some of the people appointed. 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3123 

Mr. McLane:  What discussions have taken place, Mr. 
Minister, in the department, regarding the moving towards a 
completely elected board? Do you have a time frame that you’re 
looking at for that, and when can we expect to see that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We do not have a time frame for that. At 
the present time it is not contemplated. 
 
I would point out to the member that as a result of the reforms 
in The Health Districts Act there is more democracy than ever 
before in the health care system. Prior to 1993 we never, ever 
had in the province of Saskatchewan, any elected health boards. 
Today, two-thirds of health board members are elected; 
one-third are appointed, except in Saskatoon and Regina where 
slightly more than one-third are appointed. 
 
The theory behind the appointments is that health board 
members have a dual accountability. They’re accountable to the 
people of their health district and they’re accountable to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, which foot the bill. Therefore it is 
appropriate to have both elected and appointed members. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I think we could spend a considerable amount 
of time, Mr. Minister, debating that very point, as to whether we 
should have fully elected boards. And indeed even the elected 
boards, the decision of the successfulness of those boards is 
still up in the air. Many people advocated through the health 
reform process that those district boards should be a nominated 
board by the people within the district, whether it be the 
municipalities, which is similar to an older system that we had. 
 
So I think the school is still out on whether or not this particular 
venture is going to be a success story. 
 
Of course we see today that the Government of British 
Columbia have certainly come to their senses, with some 
opposition to what they’ve been trying to do in that province 
and have realized that they staked a great many people’s lives 
and the health care of their province on a reform process which 
they weren’t sure where it was going to end up and have now 
sat back and taken another look at where they’re headed in their 
whole health reform in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I do recall that many times your predecessor and certainly 
members of the department have talked about British Columbia, 
and I’ve heard British Columbia politicians talk about the 
Saskatchewan model and that they were following it. Now the 
B.C. (British Columbia) folks are rethinking that and looking 
back. 
 
So I think that the school is still out on many of these issues and 
health reform in particular  the elections of district boards as 
opposed to appointed or as opposed to some mixes we have 
now. 
 
In this Act as well you address the issues of municipalities and 
where they have had health agencies possibly closed down. And 
I think it looks like to me, Mr. Minister, that you’re trying to 
prevent a municipality from having any recourse, to continue  

to delete their funding for a health agency that’s closed, that 
there are still debentures or monies owing on. I’m wondering 
what prompted you to insert this clause in this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Could the member identify by number the 
clause that the member is referring to? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Section 19. Clause 8 of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Prior to The Health Districts Act, as the 
member knows, hospitals were operated mainly as union 
hospitals and by union hospital boards. And those boards were 
made up of members of the surrounding municipalities. They 
had the power to give long-term debentures and required the 
municipalities to levy taxes among their ratepayers to retire the 
debenture indebtedness. Then the union hospital boards were 
amalgamated with the district health boards, as the member 
knows, when The Health Districts Act came in, except those 
that were dissolved. 
 
The liabilities of union hospital boards would include debenture 
indebtedness. The district health boards have no taxation power 
and therefore no way themselves to pay off the indebtedness, 
but nevertheless the indebtedness has to be paid off because it’s 
a liability that existed at the time the district health Act came in. 
 
So section 19 was included in the district health Act when it 
first was passed by the legislature so that the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board became responsible to pay the outstanding 
debenture indebtedness of the union hospital board. It then has 
to apportion that debt amongst those municipalities which were 
part of the union hospital district. So the municipalities receive 
a statement of the amount which they must meet to cover the 
indebtedness there, to raise that amount as part of their normal 
municipal levy, and once collected, pay it to the Municipal 
Board. 
 
The situation may arise that a municipality does not levy and 
collect the assessment set by the Municipal Board. This 
amendment will enable the board to file a copy of the 
assessment along with an affidavit deposing to the date of 
delivery of the assessment and that no payment was received by 
the board. The process provides a simple and effective method 
of obtaining a judgement against defaulting municipalities 
which can be enforced through the normal court mechanisms. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Part of my question, Mr. Minister, was, was 
there some problems within some of the health districts? Are 
there some agencies out there, some municipalities, that have 
lost their health facility and are now not wanting to come 
through with the payments, as whether it was through a loan or 
through debentures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, there have been some problems in 
terms of municipalities not levying the amount and not paying 
the amount. And it is a debt due and it has to be paid. 
 
It’s a similar problem, I think, to a problem that has existed 
with respect to some municipalities not paying over the portion 
due to school boards. And I think recently amendments were  



3124 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

made to facilitate the process of school boards enforcing against 
municipalities an obligation to pay. This is a debt due, and we 
do not apologize for the fact that a debt due must be paid. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I would hope, Mr. Minister, that you could 
understand the frustrations that many communities went 
through when the . . . certainly when they lost their health 
agency or their health facility. And certainly, I guess, a normal 
reaction would be to say, well why would we want to continue 
to pay for something that we don’t have any more. 
 
Can you tell us approximately how many of these problem areas 
we have in the province, and table a list of who they are? 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that there were two or three for 
sure. So it is not a terribly large number. But we do not have a 
list of who the small number of municipalities are. I would 
certainly be willing to obtain that information and send it to the 
member, and I’ll undertake to do so. But I don’t have the 
names. It isn’t a large number. 
 
And of course the health district assumes the liability of the 
union hospital board. Debentures have been issued in the past 
to provide health services in the municipalities. These are debts 
due that were contracted and arose in good faith. And like all 
reasonable and honourable people, these debts due must be 
paid. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, Mr. Minister, I would appreciate those 
municipalities that are contemplating some action. 
 
If you go back, and I realize that you maybe weren’t as involved 
in health reform as some people were that . . . Those 
discussions took place way back when these communities were 
indeed afraid that they were going to lose their health agency  
health agencies that of course were built with a lot of hard work 
and the best intentions in mind when they were erected, and the 
people in the communities did so in good faith. 
 
It seemed to me that maybe the government was a little remiss 
in their obligation to go and talk to these communities at that 
time and discuss this very problem with them. I don’t think 
anyone would have not thought  including yourself, Mr. 
Minister, if you would have been involved at that time  that 
one of the reactions to losing your health agency would be to 
say well, as I said earlier, if we don’t have it any more and we 
still owe money, why would we want to continue paying for it? 
 
And so I would have thought that the minister of the day, 
through the department, would have tried to rectify the situation 
before it’s got to the point where we are now, into a legal battle 
of some sort. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I appreciate what the member is 
saying. Of course times change, medical procedures change, 
technology changes, the choice people make in terms of where 
they wish to have surgery performed changes. People have done 
a lot of good work over the years as volunteers and workers in 
the health care system to build a health care system that is  

appropriate to the day. 
 
Sometimes what is appropriate in one decade is not appropriate 
in another decade and it is found that services can be delivered 
in better ways that people themselves choose. These are not 
imposed by government. And so society changes and it’s 
difficult for people to adapt to change, some people. There are 
other people that embrace change. But we live in a time of 
change. 
 
But I want to say to the member that if a liability was incurred 
by a municipality, that liability is a debt due and it must be paid, 
in the same way that if a community group trust fund acquired 
assets, that was also money that had to stay in the community so 
that it could do what it wanted with the money. 
 
And there’s really a trade-off here — that the local communities 
would keep the assets that they had acquired, if that was their 
desire, but they would also be responsible for any liabilities that 
had been incurred. This is simply a matter of ensuring that just 
as the assets are kept by local people, if that is their wish, the 
liabilities must be met. That’s an unfortunate fact of life that we 
all have to contend with every day. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. I agree with you that 
different people view change in different ways. And certainly 
one of the ways in order to get people to go along with change, 
provided it is for the right reason and heading in the right 
direction, is to communicate with them and get them onside. 
 
However, through this whole health reform process, the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government has done a very poor job 
of communicating with the people of the province and have not 
got them onside in any way, shape or form through this health 
wellness model fiasco that we’ve gone through over the last 
four years. 
 
If people were convinced . . . and people were at the time 
convinced that change needed to be made, and we all 
recognized that we had to do things differently in health care. 
And many people were of that view and wanted to see things 
change and things work. But they also wanted to be a legitimate 
part of the process. 
 
And what actually happened, Mr. Minister, was that people 
were segregated out, whether it was through communities or 
whether it was through the health associations or whether it was 
through the different sectors in health, in order that you get 
everybody kind of competing against each other in order to get 
things done. 
 
Now one of the problems that you have is that people are still of 
that view. And the unfortunate part is that people weren’t led to 
believe that they were part of the process. They didn’t feel that. 
The voluntary spirit out in Saskatchewan, as you know, is an 
immense part of the way we do things in Saskatchewan. And 
when people are not feeling that they are indeed a wanted part 
of the process, then that spirit kind of disappears and you lose 
that. And that’s what’s happened through this whole situation 
and through this whole process. 
 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3125 

And it’s not unlike what has happened with these municipalities 
that have lost their health agencies. Losing them is one thing; 
the second one is how you deal with it. And certainly this is part 
of the problem that you have now in addressing this in this Bill 
through this section where you actually force them into paying 
and leave them little recourse to not do that. 
 
However as I said earlier, if you’d have went back to the times 
when they were closing and explained and negotiated with these 
people in good faith, you certainly probably wouldn’t have this 
problem at this time. 
 
I’m wondering, you mentioned that there is very few people 
that are . . . or municipalities that are having a problem with this 
and are possibly taking some action. Given the announcement 
of more closures and more to come yet, do you think that this 
will be an ever-increasing problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No I don’t. I think most people in 
Saskatchewan are honest and honourable people who pay their 
bills. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, Mr. Minister, you’re absolutely right; 
most people are honourable and honest and will pay their bills. 
However it’s tough for them when they’re losing something so 
close to them as their health services, whether it’s an agency or 
a facility, to not take this type of attitude. And given the 
financial times that we have out there, and it’s not surprising 
that a municipality, of course, is struggling to meet its 
obligations in every way, shape or form. Whether it’s in roads 
or what have you, there’s little help from the provincial 
government on that aspect. 
 
So municipalities are caught in the crunch here, and certainly if 
there’s an avenue for them to relieve some of their debt  in 
many cases they believe that it’s a justified relief sort of a 
system  then how can you blame them. But people are on us. 
There’s no doubt about it. And hopefully that this doesn’t have 
to turn into a bloody legal battle in many of the communities 
across the province, as we’ve seen already in early parts of the 
health reform. 
 
Moving on, Mr. Minister, to clauses 9 and 11 which deal with 
some properties. It’s my understanding, and correct me if I’m 
wrong, that clause 9 is really talking about real estate, land. 
Clause 11 is talking about personal property. Could you give 
me a brief outline as to why you feel that these two clauses are 
a necessary part of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The reason for these changes is that 
presently The Hospital Standards Act contains provisions 
similar to these provisions requiring approval for sales or 
purchases over a certain amount. But The Hospital Standards 
Act is gradually being repealed. And this section replaces 
sections of The Hospital Standards Act that are being repealed, 
and it in effect maintains the status quo. So that it changes The 
Health Districts Act but it does not change the law substantively 
because this would have been the case under The Hospital 
Standards Act; now it will be the case pursuant to The Health 
Districts Act. 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. It talks about the regulations 
again and the values are to be set in regulations. I’m just 
wondering what types of limits are in place at this point in time 
and are they going to stay the same through the regulations for 
this particular Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is an issue that I would discuss with 
the Health Districts Advisory Committee. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And the discussions would centre around 
what issues, Mr. Minister? Give us an idea of what you’re 
thinking of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’ll give you an example. One of the 
issues we’ve been looking at recently has been  actually 
there’s a technical committee that looks at it  the provision of 
CT scan (computerized axial tomography) services. And a 
decision has been made by a technical committee that it would 
be appropriate to extend CT scan services to Prince Albert. 
Presently they are only in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
We have one MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), as you know, 
in Saskatoon. It is my hope that at some point soon we have a 
lithotriptor, which is commonly known as a kidney stone 
zapper, in the province. 
 
And those decisions require some agreement as between health 
districts and the government as a matter of provincial policy. In 
other words, we wouldn’t have every district going out and 
buying a lithotriptor or an MRI because it wouldn’t make sense 
in terms of the health system. 
 
This type of provision in effect says that when you want to buy 
personal property, which as the member will know includes 
anything other than land, you would do so on the basis of some 
coordinated approach. And therefore if personal property would 
cost over a certain amount of money, such as an MRI, would be 
quite an expensive item for example, some provincial approval 
should be sought so that the province can ensure that a 
coordinated and sensible approach is taken to the provision of 
health services. And in some cases we might  well and we do 
say  that some things should be provided only at certain 
locations because of the volume of service we need in 
Saskatchewan, and that the cost to the district that provides the 
service should be met by all of the provincial . . . all of the 
province. So you have a provincial program as opposed to the 
district itself. 
 
And it is that kind of issue that this gets at. Of course in 
determining these issues, the government makes the decision in 
consultation with committees of people that work in the field 
and in consultation with the health districts which the 
departmental officials and the minister meet with on a regular 
basis. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. Of course our concern is 
the same old issue of autonomy by the health districts, and I 
appreciate what you’re saying in terms of MRIs and in CATs 
and all those types of things, and certainly that is correct. Our 
concern, again of course, is the autonomy of the district health 
board and as you say will be laid out in the regulation, the  



3126 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

values. I’d like to hear from you what type of a figure you 
might be looking at, or are you going to be setting it extremely 
high or extremely low or where is it going to be at? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I don’t actually have any value, 
specific value, in mind, but I should say that the reason to put 
this sort of thing in regulation rather than legislation, and I 
think we may have had a discussion about this last week in 
another matter, is that you . . . the value that you would want to 
have as the line over which approval would be required would 
be a shifting value over time. And that sort of thing should be 
set in regulation as a matter of legislative policy because you 
don’t want to come back to the legislature and amend an Act 
every time you want to change a value. But the current 
regulations . . .as I said to the member, this is not a new 
concept; this is maintenance of the status quo as I understand it. 
 
Currently, to give you an example, with respect to dealing with 
real property, the prescribed amount by current regulation is 1 
per cent of the total amount of funding provided by the 
department to the district health board in the last complete 
fiscal year and 500,000, whichever is lesser. So either 500,000 
or 1 per cent of your budget. And other amounts, it’s not clear 
from this regulation what they refer to, but other amounts, for 
example, are a quarter per cent of the total budget or $50,000. 
 
So these would be fairly expensive items or expensive pieces of 
land, buildings, and so on. They would not be very small items 
or small amounts. 
 
And I guess what I would say, in terms of the question of 
autonomy, is again there are matters of provincial policy 
involved here. The health districts themselves, I suspect, would 
agree with that, that there’s a need for some coordination. And 
this is not a new concept; this is maintenance of the law as it 
presently exists. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you give us some examples? We talk 
about real estate, talk about land, where would you as a minister 
want to be involved in either the purchase or the selling off of 
some land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if a health district proposed to sell a 
hospital, for example, that is something that the government 
would want to know about. That would be a very important 
decision on the part of the health board and the government 
would certainly want to be notified of that kind of proposal. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Minister, if the district decided to 
do that, then what role would you play? I can see you’d want to 
be aware of it of course, and maybe that’s where it should end. 
You have been reluctant to step in and deal with the district 
boards where they’ve been forced to close down some facilities 
across this province over the last year and yet here you’re 
saying that if they were going to close a hospital or sell the land 
that it’s on or whatever, that you would want to be part of it. 
 
What role would you take in that then? Would you intervene 
and say no you can’t or yes you can or just give it your grace? 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the role the Minister of Health should 
play is the role that is set out in law and regulation. And in 
cases where the law and regulations say that a district health 
board should make a certain decision, they should make the 
decision. In cases where ministerial approval is required for 
something to be done, then the matter is referred to the minister. 
 
The decision that would be made would be whatever decision 
seemed to make sense in the circumstances, and the minister 
might approve the sale or might not approve the sale. These are 
facilities that were originally purchased with public funds and it 
is the law that the sale of real property requires ministerial 
approval. That is not a new concept. 
 
Mr. McLane:  If we use an example maybe then, Mr. 
Minister, say the Plains, for example, if the Regina Health 
District came forward next week and said that they were going 
to be maintaining the Plains Health Centre, what role would 
you play in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well that’s an unlucky question for the 
member because it just so happens that the Regina Plains 
hospital is owned by the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, so I wouldn’t play any role in it. 
 
But to answer the question fairly, if the Regina Health Board 
came along and said that they wanted to sell off the General 
Hospital, which I believe the Regina Health District owns, then 
we would expect that the government of the day should be 
advised of that so that we could ask the question whether 
adequate health facilities are going to be left available for the 
people of Regina. 
 
And that would be part of the responsibility of the Minister of 
Health and we would not expect a decision like that to be made 
without notification to the Minister of Health. And we wouldn’t 
expect the General Hospital to be sold off without the approval 
of the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Are there any other agencies across the 
province, or institutions, that are owned by SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, there are. The SPMC owns the four 
regional care facilities that are around the province. And they 
own Whitespruce, for example. And they own a variety of other 
institutions which they lease to health districts. 
 
I believe, for example, they own a couple of nursing homes . . . 
Now I was thinking they owned a couple of nursing homes in 
Yorkton, but actually they don’t; they just manage them. So in 
some cases they will manage and maintain facilities that they 
don’t own. But they do own a variety of facilities around the 
province. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate if you could table 
a list of those agencies that are owned by SPMC, just for our 
reference. 
 
A hypothetical question regarding gifts, Mr. Speaker, as it 
relates to this clause. What would happen if someone  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3127 

bequeathed a substantial amount of money that would pay for 
 let’s pick an MRI, for example  and asked that it be . . . 
that they would donate the MRI to one of our smaller districts. 
What role would the minister play in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The purchase of the MRI would require 
ministerial approval for the reasons I’ve indicated. And of 
course it’s one thing to acquire an MRI or a CAT scan or 
whatever; it’s another thing to actually operate it. And so the 
policy, public policy, would not be made by someone simply 
deciding of their own accord that they were going to gift or 
bequeath money for a particular purpose. 
 
Hopefully the two interests would coincide and if somebody 
wanted to do that, to provide the purchase money, hopefully 
public policy would also dictate that it made sense and that we 
could do it. But that wouldn’t always be the case. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Jess:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the west 
gallery is a group of 28 grade 4, 5, and 6 students from Perdue 
and their teacher, Brenda Kelly, and I believe something like 17 
adult chaperons, as well as their bus driver. 
 
And I will be meeting with this group shortly for pictures and 
drinks and I would ask the members of the Assembly to help 
me welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to just 
introduce a guest, if I may. May I have leave? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you very much. I just wanted to add a 
hello to Brenda Kelly. Years and years ago  I wouldn’t like to 
say how long ago  we taught together in the Maidstone 
elementary school and she was a good colleague. And I’d just 
like to say hello to her today and welcome her here too. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 76 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Just back to the gift, Mr. Minister. 
Let’s say for example that somebody left an MRI and 

 wanted it operated out of . . . pick a place  let’s say 
Imperial’s integrated facility. And recognizing the importance 
of MRIs in this province and the long lists of people that are 
waiting to use them at all hours of the day and night virtually, 
what would happen then, Mr. Minister? Is that something that 
you as the minister would look at in consultation with the 
district health board, or how would you handle that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, well that’s exactly correct. I would 
look at that in consultation with the district health board and 
other districts and see if that made sense in view of provincial 
policy. 
 
I wasn’t aware that the MRI was coming to Imperial, but I’ll be 
happy to take that request up with the Health Districts Advisory 
Committee and others. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I’m glad to hear that you’re a bit 
open-minded, Mr. Minister. We’ll look forward to that 
challenge some time, I hope. 
 
Another section of this Bill deals with the amalgamation or the 
mergers of health districts, and I believe in the legislation it 
talks about when two or more health districts amalgamate, that 
the districts involved and their boards will remain in place until 
such a time as elections can take place for a board for the new, 
amalgamated districts. 
 
Can you give me some ideas as to what time frame you have in 
place to ensure that when districts do amalgamate, that a newly 
elected board is put in place in a reasonable amount of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Could the member clarify whether a 
particular section of this Bill is being referred to? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, I believe it’s clause 7. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, in the event of an amalgamation of 
two health districts, because of staggered elections, it was 
unclear under the legislation as it presently exists what would 
happen in the event of an amalgamation. This provides that 
members of both boards would be deemed to have been elected 
or appointed as members of the amalgamated district health 
board, pursuant to the provisions of this Act. 
 
And so it avoids the situation where staggered elections . . . 
would prevent an anomaly with respect to the board and enables 
both boards to continue as one board of the amalgamated health 
district. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I believe it doesn’t just state that it can just be 
two  it’s two or more. And for example, even with two we’re 
talking about 24 board members. If you had three, you’d be 
talking about 35  a board of unwieldy amount of board 
members. Unfortunately the problem with that is that the then 
districts are probably going to suffer, as you’ve got 35 people 
trying to make a decision on one thing or the other, and we all 
know the problems that boards are facing right now, making 
some of the tough decisions that they’ve been forced to make  



3128 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

by the provincial government. 
 
I’m just wondering, you talk about the time limits again being 
set out in regulations. And of course that’s another problem that 
we’ve got in regulations. So why isn’t there something a little 
more stringent laid out in this Act to ensure people that we 
know exactly what’s going to happen in the event of a district 
or two or three wanting to amalgamate, and some definite time 
lines that it will take in order for that process to reach a 
conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think I could do a better job of answering 
the question than I did in my previous answer, for which I 
apologize, because it wasn’t very clear. What the amendment 
would say is that: 
 

“. . . the members of the amalgamated district health board 
hold office until the first meeting of the district health 
board that is held after an election pursuant to subsection 
(7)”. 
 

So in other words, it brings their terms of office to an end so 
that you don’t have that large board and the problem that the 
member’s referring to. 
 
Then it says that: 
 

“(7) Subsequent members of an amalgamated district 
health board . . . shall be elected or appointed in 
accordance with the regulations”. 
 

And actually what has happened is that many of the rules 
surrounding the elections for district health board members 
have been set out in regulation. And what this section is 
intended to do is to say that if there’s an amalgamation, then to 
deal with that situation, everybody holds office until the first 
meeting after an election, and that an election would be brought 
about in an amalgamated district health board pursuant to the 
regulations. 
 
What cabinet would be responsible to do would be to come up 
with regulations fairly quickly so that an election could be held 
quickly and we could deal with the situation as it arises. 
 
So rather than the previous answer I gave, which was somewhat 
convoluted, confusing, and I think incorrect, I’ll substitute the 
answer I just gave which I think is clearer and actually also 
correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Of course the concern would be 
again the time limits that it takes to get a new board in place. 
Also I believe, Mr. Minister, that you would, in the result of a 
large board being unable to operate in a responsible manner and 
make some decisions, that you have the ability to appoint a 
public administrator as well. 
 
I think section . . . I’m not just sure what section of this Act that 
is, the concerns that I have by not having this laid out in this 
Bill is the fact that you do have that right to come in and 
appoint a public administrator to look after those needs. 
 

And of course that’s something that the public would not want 
to see again because we’d virtually go back to when we started 
this process of districtification where you were making, or your 
previous minister was making, all the decisions on this, and so 
you would have complete control again to head those districts 
in the direction that possibly maybe the government would want 
to see them go, and not necessarily what the people that live in 
those districts would want to see. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  This would deal with the situation where 
there was a voluntary amalgamation by the boards. It wouldn’t 
deal with the situation where the minister or the government 
were anxious to do anything in particular. 
 
With respect to the appointment of a public administrator, the 
provisions that deal with that are actually provisions that have 
existed in our law for many years. A public administrator is 
appointed for example, if a board simply resigns and there’s no 
legal authority in place to run an institution or a district or if the 
law’s being breached or the safety of patients is being 
threatened  that type of situation. This is not a new or radical 
concept. This is a concept that exists in health legislation 
probably in other parts of the country, certainly in our 
legislation, for decades. 
 
But in any event, this is designed to deal with the situation 
where boards have voluntarily amalgamated, and to say that if 
that should happen let us, through regulation, come up with an 
election as quickly as possible so that a new board could be 
elected to run the amalgamated district. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. I realize that this 
appointing a public administrator has been around for a long 
time, and in fact most recently, in the Yorkton area that was 
enacted where a public administrator was appointed there, and 
that I believe of Mr. Elmer Schwartz. And of course that does 
not really help the situation in a community; that further 
separated many of the forces in that particular community, and 
that could happen again. 
 
However, it is possible that even under voluntary 
amalgamations the minister does have the control to appoint a 
public administrator. And you’ve talked about accepting change 
and making changes and maybe this is one area where we 
should try and deviate from a hard and fast rule and ensure that 
the people affected are going to be the ones that make the 
decision on their health care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. Well as I said, this deals with the 
situation where the communities themselves are asking . . . you 
know, are taking steps to amalgamate. It doesn’t deal with the 
situation where something is happening because the minister 
wants it to happen. 
 
Under the current legislation, an amalgamated health board may 
request the minister to terminate the membership of the 
members of the district and appoint from among those persons, 
12 of them to be the district board. That’s the present 
legislation. 
 
The amendments would enable cabinet to bring about an  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3129 

election, which is, we think, the preferred option. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, I’d ask leave for some 
introduction of some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to the Assembly, some folks from out in 
my neck of the woods, from the community of Davidson — 
happy to see you here this morning — a bunch of bright-eyed 
and bushy-tailed grade 7 students; 27, I understand, students 
that we have here. 
 
We also have some teachers with them; Diane Taylor  maybe 
I’d ask you to stand, Diane, if I could. We also have Michael 
Zintel and Deb Jestin, all teachers out there. And I will be 
meeting with you shortly to have a discussion, and hopefully 
the students are going to have a few easy type questions that I 
can possibly answer. And if not, I’ll maybe ask one of my 
colleagues from across the floor to come and help me  maybe 
the Minister of Health who’s having a fairly easy time in the 
House this morning. 
 
So I look forward to meeting with you in a little, short while, 
and we’ll have a drink and a little discussion, and I ask 
everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 76 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d ask the 
minister possibly, are there any discussions taking place across 
the province with any of the districts that are looking at 
amalgamation. I realize that they have a provincial body that 
looks after them. I’ll just be interested in knowing what 
discussions are taking place, and I’m sure that the department 
would be involved in that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I want to say that it was certainly a 
relief to hear that the member would be going to answer 
questions himself from the students because that will mean that 
he’ll have to stop asking me questions. Not that I don’t enjoy 
answering questions from the member from Arm River. 
 
I would not say that there are any sort of formal discussions 
going on about amalgamation, but I would say that I think there 
are districts that are sort of chatting informally with each other 
about amalgamation or maybe how they could cooperate with 
one another and do some things together. 
 
There are 10 service areas in the province, each of which has 
several districts within it. And I think as the district system 
develops, districts are certainly talking to each other about what  

things they could do jointly that might make sense for the 
people and save some money. 
 
If the member wants to know what my view, in terms of 
amalgamation, would be; my view, as I’ve said to some of the 
districts and at SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) meetings, is that I think in view of the fact that 
the district system has not been with us that long — it’s a new 
system that is just developing — I don’t think that the province 
ought to force, if I can use that word, amalgamations. I think 
that if there are amalgamations, they should be voluntary. And I 
think if districts came forward that wanted to amalgamate, 
certainly we would try to accommodate that. 
 
I would also make the point that if they want to cooperate in 
some ways, it’s not necessary that they amalgamate. There are 
ways for districts to cooperate with each other that would not 
involve formal amalgamation. 
 
And I realize I’ve gone somewhat beyond what the member 
asks, but I thought in view of the fact that you’re rushing off to 
meet students, you would want me to give you the benefit of all 
of those views without your having to ask me too many 
questions about it. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, I do appreciate that 
indeed. Turning our attention from the amalgamations, and I 
hope, I would only hope, that those amalgamations would be 
voluntary and would happen as the districts themselves and the 
people in those districts and the communities deem necessary. 
So I do appreciate hearing your comments. 
 
Regarding the affiliates, I wonder if the minister could 
enlighten us as to actually how many affiliate groups that we do 
have in the province, and possibly if we could also divide that 
up into sort of a couple or three different sectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, there are 225 health corporations that 
could not be included within the scope of mandatory 
amalgamation. And these include denominational hospitals; 
non-profit home care corporations; and non-profit corporations 
operating special care homes, both municipal and 
denominational. The majority of the 225 corporations have 
voluntarily amalgamated with health districts; 72 remain in 
place operating as affiliates, so presently 72. 
 
And these are broken down as follows: under the category of 
hospitals or health centres, there are four municipal; one 
federal, which is Fort Qu’Appelle, which I think really isn’t 
federal any more; 12 private or religious; and under special care 
homes, there are 19 municipal, one commercial, and 28 private 
or religious. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll just stray off of 
the affiliates for a second. Earlier you mentioned about some 
committees that you have structured, and I guess in conjunction 
with the provincial health association, SAHO. I’m wondering if 
you can comment on . . . if you’re aware of a committee that’s 
been structured, and what role your department plays in that,  



3130 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

regarding the level of physician remuneration across the 
province, and in particular, subsidization, and if there is indeed 
such a committee and who’s involved in that committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Is the member referring to the joint medical 
professional committee? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, that’s why I asked the question. 
I’m not sure what the committee’s name is. It’s a committee 
that deals with some shortfall in funding to physicians across 
the province, which I understand at this point in time that the 
districts are having to pick up out of their budgets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We are unclear what committee the 
member is referring to. I’m not trying to be difficult at all. I’m 
advised that issues of remuneration are normally raised with the 
department and the minister by the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Are you aware, or is your department aware, 
of a committee called the framework committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  There was a committee made up of 
representatives of SAHO, the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association), the college, and the department, which was 
working on the framework agreement that was arrived at last 
year to set out the roles and responsibilities as between the 
medical community and the district health boards. That was the 
task of that committee and I’m advised that that task has been 
completed. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And are there some results coming from that 
committee, some conclusions that they made, and what were 
they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, it’s the framework agreement that has 
been arrived at between government and the SMA and the 
district health boards, which is a public document. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And if we are indeed talking about some 
funding shortfall as a result of this committee’s inquiries and 
investigations, what’s being done to rectify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that that committee was not 
formed to discuss questions of remuneration and financing. 
That was not part of the committee’s mandate. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Maybe I’ll just, Mr. Minister, read to you 
some of the areas where there appears to be some shortfall with 
some of the districts, where there are some funding shortages. 
And they talk about emergency, in-house coverage, for 
example. And there’s about a million and a half  a million 
four hundred and seventy to be exact  of funding shortfall 
that I understand that the districts are being forced to pick up. 
For example, the East Central District has about 73 grand; 
Regina is almost a million; Saskatoon is about 430,000; South 
Central evidently has a shortfall of some $57,000. 
 
In pathology, there’s a shortfall in Lloydminster of about 77; in 
Parkland District, of a little over 7,000; Regina has 277,000; 
Saskatoon has a little over 8,000. 

And then we talked about, in radiology, a fee-for-service 
shortfall that I understand the districts are being forced to pick 
up; that whole area, there’s just about a million and a half 
dollars there. Assiniboine Valley has 4,000; Lloydminster has 
$295,000; Pasqua is 15; Parkland is 106; Regina again has 
another in excess of a half a million dollars; Saskatoon, 
400,000; South Central, 126,000. 
 
Another area is house officer coverage. Regina has well over $2 
million there; Saskatoon is just under half a million dollars. 
 
What’s happening in light of those figures, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The districts receive global funding in 
several pools, as the member knows. Obviously there are 
districts that believe . . . probably every district believes that 
they should get more money. And what will happen is what 
happens every year. We will go into a budgeting process in the 
fall to come up with the budget to finance the health districts 
and sometime next spring we’ll come out with a new budget 
which will determine the level of funding that goes into the 
health districts globally. And then we will apply that level of 
funding as between the districts. 
 
Of course this year in order to fund the districts at the same 
level as last year, the people of the province were required to 
. . . I’m not sure if I’ve told the member this, but I believe it’s 
$47 million that the federal Liberals have not provided to us for 
health care this year. 
 
So I bring that to the member’s attention because what we did 
this year was to take $47 million extra provincial money and 
put that into the system. Next year, as of April 1, 1997, we will 
be required to put in $100 million extra provincial money just 
to maintain funding. 
 
So funding has been tight. I certainly acknowledge that, and 
people would like to have more money. And I certainly agree 
with the member that what we’ve got to do is bring to the 
attention of the Liberals in Ottawa the need to fund health care 
better so that we don’t have the kind of shortfalls that the 
member is referring to. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That doesn’t 
help the districts too much and the people out there that are 
losing services and closing hospitals because they don’t have 
the dollars to maintain health services that those people are 
entitled to have. 
 
I think to be quite frank with you you have raised, I think, in the 
House a number of times about the shortfalls, shortcomings of 
the federal government. One thing I have never heard you talk 
about is some of the good things that the federal government 
does for the province of Saskatchewan. And I’ve taken the 
liberty over the course of this session to point those out to you 
and your colleagues, so that will be on the record. 
 
But I think quite frankly, Mr. Minister, the people in the 
province are tired of that argument. I don’t think they’re really 
too interested in listening to that. They realize the responsibility 
for health care in this province is a provincial responsibility and  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3131 

you should look after it. 
 
In particular, when you have policies in place such as the 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement), which we 
have been arguing for . . . I recall actually, Mr. Minister, back in 
last summer after I was elected, standing out on Highway No. 
44, one that was closed because the road was impassable, with 
the media, with BBS (Baton Broadcasting System), and saying 
. . . and being asked by the media, well where would I find the 
money to build Highway 44? 
 
And I mentioned that that day, and you can go back and check 
the media release, that maybe some of that money that’s going 
. . . being wasted through the CCTA could be put toward 
building Highway 44. 
 
So as long as you’ve got programs like the CCTA which 
support a particular, individual group in the province and give 
them some advantage over the other hard-working people in 
this province, you’re going to have some cynicism when you 
keep criticizing the federal government and blaming all the 
woes of the province on those. 
 
You also have raped the province with millions of dollars in 
earnings in the casinos, in your VLTs (video lottery terminal). 
You’ve got money sitting there. There’s monies in the Crowns. 
There’s all sorts of things that people believe could be better 
used than what they are being used for, and health is one of 
them. 
 
So I recognize that things are financially tight all across Canada 
 not just in Saskatchewan but all across Canada  and 
everybody is dealing with it. But we shouldn’t be dealing with 
that issue on the backs of the sick and the elderly in the 
province. 
 
And you have to recognize the fact that people in rural 
Saskatchewan are entitled to have some health services out 
there too. And they shouldn’t have to be forced . . . our elderly 
people shouldn’t have to be forced to be driving miles and 
miles and miles, which only makes the situation worse, Mr. 
Minister. It only makes those elderly, frail people much iller 
than they really are. 
 
So I think you have a real problem here. And when I look at this 
list and I look at some of these districts that have the funding 
shortfall . . . And if you look at radiology, for example, in 
Assiniboine Valley, it’s only $4,000 it appears that they are 
short. 
 
Now if you say that quick, it’s not a lot of money. But in light 
of what’s happening out in that country, in Canora and 
Kamsack and Preeceville . . . And I was out there. I know 
firsthand, Mr. Minister, the anxiety and the frustration and the 
anger  the anger, Mr. Minister  that neighbours are feeling 
toward each other because they’re making decisions that affect 
everybody’s lives, that you’re saying, well we’ll look at this 
down the road. Well they’re closing beds today and tomorrow 
and they’re losing services today and tomorrow. 
 
So I’d like you to recognize that there is indeed a problem here,  

something that should have been addressed by the department, 
by the government and by you, much earlier on. It shouldn’t 
have to come to this point where we’re pointing out that these 
are funding shortfalls. 
 
Are you saying then that some of these services aren’t needed? 
That the reason that they’ve overspent, because you don’t need 
the service. Are you saying that radiology in the Pasqua or the 
Parkland, who’s $106,000 short, that they shouldn’t have done 
so much radiology, so many tests there? Is that the problem? 
What actually are you saying in Saskatoon where there’s just 
about a half a million dollars short in radiology? Is somebody 
doing tests they shouldn’t be doing? Or what’s the problem? 
How are you going to address this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’m certainly saying that things 
should be done in as efficient and effective a manner as they 
can be. And what is happening across the province is that 
changes are being made to try to do so. In Saskatoon they’re 
consolidating lab services and saving millions of dollars and 
they are going to provide the same service, but they’re going to 
do it at a cost of a few million dollars less per year. And to the 
extent that we can do that, that’s what we should do. 
 
In Regina they are going to consolidate services in two 
locations and they’re going to reduce their operating costs by 
$10 million per year. Those are . . . there are many, many 
situations like that. They’re all situations that some people will 
complain about, including yourself and members of the 
opposition. 
 
But nevertheless the reality is that the health care system is 
changed. The system of federal funding has changed. I do not 
agree with the Liberal Party that there should not be a national 
system for funding health care. We have had a national system 
for funding health care. It’s the position of the provincial 
Liberal Party now that this should solely be a provincial 
responsibility. We don’t agree with that position. That position 
certainly creates problems in the provinces  not just 
Saskatchewan but across the country. 
 
The member talks about people going long distances to the 
hospital. The fact is, whether the member wants to admit it or 
not, people make choices to go to larger centres for major 
surgical interventions. They do not wish to go to smaller 
hospitals. That is not something that the government 
encourages. 
 
(1130) 
 
We’ve discussed this in the House before, but it’s part of reality 
that the seven largest health districts have 61 per cent of the 
population but perform 94 per cent of the surgeries. Those 
surgeries are performed for people that live outside the districts, 
people that come from rural Saskatchewan. And I say to the 
member that if somebody from Davidson chooses to go to 
Saskatoon or Regina for major surgery, as is often the case, that 
person is entitled to have their surgery paid for and we will 
continue to pay for it. 
 
The logical extension of the member’s argument is that people  



3132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

should not have that freedom of choice, the freedom to go 
where they wish to get medical services. That is a position we 
don’t agree with. 
 
Places like the University Hospital in Saskatoon are not 
hospitals for Saskatoon; they are hospitals for northern 
Saskatchewan. As indeed the hospitals in Regina are hospitals 
for people in southern Saskatchewan and throughout 
Saskatchewan. Sixty-eight per cent of the people in the Royal 
University Hospital in Saskatoon  that figure is probably a 
few years old, but certainly the majority  are from outside of 
Saskatoon. 
 
We’ve got to provide medical services to people that are 
appropriate and that are at places where people want to get 
them and choose to get them. That should include certain 
services provided in the local community, certain services 
provided in regional centres, and certain services provided at 
base hospitals. The member knows that that is a fact of life. 
That is how health services are delivered these days, not just in 
Saskatchewan, but across the country. 
 
And our challenge is to change the system so that it will be kept 
sustainable. We need a sustainable, public medicare system 
where we support the system through our tax dollars, as 
opposed to a U.S. (United States)-style system where the health 
care you receive is dependent upon the wealth that you have. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you’ve 
missed the whole point. And I think maybe this summer, if you 
have some time, I’d like to invite you to come out and we’ll 
tour around rural Saskatchewan a bit and have a look. And we 
might even invite the minister responsible for Highways to take 
a tour with us, and we can check on the roads and we can check 
on the health system. 
 
We can talk to some people out there and they’ll tell you what 
kind of services that they think they’d like to have in their local 
communities. And we’re certainly not talking about major 
surgery. We’ve been moving away from that and recognizing 
that in small communities for years and years, long before your 
health reform started back in 1992 or late 1991, that there are 
many things that can’t be done in these small institutions and 
agencies within rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But there are many things that can be done there and those are 
the things that we want to keep and that we’re struggling with, 
with you and your government, to maintain, and having a real 
problem with that because you don’t, I don’t think, fully 
understand what happens out in rural Saskatchewan and how 
we deal with things out there. 
 
And so I extend that invitation to you this summer, if you’d like 
to chat and visit with some of those folks out there. I’d be 
happy to do it with you and you can actually pick the places 
where you want to go so that we can ensure that it’s not a set-up 
for either one of us. So I’d be happy to do that. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, that as we lose more 
and more services in rural Saskatchewan, it forces more and 
more people to go further away for their services. And as you  

say, and you said earlier in the House and over the course of 
this session, that yes indeed the funding will . . . (inaudible) . . . 
But there’s going to come to a point sooner or later that we will 
not be able to sustain anything in some of our smaller towns 
and our smaller agencies. 
 
And that would be tragic because it’s not any more expensive to 
provide those services in small town Saskatchewan, in Imperial 
or Craik or Davidson, than it is anywhere else. So those are the 
things that I hope you will be open-minded enough to look at 
and listen to some reasoning, and I’m sure you will be. 
 
As I said earlier, I do have some folks I want to go and meet 
with and talk to and entertain their questions, and so I will 
relinquish the floor to a couple of my colleagues and I will 
certainly hurry back so that I can be in on the end of the 
discussion of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well just to comment, I want to assure the 
member that in terms of what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan, in fact I fairly regularly travel in rural 
Saskatchewan and I’m aware of what’s happening. I may not 
have been to everywhere the member has gone to, but I agree 
with the member that that’s something that I should continue to 
do. 
 
It’s my hope that services will actually be increased in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know that in some of the health centres, the 
range of services being made available is actually much broader 
than the range of services that was available when they had a 
hospital prior to it being converted to a health facility, but it is a 
different set of services. 
 
Some of the money that used to go to paying for empty hospital 
beds now is directed to community health services and things 
like home care that are also very important to people’s health. 
But I won’t go on because I don’t want to provoke the member 
who wants to go and meet with his students, and I do thank him 
for his questions. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good morning to 
the minister and to his officials and welcome. Mr. Minister, the 
district health boards already have agreements with affiliates. 
The affiliates in the past have chosen not to amalgamate and to 
retain control over their own facilities. If that is being respected, 
why is there a need for this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The Bill completes what I would describe 
as the accountability cycle, in the sense that if you have an 
institution such as an affiliate that is receiving public funds 
from a health district, which in turn receives public funds from 
the province, there should be a written agreement in place 
specifying what services should be provided and formalizing 
the arrangement between the affiliate and the district health 
board. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I notice that there is a 
requirement that an affiliate have an audit. Could you explain 
more in depth why an audit is necessary? According to what 
you have just said, that may be some reason, the accountability  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3133 

part. However, I would like to hear your further comments on 
this. And I’m wondering if there has been evidence that 
affiliates have misused funds in the past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not that I recall at the moment, perhaps 
because public institutions, like other institutions, regularly are 
audited. It is a good principle of public policy that organizations 
receiving public monies and expending large sums of money 
should be subject to audit for reasons that I think are obvious. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. When you mention the past, to my 
understanding and my knowledge, there has never been any 
question but that the affiliates have acted in a responsible and 
an accountable way. So I’m wondering why the extra sort of 
regulations at this time. Why is there the requirement that the 
affiliate provide any and all information that the district health 
board requires? Is there a history of affiliates hiding 
information from the district health boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member should understand that it 
is just a normal preventive measure that organizations should be 
audited. And I hadn’t recalled this until the member said she 
didn’t think there’d ever been a problem. Actually, if the 
member would think back several years, there was a major 
problem with, for example, St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon  
this is a matter of public record  where the administrator of 
that institution was convicted of defrauding St. Paul’s Hospital 
of a very large sum of money. 
 
And I can’t think of other examples at the moment, and I’m not 
saying this is a rampant problem, but I’m saying to the member 
that as reasonable people, I think we can agree that the principle 
that there should be an audit and exchange of information 
between a funding organization and an organization delivering 
service, is not a matter for public debate. It is simply an 
elementary requirement of doing business in the public sector. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
ask you to refer to clause 10 of the Bill, which enacts a new 
section 26.1 of the Act. This refers to the required agreements 
between district health boards and affiliates. The clause in the 
Bill which sets out the requirement for the agreements which 
will now be required between district health boards and 
affiliates includes the phrase, “set out the services to be 
provided by the affiliate”. So it is my understanding that as 
minister you have ultimate responsibility for what happens or 
transpires in our health system. 
 
So with that kind of authority, I take it then that you would have 
some requirements of every district health board to meet 
specifications of the kind of health system that we want in this 
province. So I look at the “set out the services to be provided by 
the affiliate” and I recognize that it would be the minister and 
the government’s ultimate responsibility to ensure that the 
services that are being provided in this province are under the 
auspices of the minister. 
 
So my question is following: is it possible that an agreement 
could force an affiliate to provide services which were against 
the religious or the ethical tenets of the organization which  

operates the affiliate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would say no, because the agreement 
referred to is an agreement between the affiliate and the district 
health board. If the affiliate, for moral or ethical or religious 
reasons, did not wish to provide a certain service then an 
agreement would not be reached in that regard. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, are 
you saying then that an affiliate will continue to have complete 
control over any procedures or decision making regarding 
procedures or practices in the very near and long-term future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, it would not be the intent to impose an 
agreement on anyone that would violate their ethical or 
religious convictions. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
ask a couple of questions regarding the mediation process set 
out in clause 10 of the Bill, which will create again the new 
section 26.1. 
 
The Bill permits the district health boards to request that a 
mediator be appointed if no agreement is being reached 
between the district health board and the affiliate. Why not 
allow the affiliates also to request the appointment of a 
mediator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The rationale is that the . . . it is the district 
health board that is spending . . . that is receiving public funds 
and attempting to reach an agreement with the affiliate. If an 
agreement was not reached, the district health board could make 
a decision whether it wished to continue providing services 
through the affiliate or whether it wished to make other 
arrangements. 
 
So the district health board is the primary funding recipient 
from government and it is responsible to make decisions as to 
what services should be provided within the district, and 
because of that, the Act is structured to give the district health 
board the option of continuing on to mediation on request, or 
not doing so if it chooses that option. 
 
(1145) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
what you have been saying so far gives me the impression that 
you’re recognizing that the affiliates have and will retain their 
own authority over themselves. As we all know, the 
government or the public does not own the affiliates  the 
affiliates have their own ownership. 
 
So I would like to refer to the new section of 39.1. In the 
explanatory notes, the districts and the affiliates are equated, 
but we know that that’s not so because the government does not 
own the affiliates. So how is it that this section can make a 
statement that equates the affiliates and the district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The member is referring to section 39.1. 
The section says that the Lieutenant Governor in Council, in 
other words the cabinet, may at any time appoint a person as  



3134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

public administrator to manage the affairs of an affiliate. And 
then it goes on to say, if safety is jeopardized, the board has 
resigned, and so on. 
 
This is really a quite standard provision that is similar to what 
has existed for many years in our legislation. We have the 
authority to appoint a public administrator for a district. We do 
not have the authority under The Health Districts Act as it 
presently stands to appoint a public administrator for an 
affiliate. 
 
But if an affiliate was operating in a fashion whereby, for 
example, the board resigned and there was no legal authority in 
place to continue to deliver hospital services, for example, to 
the public, or if the safety of persons cared for the by affiliate 
was being jeopardized, then it would be the duty and 
responsibility of the government, as the member has said when 
she started her remarks by saying the government was 
ultimately responsible for every single thing that ever happens 
in the health care system. 
 
Because of that view, it would certainly be the responsibility of 
the government of the day to maintain the safety of the public 
by taking steps that would be required. And that’s the intent of 
the section. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you made 
the comment that in the event that the board should resign . . . 
how likely do you think it would be that all members of the 
board would resign? Are there a specific number of members 
that have to stay . . . rather that have to be there to constitute a 
board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That would depend upon the by-laws of the 
institution concerned. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this Act 
seems to mix up licensing issues with contract issues. Licences 
usually pertain to professional conduct  professional conduct 
and issues surrounding that. A contract is a business  the 
business-needs issue kind of thing. Through this Bill the 
minister can revoke the licence if the facility or the practitioner 
is no longer needed or deemed to be needed. This should be the 
contract that is revoked. The licence should only be revoked 
when dealing with professional misconduct. 
 
Could you comment on that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Could the member refer to the section of 
the Bill that she’s referring to? 
 
Ms. Julé:  If you’ll give me a moment, Mr. Minister, I will 
try to go through this. I don’t have the reference down with me. 
I made these notes earlier. I’ll look through this and see if I can 
find it. 
 
Mr. Minister, my apologies. That question was in reference to a 
different Act, I think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s The Health Facilities Act. 
 

Ms. Julé:  Health Facilities Act, yes. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to just veer a little bit off of that line 
of questioning I was on. I’m wondering if you can explain to 
me why the district boards are given their funding in pools of 
money. It seems to restrict them from making long-term, 
coordinated efforts at integrated services. Can the minister 
explain to me why the districts are given money in pools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. For the reason the member indicates, 
to have a coordinated, integrated policy. The funding system 
now is based upon population and need, so that in a given 
district a decision is made that there are so many seniors over 
the age of 75, for example. And on the basis of that number, a 
determination is made that there should be so many long-term 
care beds or nursing home beds per seniors over the age of 75. 
 
And therefore you can look at a district and determine how 
many nursing home beds, according to national standards, there 
should be, how many hospital beds there should be, and so on. 
And once you make that determination, then you make a 
decision as to how much money should go into each pool. 
 
I understand what the member is getting at. And recently I met 
with the Health Districts Advisory Committee, which I 
regularly meet with, to ask them the question, do you want to 
receive your money in pools, as you do now, for nursing home 
care, hospital care, community care, emergency, and one other, 
or do you want some kind of global funding with no strings 
attached? 
 
The advice I received from the health districts themselves was 
that they wanted to receive their money in pools. As Minister of 
Health I will take the advice of the health districts themselves in 
this regard and fund the districts accordingly. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I am and 
remain quite concerned about the authority that the government 
is going to be taking and the control they may be taking of the 
affiliates. 
 
And I think that with each of the clauses and so on that are set 
out in this Bill, it is obvious that if the minister or the 
government chooses to do that, there’s enough set out in this 
Bill already that could give you complete control over the 
affiliates in this province. That remains a major concern to me 
because the affiliates are privately owned right now. 
 
In this Bill we seem to have all kinds of clauses, subsections, 
and so on that state that, for instance: 
 

subsection (3), a public administrator appointed pursuant 
to subsection (1) 
 

. . . has control of all assets of the affiliates that relate to 
the facility or program that the affiliate operates, 
including the power to dispose of those assets in the 
everyday operations of the affiliate. 

 
That seems to me like that’s some power . . . that is the kind of 
power that we don’t want in this province. 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3135 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may set the terms and 
conditions governing the powers and duties of a public 
administrator. 
 

That means that cabinet can certainly set out any powers that 
this government may want them to have. 
 
There has been I think, some controversy as to whether or not 
affiliates in this province have a place. It seems to cause a little 
disturbance for some reason or other. And so I think that and I 
hope that there can be further discussion and that there can be 
an attitude here of freedom of expression, freedom to function, 
freedom of religion, freedom of whatever, according to the 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
We don’t want to have a system where we’re going to end up 
having our health care or anything else look as though we’re 
robotical and without any sense of personal expression. So I 
have some concerns with those clauses in there, and so do a 
number of the affiliates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would just like to refer to a situation within my 
constituency. Cudworth and Wakaw are two towns that each 
have a hospital, and no doubt these hospitals are not huge. 
None the less, they are there. They also have nursing homes. 
And nursing homes are needed much, much more. In fact at this 
point, we understand that some of the hospitals in Saskatoon 
are sending patients back to these hospitals to recuperate. So 
it’s pretty evident that there’s a need there for palliative care 
and nursing homes. 
 
Mr. Minister, the word that the people in Cudworth and Wakaw 
have, that are responsible for looking into trying to get a 
program or something going here in order to ensure that they 
have what they want as far as health goes, or health needs go, 
it’s going to be very difficult for these people to do because, 
first of all, Cudworth has an affiliated facility, and Wakaw does 
not. A consultant from this province has . . . from your 
government rather, has come forward and told them that they 
have to work together. 
 
And on top of it, Mr. Minister, they are in two different district 
health boards. Gabriel Springs is one of them and Central Plains 
is the other. How does the minister and his consultants, his 
people, expect this to work? Maybe I will let you comment on 
that at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I should say first of all that when we were 
talking about the various funding pools, the districts have 
complete freedom in terms of transferring money as between 
hospitals and nursing homes. So if they want to take money out 
of hospitals and put that money into nursing home care, they’re 
free to do so, and vice versa. 
 
They can’t take money out of the institutional side and put it 
into community . . . or I’m sorry, they can take it out of 
institutions and put it into community. They can’t take it out of 
community care, put it into the institutional side. But as 
between the institutions they can make whatever decisions they 
want. 
 

I think the only way to resolve the . . . to answer the question 
that the member raises, is to say that there’s a need for 
inter-district collaboration and cooperation, so that even though 
the two facilities are in different health districts, the two health 
districts can and probably should get together to talk about the 
needs of the area as a whole, and to try to make the best 
decision they can. 
 
This sort of problem will exist whatever the system is. You 
could go back to the system of the 400 boards instead of the 
health districts, or you could have decision-making powers 
centralized in Regina at the Department of Health, or you could 
have the health district system. And you still will have the kinds 
of problems that the member’s referring to. And it’s really 
something you can’t avoid. 
 
The fact is there are certain resources available, and within 
those resources we have to make the best decisions we can to 
coordinate services, and the districts have to make those 
decisions within their districts and integrate services. They also 
have to talk to other districts, as the member is saying, to ensure 
that the needs of the region as a whole are looked at. 
 
I’m not sure that I can answer the question any way other than 
saying that there’s a need for collaboration between the 
districts, and I agree with the member in that regard. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your 
reference prior to this on . . . or I guess I was talking about 
mediators. If these two centres cannot come to some agreement 
on how they will integrate their facilities and how they will 
collaboratively work towards these facilities, is this where a 
mediator would come into play? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  This legislation would deal with the 
situation as between a district and an affiliate, but it would not 
deal with the situation as between two districts. 
 
(1200) 
 
Ms. Julé:  That’s what I’m worried about. So my concern is, 
who would deal with it if they cannot come to an agreement on 
how to share their facilities, or share and work at what they 
need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Eventually the health plans of districts 
have to be approved by the Minister of Health; that’s part of 
The Health Districts Act. So that if you got into a situation 
where there was no collaboration, and something was being 
done that was wrong, then that would be brought to the 
attention of the minister and the minister would have the option 
of not approving the health plan. 
 
That situation has not arisen to my knowledge, and I don’t think 
it is likely to arise, because I think the districts will make the 
most responsible decisions that they can. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
think there is going to be a problem because I understand that 
within the Central Plains District we have a number of towns, 
including Leroy, Cudworth, Humboldt, Wadena, and so on, that  



3136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

have come up with strategic plans for their health needs. These 
are coordinated plans. They’ve all got together with plans on 
making the most of integrating what they can, and we’re quite 
sure that they could do this in a very cost-effective way. 
 
Now we recognize that Cudworth is within that health district, 
and still Cudworth is being asked to coordinate some planning 
with Wakaw, which is not in the health district. If in fact 
Cudworth can come up with an effective plan within the 
existing district and all is going well, how are you going to 
resolve, or how will the government resolve the problem that is 
right before us as far as Wakaw and Cudworth being asked to 
get their act together, when they’re dealing with two different 
districts there, and Cudworth is quite happy in the district 
they’re in already? 
 
There’s a great deal of confusion surrounding the question of 
why these places were even asked in the first place to try to get 
their integrated system together when they’re in two different 
districts. If they had been told that there were going to be a 
bigger district eventually in that area, then I think they would 
have understood what was happening. But no one told them 
that. So could you please comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  When the districts were created, the 
municipalities made a choice as to what district they wanted to 
go into. It is up to each district to come up with a plan for the 
district as opposed to each town to come up with a plan for that 
town. So presumably in formulating their plans, the districts 
will be talking to the surrounding districts and trying to make 
decisions that make sense not just for their own district, but for 
the region that they’re a part of. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to just ask you 
one more question before I turn the questioning over to my 
colleague. Has the minister received any of the plans that I have 
just mentioned, the plans from the communities within the 
Central Plains Health District that already have facilities and 
primarily affiliated facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I don’t believe that they have been 
submitted to myself or the department. I’m not 100 per cent 
sure, but certainly they haven’t been brought to my attention 
and I’m not sure that they were created for that purpose. I think 
in the first instance they would submit these sorts of plans to 
the local health district and then the local health district would 
consider them in the process of making a plan for the district as 
a whole. 
 
Ms. Julé:  The plans then have to be referred to the CEOs 
(chief executive officer) and then to you for approval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, they would never be referred to me for 
approval in the sense that they are not district plans. The health 
plan is made for the district by the district health board. These 
community plans as I understand them, would be arrived at at 
the community level and submitted to the district health board 
which would then use them in the process of coming up with a 
district plan. These community plans are not something that 
would ever require the approval of the Minister of Health. 
 

Ms. Julé:  But, Mr. Minister, I understand from some of your 
legislation here that districts must formulate a health plan and 
that the minister must approve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct, but the districts refers to the 
health districts as opposed to communities within the health 
district. Those communities would go to the district heath board 
as opposed to the minister. The district health board would then 
come up with a plan, and that health plan ultimately would be 
submitted by the district health board to the Minister of Health. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, and 
good afternoon to your official. 
 
This Bill contains provisions which ensure that any decisions 
made by boards remain in force even if the government has 
erred or failed to follow the proper procedure when appointing 
members of boards. And when you examine that aspect of the 
Bill, it’s quite interesting, Mr. Minister, because I think it 
becomes a clear indication that some of the board members may 
have not been properly appointed. Some of the boards have 
made some controversial decisions such as closure of health 
care facilities. And I’m sure the government wouldn’t want to 
be revisiting any of those decisions in courts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you, how many board members 
were improperly appointed since 1993? And could you provide 
a list of those individuals whose appointments were not done 
according to proper procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We do not know of any of the 
appointments that are not properly made. But the amendment is 
I think a fairly standard provision. And what may happen is that 
to be appointed, you’re to be nominated by a certain number of 
people, and they are to be residents of the district. 
 
But in some cases, there may be a question as to whether . . . 
usually a farmer, for example, is a resident of the district if 
there’s farm land in the district but the farmer’s actual house 
happens to be outside of the district. Situations like that may 
arise and this amendment is simply to say that if that farmer was 
one of the nominators, so that there was a defect in the 
nomination, that that should not invalidate the decisions that the 
board has made simply because there may be a defect. 
 
But having said that, we don’t know of any defect. This is a 
similar provision to provisions that exist in other legislation 
where there are board members mandated to carry out certain 
functions. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, I was referring to the section 7 
here. I think your answer was related perhaps to more, 
disqualification of elected members of boards. 
 
But anyway, to go on. You’re suggesting that you’re not aware 
of any that have been improperly appointed in terms of board 
members, but it would seem to me that the aim behind a section 
such as this would be to ensure that you don’t have to revisit the 
decisions made by those boards. 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3137 

Say in the instance of where a board closed a facility. It closes it 
and then all of a sudden the community group opposed to a 
decision would find out that one or two members of the board 
were improperly appointed, and as a result they might seek 
some legal recourse against the decision to close a facility like 
that. 
 
And I would just like you to tell us here today, is that your 
primary aim with respect to this clause? Is it to avoid people 
using the courts to overturn decisions with respect to closing 
health facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that is not the primary reason, but I 
certainly acknowledge that certainly this provision would 
prevent people from going to court to challenge decisions of 
boards based upon minor technical defects in the appointment 
process. So that the result would certainly be that what the 
member says is correct. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, going on to . . . with respect to 
disqualification of elected members. The Bill before us does 
change the eligibility of certain persons wishing to serve on a 
board, where elected board members, for instance, must live 
within the district or else they will not be able to continue to 
hold their seat on the elected board. 
 
And an item which I find amusing in all of this is that you’ve 
written into this law, such that an elected board member must 
live in a district rather than requiring that all board members 
live within a district. And I’d just like to ask why that isn’t 
written into this particular aspect of the Bill such that elected 
and non-elected board members are subject to that same rule of 
disqualification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the requirement is that to be an 
elected member of a district health board, you must reside in the 
health district, and if you cease to reside in the health district, 
then you cease to be eligible to be an elected member of the 
health board. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, Mr. Minister, we understand that. But I 
ask, why don’t you make the rule of disqualification the same 
for both elected versus appointed members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well there are reasons why you want to 
appoint people who do not reside within a health district. For 
example, in Saskatoon and Regina, we consider that Saskatoon 
and Regina which each have six appointed members instead of 
four, serve the entire province. And we have appointed people 
that reside outside of Saskatoon and Regina to serve on those 
boards so that there’s some representation of people beyond 
Saskatoon and Regina. That would be one reason you would 
want to specifically appoint people that live outside the district. 
 
You might also want to appoint people who represent particular 
groups such as seniors or aboriginal people, and you might 
want to get a certain mix of people. And you might want to 
appoint people who are not resident in the district, but you want 
to represent to the district a certain interest such as rural people 
on an urban health board and so on. 
 

So the election process is, I acknowledge, different from the 
appointment process. There are reasons why one would want 
elected members to be residents of the health district and why 
one would not necessarily require that of appointed members. 
Because in fact the whole purpose of the appointment may be to 
bring in communities outside of the district to be represented on 
the district board because that district may make decisions that 
impact on people that are beyond the borders of the district. 
 
The Chair:  Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, 22 
grade 6 students from Francis School in my constituency. They 
are accompanied by Don Gabel, their teacher, and chaperons 
Esther Lynch, Brenda Brick, Carmen Jackson, Rita Nell, and 
Eugene Deis. 
 
The class is in the city today touring a number of facilities as 
they approach the end of another school year, and I’d like to ask 
all members in joining with me in welcoming them here today 
and wishing them a happy summer holiday. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 76 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
think that one of the reasons that you neglected to point out in 
your most recent answer, and I’m afraid it’s one of the ones that 
pretty well drives most of whatever the government opposite 
does these days, and it’s one of political reasons. That would be 
one of the reasons why you wouldn’t want to have your 
appointments subject to the same rules of disqualification. But I 
know we could argue about that for quite a while and I won’t 
dwell on it, but I will go back to the instance of disqualification 
of elected members. 
 
Could the minister tell the committee if there are any specific 
instances where elected board members might face 
disqualification if this Bill is passed. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The purpose of the provision is to be 
consistent with provisions relating to municipal government 
and school boards. There are similar provisions for municipal 
councillors and school board members, that they must be  



3138 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

residents of the district they represent. 
 
I should say for the member’s information that we only are 
aware of two cases where appointments to boards do not reside 
within the districts, those being the representatives in Saskatoon 
and Regina. Otherwise, as far as we know, all of the appointees 
do reside within the district that they represent. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well more specifically, Mr. Minister, I did 
raise as an example during second readings on this Bill, the 
example of a Dr. Lewis Draper, a former member of this 
Assembly. 
 
Dr. Draper now resides in Moose Jaw but he still owns a 
residence in Gravelbourg, where he represents the South 
Country Health District. And as a consequence, I have to ask 
you here this afternoon, what will happen to Dr. Draper in this 
instance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t think it would be appropriate for 
me to comment on Dr. Draper’s personal situation. It would be 
for Dr. Draper to indicate where he maintains his residence. 
And that would be a legal matter for Dr. Draper to discuss with 
the health board that he’s a member of. It’s not a matter that I 
should discuss or that can be resolved in this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Minister, it doesn’t seem to ever 
phase the members opposite when they like to talk about where 
I take up my residence. 
 
But I’ll go on to section 39. I know my colleagues here today 
have touched on that one quite a bit, and this is with respect to 
appointment of public administrators. And I know I heard you 
say this morning that this is a provision that’s been around for 
some time. In fact, I think your quote is, “not a new concept; 
it’s been here for decades.” 
 
Now I guess I can go along with that. In section 39.1 . . . And 
you’ve actually, you quite aptly laid out all of the reasons why 
you would need a provision or provisions such as this in 
39.1(1)(a), (b) and (c). But where I really start to have some 
problems, and it gets back into our argument where we had last 
night with respect to a Bill where, under clause (d) here, it says, 
“for any other reason, it is in the public interest that a public 
administrator be appointed.” 
 
And I would maintain that’s where we get into a situation 
where the politics of the day come to bear. And I do believe that 
what happens here is that this is where democracy starts to fail 
with respect to this particular piece of legislation. 
 
You know, we always considered that the Tories had taken and 
done as much damage to democracy in this province as could 
ever be imagined. But in instances like this, where we see a 
catch-all clause of this nature, I think that what we have before 
us today, a piece of legislation that’s probably a . . . it probably 
does more to destroy democracy than anything else we’ve saw. 
 
But having said that, I’ll just leave you to make a comment 
about that, and that’s all I have to say. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if I wanted to provoke the member, I 
would talk about the manner in which seven individuals sitting 
over there deposed of the duly elected leader of the Liberal 
Party. Because every time democracy is raised by the 
opposition, I can’t help but think about that. But since I don’t 
want to provoke the member, I’m not going to get into that. 
 
I will just say that, as the member says, this is a fairly standard 
provision. It’s a provision that has existed in our law for quite 
some time and there may be circumstances where it’s in the 
public interest to invoke this kind of provision, but very rarely 
and only for the most serious of reasons. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just one follow-up 
on section 39(1). And I have to hear your opinion, Mr. Minister, 
how in fact, when I read this section  and keeping in mind 
we’re not talking about a publicly owned facility; we’re talking 
about privately owned facilities  how it is that you feel the 
government of the day can actually take control of a private 
facility. And we’re not talking about just a health care 
providing facility, but take over the facility, put in place an 
administrator. But in fact, when I look down on 39(1)  (2)(b), 
is it?  you actually have the power to seize these assets and 
dispose of them. 
 
So I don’t want to be too far-fetched, but really what you could 
do is take a private facility and if in fact the facility, the private 
facility didn’t want to do certain procedures, you could force 
those procedures to be done in that facility or take control of it 
and in fact sell the facility and equipment within that facility to 
whomever you so wished for whatever price. 
 
Now do you not think that that, as government, is going just a 
little far? This is something we would’ve thought of happening 
in Europe. You’ve got to explain this one to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, these are private facilities but they are 
publicly funded. But I want to point out to the member that this 
provision deals with management not ownership, the 
management as opposed to ownership. Section 39.1 does not 
give the government the right to take over the ownership of the 
facility, only to step in and provide some management where 
required. 
 
And the member is not correct in his reading of subsection 
(2)(b) where he assumes that it means that there’s a power to 
dispose of assets. What the section says is “. . . the power to 
dispose of those assets in the everyday operations of the 
affiliate,” which means in the ordinary course of business. So 
that if in the normal management of a facility one would 
dispose of certain assets in the normal course of doing business, 
then that would continue. 
 
That does not give a power and is specifically drafted not to 
give a power to dispose of the assets, period, of the affiliate. 
That’s a different matter. 
 
That power actually exists with respect to district health boards. 
With respect to district health boards, the section 39 of The 
Health Districts Act gives the public administrator  I’m 
referring to subsection (2)(b) of section 39, which is the section  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3139 

dealing with the district health boards. It reads, the public 
administrator has: 

 
(b) the exclusive control of the assets of the board, 
including the right to dispose of them.” 
 

So that if you’re dealing with a public institution under the 
power that exists, the administrator would have the right to 
dispose of any and all assets. 
 
If you’re dealing with an affiliate, that’s not the case. What the 
section says is what the member read. But you can only dispose 
of assets in the everyday operations of the affiliate. In other 
words, if it would be in the normal course of events that certain 
assets would be disposed of because that’s the way the affiliate 
operates, and similarly the public administrator could dispose of 
the assets. 
 
But the meaning of this subsection is not to give the power to 
dispose; it’s actually the reverse. It’s to be an encroachment on 
the power to dispose. So that the public administrator would 
take over management of the facility temporarily, but could not 
own the facility and could not dispose of the facility. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, that isn’t clear. What you’re 
saying is clear in section 39.1, is not. Firstly, who determines 
what the everyday operations of an affiliate are? Is it you or . . . 
yes, it would obviously be the public administrator that you, sir, 
would appoint. So unless you can show us a list of what all the 
everyday operations would be, we can only assume those 
everyday operations could be whatever you chose them to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the problem with that would be that if 
a public administrator disposed of the assets of an affiliate, the 
public administrator would be . . . I mean other than in the 
everyday operations, the public administrator would be 
exceeding his or her powers under the Act, and therefore would 
be liable to a suit by the affiliate which pursuant to subsection 
(5) is entitled to “return control of the assets and the operations 
of the facility or program . . .” 
 
If that did not happen because the public administrator had sold 
off the assets of the affiliate, the public administrator and 
probably the government, would be liable in a lawsuit to the 
affiliate which is entitled to the return of the assets and the 
operation. And if they exceed their power and go beyond what I 
have stated and what is stated in the Act, then they would be 
subject to a lawsuit. It would be very unwise for someone to do 
that. 
 
Usually, by the way, there isn’t a market for hospitals and so 
on, as the member knows, and so I don’t think there’s a great 
danger of it. But in any event the section is crafted so that return 
of the assets of the affiliate is required. If that wasn’t done, I 
think there would be a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench 
that would probably have a great deal to say about it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, now you’re letting on that 
the public administrator has some guidelines or parameters that 
he has to deal within. And if you look at the subsection right 
below it: 

. . . Lieutenant Governor in Council (cabinet) may set the 
terms and conditions governing the powers and duties of 
the public administrator. 

 
So what you’re saying, our parameters can be changed at . . . 
well whatever you meet, every Tuesday or Wednesday, in 
cabinet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, no. When judges are interpreting 
powers they compare one section to another. And as I indicated 
before, section 39 which deals with health districts, says that a 
public administrator has the exclusive control of the assets of 
the board including the right to dispose of them. 
 
When you go to section 39.1 which deals with affiliates, the 
power is not that broad. The power is restricted. It says that the 
public administrator can dispose of assets in the everyday 
operations of the affiliate. 
 
That is different language. And it’s different because it has a 
different meaning. What it is designed to do is restrict the 
power of the public administrator. And while it’s not 
appropriate to say what any judge would do with these sections, 
an attempt has been made to draw a distinction between 
affiliates and district health boards. 
 
So a judge must determine whether the law has been followed, 
and the law is set out in the subsection. And I think it’s 
reasonably clear. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just some closing 
comments, Mr. Minister. This Bill, in essence, changes the rules 
for affiliates. Essentially this is really the second stage of health 
care reform, bringing in a Bill that seeks to extend the same 
control over facilities, budgets, appointments, and procedures 
over affiliates that the minister already has over the district 
health boards. 
 
One of the main features of this part of the Bill is the rules 
which govern how affiliates must enter into agreements with 
the district health boards. Clause 26 of the Bill says that after 
the minister designates an affiliate, which he does so by 
regulation, the district health board must stop funding the 
affiliate, signs an agreement with the district health board which 
must cover all the topics in clause 26. Naturally the list of 
topics includes “any other prescribed matter.” 
 
The agreements cover what services the affiliates may provide 
and what money they will receive from the district health board 
to provide those services. They are similar to the service 
agreements which the district health boards must sign with the 
minister before they receive any money from the minister. 
 
Some of the requirements for the agreements are oppressive and 
demonstrate a complete lack of trust by the minister towards the 
affiliates. It’s the same lack of trust that the minister has shown 
towards the district health boards. 
 
We should have asked  or we should ask, why call it an 
agreement here when it’s not really an agreement at all? Why is 
an audit needed, as I have asked before. Why all the  



3140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

information requirements from the affiliates to the district 
health boards? Why not some limits on the information 
requirements, etc., etc. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that we have to reconsider, as my 
colleague has just mentioned, what it means to be a democratic 
society. This Bill goes completely against democracy and we 
are not in agreement with it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is the first of 
the amendments that I introduced or announced at the start of 
the Bill. I would, just before I move this amendment, like to 
make mention to the minister that I did meet with my students 
and they didn’t . . . although they didn’t have a lot of health 
questions, they did have one question. And they were 
wondering who I was talking to. And I said, well why would 
you ask that? And they said, well, there was members on that 
side of the House that were reading newspapers, and some that 
were having a rest, and others doing something else, so they 
wondered who on earth I was talking to. 
 
And I said, well I can assure you that the Health minister was 
listening and was responding, and that’s who I was talking to. 
So I alleviated their concerns that nobody was listening to what 
I had to say. 
 
To move on to this amendment: 
 

Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill by deleting from 
subsection 19(3.3) being enacted all the words that follow 
the words “Court of Queen’s Bench” and replacing them 
with the words “a statement of claim claiming the amount 
set out in the statement or any portion of that amount that 
is outstanding, plus interest calculated in accordance with 
subsection (3.2).” 

 
And I do move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 12:33 p.m. until 12:34 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  7 
 
Aldridge McLane McPherson 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays  18 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 
Johnson Goulet Kowalsky 
Crofford Renaud Trew 
 

Nilson Cline Stanger 
Hamilton Langford Wall 
Kasperski Sonntag Jess 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair:  Just a minute please. My apologies to the 
member from Arm River. According to Beauchesne’s, the 
chairman will call the amendments in the order in which they 
appear in the Bill, and I believe the minister has an amendment 
with an earlier clause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I move that we amend clause 10 of the 
printed Bill by: 
 

Amend subsection 26.1(2) of The Health Districts Act, as 
being enacted by clause 10 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) in clause (b) by adding the words “for the district 
health board” after “to be provided”; and 
 
(b) in clause (e) by striking out “90” and substituting 
“180”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As noted earlier, we 
would move an amendment to: 
 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 
after subsection 26.1(2) the following: 
 
“26.1(2.1) An agreement required by subsection (1) may 
not require an affiliate to provide services the provision of 
which would violate the ethical or religious tenets of the 
affiliate.” 

 
I do move. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:40 p.m. until 12:41 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 7 
 
Aldridge McLane McPherson 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays  17 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 
Johnson Goulet Kowalsky 
Crofford Renaud Trew 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3141 

 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Sonntag Jess  
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Further to clause 
10, we’ll be moving another amendment to: 
 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill 
 

(a) by adding to subsection 26.1(3) being enacted after the 
words “The district health board for the health district in 
which an affiliate provides service” the words “or the 
affiliate”; and 
 
(b) by deleting in subsection 26.1(5) being enacted the 
words “and the district health board has not requested the 
minister to appoint a mediator pursuant to subsection (3)” 
and replacing them with the words “and no request has 
been made under subsection (3) for the appointment of a 
mediator”. 

 
I do move. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:44 p.m. until 12:45 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  7 
 
Aldridge McLane McPherson 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays  18 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 
Johnson Goulet Kowalsky 
Crofford Renaud Trew 
Nilson Cline Stanger 
Hamilton Langford Wall 
Kasperski Sonntag Jess 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 11 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For most of this 
session through these hundred-and-somewhat-odd Bills that 
we’ve had, we’ve been talking about the problems that we have 
with a government that tries to govern by regulation. 
 
And this Bill is not any different from the other ones. We have 
a government that’s afraid to put a lot of the intent into the 
legislation and the meat of it is hidden in the regulations at the 
whim of the cabinet, at the whim of the minister in charge. And 
this one is no different. 
 
And we can only hope that this Minister of Health will, over the 
summer months as he’s thinking about some of these 
amendments that he has voted against today, will only realize 

that maybe he made a mistake on some of them and will 
re-visit, and certainly try and be more open and accountable to 
the people of the province, and to carry that message into 
cabinet and then try and impress on his colleagues that there are 
better ways to do things. 
 
And in the words of the Premier, it’s the Saskatchewan way. So 
why don’t we be first in Saskatchewan to do things differently 
and be more open and accountable to the people and be up front 
with them. 
 
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I will move an amendment once 
again regarding the regulations in particular to clause 22 of this 
printed Bill to: 
 

Amend subsection (1) of clause 22 by deleting the words 
“on proclamation” and substituting the words “upon 
consideration and acceptance by the Committee of the 
Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 
regulations proposed pursuant to clauses 40(1)(b.1), (c), 
(c.1) and (d), subclause 40(1)(h)(x.1), and clauses 
40(1)(j.1), (k), (m.1), (p.1),(p.2), (q.1), (q.2), (q.3) (q.4), 
(q.5), (s), (s.1) and (s.2).”. 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, even though I will be voting against 
this amendment, I do want to thank the member for his 
comments. 
 
And we should be guided by the spirit of some of the 
amendments, and we certainly will be. And I certainly 
appreciate the member’s kind help and advice in that regard. 
 
Before we vote, I just wanted to thank the officials for their 
assistance today because I believe they’ll be leaving for lunch 
which hopefully we all will be fairly soon. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:50 p.m. until 12:51 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  7 
 
Aldridge McLane McPherson 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays  18 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 
Johnson Goulet Kowalsky 
Crofford Renaud Scott 
Nilson Cline Stanger 
Hamilton Langford Wall 
Kasperski Sonntag Jess 
 
Clause 22 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 



3142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, 
to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that the Bill be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:54 p.m. until 12:55 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  22 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Johnson Goulet 
Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Stanger Hamilton 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Sonntag Jess 
Flavel   
 

Nays  7 
 
Aldridge McLane McPherson 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3143 
 June 25, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am presenting 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens from throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, concerned about the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from all over the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to present names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, some of the communities that we have involved 
today are Regina, Lipton, Fort Qu’Appelle, Rocanville, 
Weyburn, Moosomin, Wolseley, Rockglen, Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, Coronach, Moose Jaw, White City, Lancer, Cabri, 
Yellow Grass, Drinkwater, Esterhazy  virtually every corner 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of concerned citizens throughout the 
province concerned about the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names that are on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Weyburn, Lampman, Alysham, Regina, Margo, Moose Jaw, 
Fife Lake, Mortlach, Corning, and numerous places throughout 
the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names, probably hundreds and 
hundreds, regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from so many towns throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise on behalf of citizens  

concerned about the impending closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on the petition today number in the hundreds, from 
Regina mostly but also from southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout all of 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Petitions are from places . . . I would think virtually all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of concerned citizens throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre, to present a petition. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a lot of people from right 
across the province of Saskatchewan. I notice there are a lot 
from the city of Regina; they’re from Fort Qu’Appelle; I notice 
Central Butte, Riverhurst, Dubuc, Regina Beach, Moose Jaw, 
Buena Vista  from virtually right across the spectrum of 
southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of concerned citizens with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, pretty 
much span the province, from communities from Shaunavon to 
Regina, from Ogema to North Battleford, from Moose Jaw to 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Good guess, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve got 15 sheets of hundreds of names of people 
throughout Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  



3144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And again the people that have signed the petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re from Regina, they’re from Moose Jaw, they’re 
from all throughout the land. And as official opposition we’ll 
present all petitions from north, east, west, and south to fight 
for the common injustice being served by this government. And 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan today to present 
what is the last of the petitions regarding the saving of the 
Plains Health Centre here in Regina. To date there is 
somewhere between 70 and 80,000 petitions that we have 
presented during this session in the Assembly. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions, the 70 
to 80,000 people that have signed these petitions in desperation 
in their efforts to stop what the government is doing to the 
Plains Health Centre, are from virtually every community 
within my constituency. And I would think, by looking at half 
of these here, hundreds and hundreds of names, that each of the 
members across, from Regina and the rural constituencies, are 
also in this group. I so present on behalf of those people that are 
so desperate. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 
SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 
three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 
debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 
future, in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
And these come from the Aberdeen area, as well as Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also 
like to present a petition today that was missed earlier. These 
petitions come from the Gull Lake, Shaunavon, Tompkins, and 
Webb area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights) which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy today to present petitions on behalf of people from 
Saskatoon and Regina. They accompany, of course, the 
hundreds of names that were presented earlier on this subject. 
And I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it with a 
fair tendering policy which awards all government 
contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 
non-union, with no union hiring quotas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we sincerely hope that the government will 
be listening to the call of the people. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petition has 
been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 
reconsider the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 29 grade 4 students from Wilfred Hunt School that 
are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied 
today by their teachers, Evelyn Girard and Lisa Markestyn. And 
they are going to have a tour after they’ve watched the 
proceedings from the gallery, and I’ll be able to meet with them 
in the members’ dining room for refreshments. 
 
I know they’re nearing the end of their school year and so 
they’re excited about the time for their summer holiday. And I 
would like all members to welcome them  and I would hope 
close to our wrapping up of the year in the Assembly  join me 
in giving them a warm welcome and wishing the best for their 
summer holiday. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

70th Anniversary of Baldwinton Wheat Pool Elevator 
 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, over the weekend I was 
honoured to take part in a special anniversary celebration in my 
constituency. I am referring to the 70th anniversary of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevator at Baldwinton. As one of 
the few remaining original structures still in use, the 
Baldwinton elevator serves as an important reminder of the 
early days of farming in Saskatchewan. 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3145 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 150 people attended events for this 
anniversary, which included a parade of tractors, a barbecue, a 
dance, and official ceremonies. 
 
Over the past 70 years there have been many changes in 
farming practices and in agriculture in general. In today’s 
high-tech world of agribusiness and transportation, it was 
interesting to celebrate the anniversary of a structure that 
reflected the beginning of our farming industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to congratulate everyone who was involved in 
organizing this special celebration, especially the men and 
women who built, supported, and maintained the Baldwinton 
elevator, and acknowledge agents such as Bob Mantie, who has 
served as elevator agent for some 25 years. 
 
Congratulations to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, which works 
to unite farmers, and gain for them as a group what individuals 
alone cannot do. 
 
The first members of the Baldwinton elevator were determined, 
organized, and dedicated to a cooperative movement promoting 
the success of all farmers, with a vision to the future. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 17 I stood 
in this House and asked the Minister of Health to support my 
private member’s Bill to require all liquor outlets and licensed 
premises in Saskatchewan to post signs that warn drinking 
could be harmful to the health of an unborn child. At the time, 
the minister responded by saying that he was awaiting the 
recommendations by a working group on the fetal alcohol 
syndrome issue. He said he would not support my proposed Bill 
because it was too simplistic and hoped to arrive at his own 
proposals by the end of the session. 
 
The committee examining this issue was founded in 1992. That 
was four years ago. And here we are at the end of the session 
and this government has still not come up with any legislation 
to warn expectant mothers about the risk of fetal alcohol 
syndrome. FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) is the third-leading 
cause of mental retardation and is affecting all cultural, social, 
and economic groups. 
 
I would like to express my extreme disappointment that the 
minister does not consider this legislation a priority. He claimed 
he did not want to make politics out of this issue, but that is 
exactly what is happening, and it is at the expense of our 
unborn children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture News 
 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture is an 
important industry in my constituency and today I have some  

good news regarding this sector of our economy. 
 
Millstreet Development Corporation and Rockwell International 
have signed a distribution contract for Global Positioning 
System equipment. This equipment can precisely evaluate and 
recommend crop inputs to enhance crop yields for specific 
portions of land. The equipment is attached to seeders and 
combines and gathers field data for efficient seed, fertilizer, and 
pesticide use. 
 
The contract provides for Millstreet, a Regina-based company, 
to be the sole western Canadian distributor. 
 
The other good news involves the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
The Wheat Pool’s three major business segments posted strong 
performances as the company recorded before-tax earnings of 
40.1 million for the nine months ending on April 30. The 
earnings were 32 per cent or $9.9 million higher than last year. 
Sales and other operating revenues were 2.9 billion by the end 
of the third quarter, an increase of 236.5 million over last year. 
 
Agri-food processing led the way with $145 million increase 
due to higher sales by CanAmera Foods, Prairie Malt, and 
Dawn Foods Canada. Farm supply sales were also strong. 
Operating earnings for the grain handling marketing segment 
showed a $2.2 million improvement for the current quarter 
compared to last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Better Roads Coalition 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new public 
awareness campaign has unfolded across Saskatchewan this 
week pointing out the deplorable road conditions we are forced 
to face here in Saskatchewan. The Better Roads Coalition 
unveiled the billboards which declare: “caution, rough road 
ahead for the next 26,000 kilometres.” The huge sign 
encourages people to call their MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) and I hope the people do that, especially 
the government side. There's absolutely no doubt in my mind, 
Mr. Speaker. that that will happen, that we will get even more 
calls about the road situation. 
 
Time and time again I have stood in this House, Mr. Speaker, to 
ask the minister to seriously consider the safety risks we all face 
because of his neglect of Saskatchewan roads. I also urge all 
government members, maybe this summer, to take a drive 
across rural Saskatchewan and get firsthand knowledge on what 
deplorable state our roads are indeed in. Maybe then this 
government will finally start listening to the hundreds of 
complaints from people across this province who put their lives 
in jeopardy every day by travelling on neglected highways and 
roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

10th Anniversary of the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
congratulate the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre on its 10th  



3146 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

anniversary. I was very pleased to attend the open house on 
behalf of the minister, the hon. member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, and to be able to have an opportunity to chat with 
the staff, with the volunteers, with the young moms and their 
happy children. 
 
The Mackenzie centre started as a pilot project initiated by the 
junior service league of Regina and the special tutorial class for 
pregnant teens at Balfour Collegiate. The idea was that teenage 
moms would have a much better chance of finishing high 
school if affordable, high quality infant care was available to 
them. 
 
The Mackenzie centre provided child care near the school and 
in 1992, a second centre in the school itself was opened. Today 
both centres operate as a part of a more comprehensive support 
program that also encourages good parenting skills and helps 
young mothers develop networks for emotional support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all need help along the way when it comes to 
raising children. Teenage mothers need extra help. The right 
support at the right time can be critical for the teenage mother 
and her child. 
 
The Mackenzie Infant Care Centre was the first of its kind in 
Saskatchewan. A second teen-infant centre opened the same 
year in Saskatoon and both led the way for development of 
similar programs across the province. Now there are 14 such 
centres operating in or near high schools. 
 
I’d like to thank the staff and the volunteers for their hard work, 
foresight, dedication, and immeasurable contribution to the 
future of our province  our children. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Party Leadership Process 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as this 
session closes, I’d like to share a few frank thoughts with other 
members. The last few months are among the most trying I’ve 
ever encountered. We faced doubts, but at times dealt with them 
by doubting ourselves. We faced challenges. We struggled to 
meet these challenges but sometimes faltered. We’ve hoped, 
often only to see those hopes dashed. 
 
The trying times, Mr. Speaker, have been worth it because the 
people of this province are worth serving. The measure of one’s 
worth isn’t found in avoiding difficulty, it’s in the courage to 
persevere in spite of difficulty. My colleagues are men and 
women of strength, will overcome each and every challenge, 
and do so to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This past weekend the Liberal Party finalized its leadership 
selection process. By November, Saskatchewan residents will 
be given real leadership, a real alternative, and the real hope 
they so desperately seek. 
 
Perseverance, courage, and a commitment to service will be our 
legacy to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Treaty 6 Powwow 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, an event of important historical 
significance will be held in my constituency from July 4 to July 
7. The Waterhen Lake First Nation will be celebrating the 75th 
anniversary of its signing of Treaty 6. Activities over the four 
days include the main event powwow featuring dance 
competitors from Saskatchewan and Alberta. Prairie Oyster will 
be in concert Saturday evening. 
 
A world-class canoeing marathon will be held on July 4, and 
Solomon Carrier, a world-champion paddler, will be competing 
along with many other professional paddlers for $10,000 in 
prize money. Assembly of First Nations Chief, Ovide Mercredi, 
will formally start the marathon. Also in attendance will be 
Chief Blaine Favel of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Treaty 6 was originally signed at Forts Carlton and 
Pitt in 1876 between the Plains and Woodland Cree and the 
British Crown as represented by the Government of Canada. 
When the signing of Treaty 6 took place on November 8, 1921, 
RunningAround was the first chief of the Waterhen Lake Band. 
 
I would like to congratulate Chief Richard Fiddler, his 
councillors, and the band members of the Waterhen Lake First 
Nation for organizing all of these events and for celebrating a 
part of their history. And I invite everyone to attend these 
exciting celebrations. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Frontier Days Regional Fair and Rodeo 
 
Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Beginning this 
Thursday, the Frontier Days Regional Fair and Rodeo will be 
held in Swift Current. The Swift Current Agricultural and 
Exhibition Association has lined up some exciting 
entertainment and new promotions for people not only in Swift 
Current, but in the south-west region. 
 
On Thursday, a kiddies’ day parade will be hosted by Beta 
Sigma Phi. On Friday there will be a pancake breakfast hosted 
by the student employment centre. On Saturday the Frontier 
Days parade, of which I will be participating in, is sponsored by 
the ag and ex association and hosted by the Swift Current Lions 
Club. There are over 80 entries in the parade and the theme this 
year is: “Celebrate the Great South-west”. On Sunday the 
feature attraction is picnic in the park. 
 
Of course throughout the four days there will be events such as 
the annual CPRA (Canadian Professional Rodeo 
Association)-sanctioned professional rodeo, midway, casino, 
machinery displays, talent show, horse and cattle shows, 4-H 
shows, heritage village, crafts and exhibits, grandstand shows 
daily, children’s shows, and a chilli cook-off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Swift Current 
Agricultural and Exhibition Association for all of their hard 
work in organizing this year’s fair. And I would like to invite 
everyone to visit Swift Current from Thursday to Sunday to  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3147 

enjoy the many things that Frontier Days has to offer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
once again is for the Minister of Post-Secondary Education. Mr. 
Speaker, the Chief Electoral Officer has launched an 
investigation of the political donations of the three main 
political parties in Saskatchewan. Each party has received a 
letter asking certain pointed questions about their finances, and 
as I understand it, each letter is different, containing different 
questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my party has made public our letter and has 
committed to cooperating with the Chief Electoral Officer in 
every way. But the people of Saskatchewan have not yet heard 
that same commitment from either the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) or PCs (Progressive Conservative), so they ask the 
minister today whether his party will make public the letter his 
party received and make the same commitment to cooperate 
fully. 
 
And since I can’t ask the Leader of the Third Party to do the 
same in this particular forum, I’ll do so by way of a letter which 
we’ll deliver right now, Mr. Speaker. And with the help of a 
page, I’ll also send a written request to the minister. 
 
Again, I’ll ask: will he make his commitment today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must say to 
the member that I haven’t seen the letter addressed to the New 
Democratic Party. I understand by newspaper reports however, 
that a letter has been received by our party, and I understood 
Mr. Proctor to say that he intended to make it public. So I 
believe that’ll happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Reform 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to bring 
to the attention of this House today the fact that the New 
Democratic government in B.C. (British Columbia) has indeed 
slammed the brakes on plans to restructure the health care 
system in that province. This plan called for the creation of 100 
community-based boards much like the government has done in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Pressure from the public during the 
recent election and a strong Liberal opposition have forced 
B.C.’s New Democratic government to scrap its plans. 
 
Health minister Joy MacPhail says the changes were, and I 
quote, “bloating the bureaucracy, not trimming it.” 
 
Will our Minister of Health explain why his government has 
refused to come to the same realization and when will they  

come to their senses and take some action like the B.C. 
government has done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The hon. member obviously has not 
been following the proceedings of the House or the activities 
within the province concerning this issue, which is basically a 
management-labour issue. There was legislation passed within 
this legislature. I don’t know how the member opposite viewed 
it personally. It’s good legislation and what the legislation does 
is pave the way for putting in place a commissioner to sort out 
the issues. 
 
The legislation was modelled on the British Columbia example 
which we think was very successful there. We’re following 
basically the same route. We’re in the very final stages of 
deciding, between SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), the organization that represents the health care 
districts in Saskatchewan, and the five major unions that are 
involved in organizing employees in the health care sector — 
and it’s very, very close to deciding — on who the 
commissioner should be and what those terms of reference 
should be. 
 
So if the member followed a little more closely he’d know 
we’re following a very good example set by B.C. which is 
going to be beneficial to us here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for that. But maybe we could pay a little closer 
attention and listen to the next question. Maybe we can get . . . 
if he wants to answer as well, I guess . . . I’m not sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Roberta McKay, the former president of the 
SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association), is among those who 
would not classify herself as a fan of this government’s version 
of health reform. 
 
In a recent Leader-Post article, McKay questions, and I quote: 
 

Wasn’t it a bit bold to stake a major part of the health 
reform on something that no one is sure works better than 
the old way? (She adds) This is a massive social 
experiment with no evidence it will work or be less 
expensive. 
 

Mr. Speaker, yes, this is a health question. And yes, dollars and 
cents are at work here  not common sense . . . is driving the 
NDP’s vision of the health reform. The true cost of this failed 
process can be found with every person who is sick or elderly 
but is not being provided the quality of care that they need or 
deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health, I hope, follow the lead 
of his B.C. counterpart and admit his government’s 
restructuring of health reform has been a dismal failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



3148 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not really sure what 
I can add to what the Minister of Labour said, but I’ll make an 
effort anyway. Yes, they had an election in British Columbia 
where the Liberals, yes, came in second, I believe, but blew a 
20-point lead in the process, much like the Liberals have done 
elsewhere. 
 
But I would remind the member that we had an election just 
about a year ago in this province. And in that election the 
record of this government on health care was put to the voters, 
put at issue by the members of the opposition. And of course 
what happened is that this government received, I believe the 
largest mandate of a second term government in the history of 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  So we believe, Mr. Speaker, that no system 
is perfect, but that the people support our approach to health 
care, which is to do everything we can to maintain the public 
medicare system, unlike the U.S. (United States)-style, two-tier 
system advocated by the member from Arm River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Health Care Funding 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Health is all 
too aware, health care rallies have taken place in communities 
throughout Saskatchewan over the past few months. People are 
coming out in the hundreds to protest this NDP government’s 
abandonment of rural health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another such public meeting is slated to take place 
this evening in Morse, where locals fear the closure of the 
nearby Herbert hospital or nursing home. Will the minister tell 
this House if he plans on attending this meeting and what he 
plans to do to address the concerns of area residents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I commend the health boards 
around the province for doing what they’re mandated to do, 
which is to have at least two public health meetings a year so 
that the public can have some say in health care. It’s the first 
time that this has occurred. And I have every confidence that 
the health district will consult with the people of the area and 
come up with an appropriate plan to meet the health care needs 
of the people of the district. 
 
We have a very good health system, Mr. Speaker, and it’s our 
goal to keep it that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, Herbert faces a possible loss of 
its hospital or nursing home because of the fact that this 
government has reduced funding for the Rolling Hills District 
Health Board. Another board facing the same situation is the 
Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District which faces a 3.3 per cent 
reduction in funding. 

Mr. Speaker, since April this district has been using its reserves 
to maintain the present level of service. However, these reserves 
will soon be depleted. It is expected that as many as 50 
front-line care-givers will be eliminated to address this funding 
shortfall. Will the minister explain how the people residing in 
this district can continue to have any confidence in their local 
health care system when this government is driving it into the 
ground? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to inform the member from Thunder 
Creek, Mr. Speaker, that this year this provincial government 
and the people of Saskatchewan are putting $47 million extra, 
provincial health care spending, into the health care system. The 
reason being that the Liberal Party, with which the member is 
associated, in Ottawa, has cut back on health care spending in 
this province by that amount. 
 
As of April 1, 1997, the Liberals in Ottawa are going to cut 
back on health care spending to the province of Saskatchewan 
by $100 million. Now if I was a member of the Liberal Party, I 
wouldn’t want these facts to be revealed to the public and I 
wouldn’t want to talk about these matters either, Mr. Speaker. 
But the fact is we have to deal, our province, every province, 
has to deal with the largest cut to health care spending in the 
history of Canada, and that cut has come from the Liberal Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the number of communities 
seeking legal action against this government now totals five, 
with possibly more to come. When Providence Place officials 
announced last week that it was proceeding with a lawsuit, the 
minister indicated to the media that this action is inappropriate. 
He stated that, and I quote: “It is unfortunate that public funds 
will now be used to pay legal fees in defending the claim rather 
than for the provision of health care services.” 
 
Given these comments, will the Minister of Health explain why 
his government is inviting such action by failing to properly 
fund rural health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I think in this session we 
have found the member’s commentary with respect to lawsuits 
and court proceedings to be less than accurate. And I want to 
say to the member what I said before, and that is that many 
lawsuits are started but at the end of the day, the best way to 
deal with a situation where one party is suing another, just like 
any other dispute, is for the parties to sit down and try to 
resolve the issue. 
 
And I say to the member that that’s what should be done in this 
case as well. And if we’re going to have a long-term solution to 
this problem, then I suggest to the member that he should join 
with us in suggesting to the parties concerned that they sit 
down, negotiate in good faith, and attempt to resolve their 
differences. 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3149 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highways Maintenance 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
my questions are for the Minister of Highways and potholes. 
Mr. Minister, yesterday some more signs went up across this 
province warning people about the terrible shape of 
Saskatchewan highways. Only this time it wasn’t the 
Department of Highways that was putting up the signs, 
probably because they’ve already run out of red flags. 
 
Several organizations calling themselves the Better Roads 
Coalition are putting up billboards in several locations 
throughout the province. You probably saw a picture of one in 
today’s papers, and I know that you look at the pictures first so 
you’ve probably seen it. 
 
The billboards say: 
 

Caution! Rough road ahead. Next 26,000 kilometers. 
Speak to your MLA 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan highways are a disaster. And 
now a public campaign has been launched to drive this point 
home to you and your government. So, Mr. Minister, what are 
you going to do to address this embarrassing and dangerous 
shape that Saskatchewan highways have come to be in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 
question. I understand that Mr. Manley McLachlan is a 
spokesperson for this organization. And I do understand that 
Mr. McLachlan is quite active in many issues, and actually I 
would be quite worried if I was the member from Wood River 
because there’s a leadership convention coming soon in that 
party and maybe this is what Mr. McLachlan is doing. 
 
But I want to say to the member that once I explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan what the Conservatives did in their 
administration under Mr. Devine  spent millions and millions 
and millions of dollars, costing us an interest bill of $851 
million each and every year; we could actually twin No. 1 
Highway 10 times each and every year with just the money that 
we spend on interest that we’re paying on your debt  when I 
explain it to them, the people of Saskatchewan are very 
understanding and they appreciate the work that we are doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental for the same minister. Well, Mr. Minister, the 
truth of the matter is that you’ve got $5.2 billion to spend; 
you’ve got 7-plus billion dollars in the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the minister brags about all 
the money you’ve got. You’ve got money running out of your 
ears. The simple fact of the matter is that you and your 
government wouldn’t know how to manage a kindergarten 
piggy bank, let alone the affairs of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Minister, this is not just the members of the opposition who 
are complaining about the shape of Saskatchewan highways; 
even one of your own cabinet colleagues, the Minister of 
Agriculture, has complained in his local paper about the shape 
of Highway No. 15 and 20. And apparently those highways are 
now being repaired, Mr. Minister. Yahoo! What do you know? 
 
Well we’re glad for the people that live in the Minister of 
Agriculture’s constituency because we’re happy that they’re 
getting their roads fixed. But what about the rest of us, Mr. 
Minister? What about those of us that live in the rest of the 
ridings, including the back-benchers in the NDP? What do they 
have to do to get some of their roads fixed in this province? Do 
they have to become the Minister of Agriculture? 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you treat the people of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly my riding and the rest of the back-benchers, why do 
you treat them like first-class taxpayers and second-class 
citizens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you for the question, to the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker. And when you talk about 
robbing piggy banks, you know the members of the third party 
haven’t got a lot of credibility when they want to talk about 
that. 
 
But what I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
and he knows very well, in the south-west where he is from, the 
area that he represents, there’s a transportation council with 
over a hundred municipalities involved, priorizing their road 
needs; realizing that we have to change the way we do things, to 
spend the limited funds more wisely. Why? Because of the way 
they spent in the 1980s, the debt that they created, and the 
interest that we have to pay. 
 
They also realize, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals across, their 
federal government is taking away transfer payments from the 
province in health care, education, and social programs, and we 
and other departments have to back-fill. And once you explain 
that to the people, Mr. Speaker, they understand and they 
appreciate the work that our crews are doing now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Now the — order, order — the Speaker quite 
understands that all members of the House have great 
enthusiasm for question period today, but I’m finding it 
increasingly difficult to be able to hear both the questions being 
put and the answers being provided. So I’ll ask all members to 
cooperate and allow the Hon. Leader of the Third Party to be 
heard. 
 

Government Election Platform 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, last 
year you campaigned on a platform of improving health care, 
cutting taxes, and creating jobs. We then waited nine months 
for a legislative session, and then when the session finally  



3150 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

arrived, you have failed to address any of those important 
questions. 
 
Have you improved health care? No. Hospitals and nursing 
homes continue to close all over the province. Have you cut 
taxes? No. Saskatchewan people continue to bear one of the 
highest tax burdens in all of Canada. Have you created jobs? 
No. Through the first five months of 1996 you have averaged 
800 fewer jobs than last year. 
 
Mr. Premier, why have you abandoned all of your campaign 
promises? Why have you failed to address all of the important 
concerns of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I thought the member was going to 
have a tough question for his last question of the session, but 
it’s actually, Mr. Speaker, a very easy one to answer. Obviously 
the health care system in this province, and education, are two 
of the biggest reasons why the United Nations formula applied 
to Canada show that Saskatchewan is the best province in 
Canada to live, in the best country in the world. 
 
So what you’re saying is absolute nonsense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, when he talks about jobs, he can’t be farther from the 
truth. And he does the companies of Saskatchewan a great 
disservice, the companies like Pelorus Manufacturing that’s 
going through expansion, Thomson Meats, Komis gold mine, 
Saskferco, the Alcatel expansion, and the list goes on and on. 
 
I say to the member opposite, we are booming in Saskatchewan. 
I can’t understand why you are so negative, but it might explain 
why you have only five seats, and if you keep that negative 
attitude, I can assure you five seats is the most you’re going to 
have for a long, long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we keep 
hearing from NDP members about what a great job they’re 
doing . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the Speaker’s 
having difficulty hearing because of the support from behind 
the Leader of the Third Party and I will ask all hon. members to 
come to order. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  And I appreciate all that support as well. We 
keep hearing what a great job the NDP is doing from the NDP 
members, but a great job for who? A few weeks ago you 
announced record profits from the Crown corporations, and on 
that very same day you closed down a seniors’ home in Swift 
Current. 
 
That’s been the pattern of the NDP  a government that cares 
more about its family of Crown corporations than the families  

of Saskatchewan people. A government that cares more about 
its own political health than the health of the sick and the 
elderly in this province. A government that finds $4,000 for 
each of its back-benchers and cabinet members, but can’t find 
tax breaks for the average Saskatchewan family. 
 
Your government has really screwed-up priorities, Mr. Minister, 
and you’ve really showed it during this session. Mr. Minister, 
why have you failed to address the real issues, the important 
issues, for the families of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is using some lines obviously written for Grant Devine back 
before the 1982 election, and I can understand, this being the 
last day, why the researchers were finding it hard to find new 
lines, but I would give those away. You’re talking about the 
family of Crown corporations. Those old words are what got 
Grant Devine . . . the guy who was well-known for, “give her 
snoose” and “don’t say slow down in a mud hole,” and also 
said that we were so well off “you could mismanage the 
province and still break even”. Give up on those lines. 
 
Join with the business people and men and women in this 
province who are building a community, the working people, to 
form a partnership in order that we can continue to build on the 
strength of this province. I say to you, if you stick with those 
old Tory lines, you’re doomed to third party, and that new 
image you’re trying to create isn’t going to be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Facilities Closures 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health and not the Minister of 
Labour this time. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Order! Order. Order. I’ll 
ask all hon. members to allow the hon. member for Arm River 
to be heard. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again my 
question is probably for the Minister of Health as opposed to 
the Minister of Labour. Mr. Speaker, this government’s total 
abandonment of our seniors is clearly demonstrated in the 
recent closure of the Swift Current Care Home. In this case, 
more than 1,300  1,300, Mr. Speaker — people have signed 
the petitions opposing the closure. I’d like to send this over to 
the minister if I could. 
 
But again this government refuses to acknowledge or address 
those concerns. Mr. Speaker, I could just as easily be presenting 
petitions from the residents of Melfort or Leroy or Rose Valley 
or Regina or Estevan, all over the province, all communities in 
which long-term care have been cut back substantially or 
closed. However, the minister and his government fail to realize 
that pressure is mounting in these and other communities to 
protect our sick and our elderly. 
 
What is the minister prepared to do to address the many 
problems that he and his government have created? 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3151 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I certainly believe that we should 
protect our sick and the elderly, and I’ll tell you something, Mr. 
Speaker, the last group I would ask or rely upon to protect the 
sick and elderly would be members of the Liberal Party. 
 
But I want to say to the member that what the member doesn’t 
acknowledge when he gets up day after day and talks about how 
the Liberal Party will support the sick and the elderly is that 
there are other ways of delivering health care, Mr. Speaker. 
There are two visions here: one vision is that you put everybody 
in a nursing home once they get old  that’s one vision. That’s 
seems to be the Liberal vision. 
 
The other vision is you have nursing home beds for people who 
need them, which includes the people who are presently in 
nursing homes, and you also have home care and 
community-based services to keep people healthy, independent, 
active in their own communities as long as they don’t need to 
go into a nursing home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is a progressive, positive vision which this government 
embraces and which progressive people all over the province 
embrace. And I can tell the member that we’re going to have 
that progressive vision. We’re going to do things in new ways. 
We’re going to take care of the sick and the elderly far better 
than the Liberal Party ever will as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier and the 
government, including the Minister of Health, claim to be in 
touch with the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  They claim to have the best interests of 
Saskatchewan residents at heart. The fact is they have clearly 
demonstrated neither. 
 
A perfect example of this fact involves the debate that has been 
raised over this NDP government . . . to close the Plains Health 
Centre. In spite of the fact that the Liberal opposition has 
presented petitions in this House on behalf of more than 
70,000, Mr. Speaker  70,000 Saskatchewan residents, this 
government refuses to acknowledge the feelings of these 
people, much less address the concerns that they have 
registered. 
 
Instead they put a gun to the board of the district health board 
that forced them to make the decision. Will the Minister of 
Health explain in this House today why he and this government 
continue to demonstrate such arrogance and contempt towards 
the people of this province, the very people that they’re 
supposed to be representing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Now of course what the Liberal Party says 
to the public, Mr. Speaker, is misrepresentation because what  

they say is that the services that are now provided at the Plains 
Health Centre are not going to be available. Nothing could be 
further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. Those services are going to 
be consolidated in two other centres in Regina. 
 
The problem with the Liberal Party is they cannot accept 
change, and the reality of the closure of this centre, Mr. 
Speaker, is that times do change. 
 
I say to the members of the Liberal Party that they should join 
with us in changing the medicare system to make it sustainable, 
instead of advocating, as the member from Arm River does, that 
we go to a two-tiered system or, as the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena does, that we embrace the American style 
of health care or, going back to the member from Arm River, 
that we dismantle the national medicare system, which the 
member from Arm River was advocating in the House 
yesterday and which he has advocated before. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to adhere to the history 
of this province and this party and keep the medicare system 
we’ve got, not adopt the two-tiered, U.S.-style system as 
advocated by the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education System Review 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
throughout Saskatchewan, schools have been taking part in all 
sorts of pilot projects to help deal with this government’s cuts 
to funding. School boards are experimenting with alternate 
school years, four-day weeks, and many other cost-saving ideas, 
all under the supervision of the Minister of Education. 
 
Minister has also initiated a series of consultations to determine 
how we can best work together to structure our education 
system for the future. Will the minister explain how she is 
evaluating the information from these meetings and all the pilot 
projects, and will she be sharing the results with other school 
boards and the Saskatchewan public? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as the members 
know, we announced a major public consultation process with 
the public, I think at the end of May, where we are asking 
people to come to public meetings and talk about the future of 
how we structure public education in the province. 
 
I am pleased to report that as of last night we’ve had 51 
meetings with close to 4,000 people in attendance. We’ve had 
over, I believe, 700 written presentations that have been sent to 
myself and the department, and we’ve had over 220 visits to the 
Internet site with people talking about how they would like to 
see the governance and structure of public education in the 
province. 
 
Now this process will go on throughout the month of July, 
August, September, and October. 
 
And I can assure all members of the House and the public that 
we will, at the end of the day, make a decision based on what  



3152 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

the public had to say to us. And then we will ensure that if a 
decision is made to alter the way we presently structure public 
education, all of the various stakeholders involved will be 
properly consulted, and there will be a collaborative process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, visitors 
from Montreal, Quebec, in our west gallery. Eli and Henning 
Ross-Jensen are here visiting with my father, Tom Nilson. And 
they are here as guests of western Canada, but also I think now 
on a . . . maybe annual tour, to come and see how we’re doing 
and also report on how things are going in Quebec. Let’s all 
give them a good hand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
welcome you back here today. It’s great to have you back here 
today in fact, Mr. Minister, because as you had stated yesterday, 
on many occasions, that really our problem here is all in 
interpretation. And I know that you have spent hours and hours 
and hours pouring over this Act in the last while to . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. The Chair is having a hard time 
hearing the member and we want to get the questions out and 
the Bill through, so I could bring order to the House, please. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, Mr. Minister, 
what we’re going to start with today is having you step me 
through where the interpretation problem is that I supposedly 
am having and you don’t have. 
 
Just a quick recap of where we were at from yesterday. You had 
told me  told the House, Mr. Minister, on a number of 
occasions  that there was nothing wrong with the present Act 
but that you were going to fix it. And we went all through that 
and maybe later today we’ll revisit what it is that happened in 
1974 and 1978 that would cause you to think that we have to 
fix something here today, because you didn’t make that clear to 
me. And I think at some point today you will have the 

opportunity to make that very clear — what it is that we have 
that actually needs fixing. 
 
We’re going to start, Mr. Minister, with the definition of an 
agent. Now we had left off with that . . . I’d really, really 
appreciate it if the member from Cypress Hills would have his 
conversation elsewhere. But if in fact you would step us 
through exactly what an agent is, because when I look in 
Hansard and yesterday your explanation of an agent is someone 
who is authorized to act on the principal’s behalf and who’s 
actions are subject to the control and direction of a principal. 
And this is only under 219 of the Act where they are referring 
to agents. 
 
So can you give me some examples then, of who an agent 
would be, say for your party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No I can’t. I can say that the member 
asked me for a definition of agent and I drew upon the advice of 
my officials and my own background and gave him what I 
consider to be the definition or the understanding of the term 
agent as it is defined and understood in law. That’s all I was 
trying to do. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. But now the Act is very clear, I 
think, and until you convince me otherwise, there’s only a few 
ways that your party is going to have monies . . . In fact there’s 
only two ways that your Act is going to have monies. And it’s 
going to fall under either section 207 or section . . . which in 
essence is an individual bringing forward monies and they’ll go 
through the disclosure as stated in section 207; or section 219, 
where you use an agent. 
 
Now does your party  just so I understand what an agent is  
does your party use an agent to in fact fund . . . I’ll leave it at 
that. Do you use an agent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, with great respect, I’m not 
sure I follow the member. We file a return, as we’re required to 
do by the Act, which I understood was pursuant to section 210. 
And the mechanisms as to how those things happen within the 
party, I’m not certain I can answer with any clarity. 
 
The member probably knows as much about that as I do. He 
was a member of this party for many, many years and would 
know how those mechanisms work. But the return that we file, I 
thought was filed pursuant to the requirements of section 210. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well no, Mr. Minister, in fact if you’re 
bringing in monies . . . Well let’s recall what’s happened here in 
the last month. There have been a couple of funds, secret funds, 
that have become known to the public through the media. 
Firstly, we started out with the PC metro fund and through the 
Tommy Douglas fund . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s not a secret. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh, you’re saying it’s not a secret? Good. 
Well we’ll get into that then because you’re going to have to 
tell me why it isn’t secret. 
 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3153 

If it isn’t secret, then I’m sure what you brought with you today 
is a list of all the people that donate to that fund so we can see 
that it’s not secret. 
 
But under section 219  and, Mr. Minister, I know that you’re 
getting back to your problem of yesterday where you think that 
you’re going to play a bit of a game and that we’re just going to 
step over this — but under section 219, if in fact you’re using 
monies as a registered party . . . 
 
(1430) 
 
And you can’t let on you don’t know if your party is doing this 
because you’re bringing in amendments that affect this — these 
sections of the Act. Now you wouldn’t bring in an amendment 
if you don’t know even what your own party is doing or what 
the third party there is up to. I mean we’d all like to know what 
they’re up to. But you wouldn’t bring in amendments unless 
you actually knew for sure what you were already doing, and 
unless you knew for sure how the Act is working within your 
own party, and the funding that goes to your registered party. 
 
So the question is quite simple, I think. In fact 219(2): “Where a 
person uses an agent as authorized by subsection (1), the agent 
. . .” And this was yesterday’s question. I asked you what an 
agent was and you gave me the answer of registered agent. But 
here, I think it’s very clear that you’re either dealing with a lot 
of individual donations, which would fall under section 207, or 
you’re using somebody to collect monies for your registered 
party, which would fall under section 219. 
 
And I’m asking you to give me an example of who raises 
monies for you, or for your registered party. Give me some 
examples of people that would do this that you would consider 
to be agents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I don’t know. I couldn’t answer 
the member’s question. I’m not certain there would be anybody 
on this side of the House who is that familiar with the 
operations of the party. 
 
It is not the operations of our party that leads us to bring 
forward these amendments. These amendments are being 
brought forward because of an issue that was brought, that was 
created, that was driven, by the Liberal Party. We understood 
that you were coming forward with a novel interpretation of the 
sections of the Act that would be quite different than the Act 
had been applied over these many years. 
 
And that was an interesting series of ideas. And we considered, 
tried to understand what it was that the Leader of the 
Opposition was talking about; and tried to fashion amendments 
that would meet some of those ideas. I mean they’re not bad 
ideas. They speak to the transparency of political contributions. 
 
This has been a developing area of the law in this country over 
many years, as I’ve said to the member before. And I don’t 
want to waste the time of the committee, but I’m just trying to 
answer the member’s question here. 
 
We were trying to meet what we understood to be the Leader of  

the Opposition’s point about the transparency of the political 
contributions. And we could see immediately at the press 
conference where Garrett Wilson was one of the participants 
that he had another interpretation of the Act, and he was 
alleging that we were not in compliance with the present law. 
 
We are. I mean we think we are. Our position is just as firm as 
it can possibly be. This is our law and we prepared it and we 
passed it in this legislature. And we followed it over all these 
many years. 
 
But we could see the point that Garrett Wilson was driving at 
and which was being enunciated by the Leader of the 
Opposition. So we tried in the same spirit as the rest of the Act 
that’s been put forward, to change the Act to accommodate all 
of the ideas that we have about what the election law of this 
province should have. 
 
This was not an attempt to deal with something within our party 
or deal with some particular situation anywhere else. It was an 
attempt to produce a better election law for this province and it 
was based upon ideas that were enunciated by your party. It’s as 
simple as that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I fail to see what is novel 
about this interpretation. So our interpretation . . . I’m going to 
work clearly from first, the two sections in the Act  207, 
which is subject to other provisions in this section, and the only 
other provision is 219. All right? But 207(1)(a): 
 

all moneys provided by any person, for the use of a 
registered party, whether as a gift, contribution, loan, (and 
of course those loans to Tommy Douglas House would fit 
in here because it’s to the registered party) deposit or 
otherwise, shall be paid on his own behalf, out of moneys 
to which he is beneficially entitled, to a registered agent of 
the party; 
 

Tell me what that means to you. Let’s start slower then, today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well it means exactly that. I mean it 
means exactly what it says. Those are very simple words, and 
they’re clear. I mean I can’t help the member there. All I can do 
is read the same section back to him that he read to us. 
 
I don’t want to play games here and I don’t want to be cute, but 
I don’t know what the member wants from me. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. Then with section 207, anyone, 
any person that is making these contributions for the use of a 
registered party, do you feel that those people, the names and 
the amounts that they so provide — monies or loans or gifts, 
contributions, advance deposits — should they be disclosed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think we’re getting right down here to 
the argument, if I can use that term, that is going on between 
your legal advisers and our legal advisers. Not to say that 
they’ve been arguing with each other. But they’ve been 
advising us, putting forward their interpretation of the Act. And 
I think the member is getting right down to the nub of that now. 
 



3154 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

Now I don’t know whether it’s appropriate for you and I to 
duke it out here or whether it’s for Garrett Wilson and Wil 
Olive to duke it out somewhere else. I don’t know. 
 
But to me those words are just as clear as they can be. And we 
have complied with them. I think you have complied with them 
too as best I can see. I don’t know about the Tories; it’s not my 
job to judge that sort of thing. But I want to be responsive to the 
member because these are serious matters. But I don’t know 
what more I can say. 
 
The member mentioned loan, and I’m not aware that Tommy 
Douglas House loaned any money. I’m not aware that they 
loaned any money. I just picked up on a word that you used, 
which seemed to indicate to me that they had loaned money. I 
know that they guaranteed a bank loan, which was interim 
financing, as I understood the media reports on it, for an 
election campaign. And the loan came . . . the commercial loan 
from a commercial bank or a chartered bank, and then of course 
it was repaid as the election money came in. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I don’t think you got to deal 
with my question. My question had to do with, does the person 
who is providing any of the things that I had read here  a gift, 
contribution, loan, advance deposit or otherwise, for the use of 
a registered party . . . so if a person is giving monies of any kind 
to a registered party, do you believe that those names should be 
fully disclosed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well as I read 207, the thrust of 
subsection (1) is that money that is contributed has to be paid to 
a registered agent of the party. That’s what subsection (1) seems 
to me to be all about. It’s directing where the money will be 
paid, and it cuts out all other possibilities. 
 
I apologize to the member if I’m not grasping the question, but 
we’re both being a bit distracted, I think. But that’s as I 
understand the requirement  207 is not a reporting section. 
That’s right, yes. Okay. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would agree 
with you. What I’m getting at are the people that are providing 
monies to a registered party and providing them through an 
avenue . . . what avenue are they providing them through? In 
your case, in your party’s case, it would be through a 
constituency association  right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Could be, yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. Now do you consider that 
constituency association to be an agent in accordance with 
section 219? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the way that I see this is that when 
my constituency association forwards money to the provincial 
office, to the NDP, it does so as an association under section 
210. That’s one of the entities that are named there. 
 
I mentioned 210 earlier, and that’s the one that requires 
reporting. It’s a return and shows the amount of money 
provided for the use of the party by individuals, corporations,  

societies, trade unions, unincorporated organizations or 
associations, and any other persons. So that when my  to 
repeat myself  when my constituency association pays money 
to the provincial party, it does so in that capacity and the party 
has an obligation to include that in the return. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. Well that moves us along here a 
little bit, Mr. Minister. So under section 210, you feel that all of 
the donations over more than $100 that flow to your 
constituency associations should then be reported under section 
210 because your constituency association is of course listed as 
an association. 
 
So if I look at 210(2)(b): 
 

the name of each member of each class of persons 
mentioned in clause (a) who made a loan, advance, 
deposit, contribution or gift of more than $100, or who 
made loans, advances, deposits, contributions or gifts the 
aggregate of which is more than $100, in the fiscal year for 
the use of the party, and the amount of each loan, advance, 
deposit, contribution or gift, or of the aggregate of the 
loans, advances, deposits, contributions or gifts, made by 
any such person; 
 

So now what we’re saying . . . what you’re saying, what you 
said was that your constituency association would fall under (v) 
 210(2)(a)(v); it’s an association. And clearly, right below 
that, it’s asking that the name of each member of each class be 
listed. Can you tell me where I would find those lists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In the case of my constituency . . . I 
shouldn’t be answering questions in my personal capacity as an 
MLA; I’m here as a minister. But I’ll do it just by way of 
example. 
 
Mine are tax-creditable contributions and they flow through the 
provincial party to the federal party. And the information is 
public that way, in the same way that I think all parties function. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, we’ll deal with your 
own constituency for awhile. You’re saying that every donation 
that you received to your constituency association flowed 
through the federal tax credit system, so it would fall under the 
Canada Election Act and we would be able to see the list of 
donors I guess in Ottawa, if they’re sitting there. It’s exactly 
what we tabled in the House today. 
 
But are you saying that you then have no other donations to or 
through your constituency association, other than those? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m not sure, again, what the member is 
asking me and I apologize. And it’s probably my fault and not 
yours. 
 
What we’re talking about here is the return that is required to be 
made by the  what’s the term?  by the chief official agent 
of the party. And that’s under subsection 1 and that return sets  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3155 

out the amount of money that they receive from my 
constituency association and everybody else’s constituency 
association and all the other people, organizations, persons 
named under subsection 2. I mean I can’t answer as to what my 
constituency association . . . how they report that matter. 
 
I mean I know it’s done and the member will know how that 
works. I mean it’s not the sort of thing that an MLA does, and 
not appropriate for me to answer anyway as in my capacity as a 
minister. But the point I want to make to you is that the 
constituency associations do provide money for the use of the 
party as associations under subsection 2, and it is in the 
obligation of the chief official agent of our party to transmit to 
the Chief Electoral Officer a return. That’s what we do. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well this is getting confusing, Mr. 
Minister, because a moment ago you told me, you told this 
House, that your constituency association would fall under 
210(2)(a)(v) because it’s an association, and I accept that. But 
directly below that, which would be 210(2)(b), it states that any 
of the above . . . I’ll paraphrase it. Any of the . . . well I’ll read 
it: “the name of each member of each class” from 1 to 6 should 
be disclosed. 
 
And so what you’re saying is that now you don’t know how 
they do it in your own constituency. Let’s say if I were to look 
at a return, your return then, because of section 210 . . . well 
because of The Election Act, you’re telling me firstly that I 
would be able to see the full list because they’ve all run through 
the tax credit system and would fall under the Canada Elections 
Act. 
 
So if I look at your return, what am I going to see? Am I going 
to see any other donations that perhaps didn’t fall under the 
Canada Elections Act? Will I see donations from trade unions 
or corporations or your constituency association, which does 
have to disclose every name of every individual that donated 
over $100. It’s right there, Mr. Minister. You’re the lawyer, I’m 
not. I mean how can you not understand what this says? What 
am I going to see on your return? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We’re talking in 210 about the party’s 
return. We’re talking about the party’s return. This is the 
Liberal Party’s return to the Chief Electoral Officer and the 
detail that has to be there. That’s all section 210 speaks to. It 
doesn’t impose any other obligations on your constituency 
association or anything like that. It is all about the return that 
has to be made by the party to the Chief Electoral Officer. It’s 
perfectly plain in subsection (1). 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, if you don’t want to look at it as 
an individual . . . as a party return, then as the party return, 
would we be able to see the list that would fall under 210(2)(b) 
of each constituency association that would be listed in your 
party’s annual return. Would we then be able to get that list of 
people that have, through your association being an agent, 
provided monies for use of that registered party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The answer is no. It is the association 
that is the person. I mean it is the . . . you know you’re talking 
here about the return that your chief official agent prepares and  

files with the Chief Electoral Officer. And on that return, the 
chief official agent is to report contributions from individuals, 
from corporations, from societies, from trade unions. Take the 
case of corporations just to clarify the . . . they are the persons 
there, the corporations, that have to be included in the report. 
 
Section 210 doesn’t ask the corporations to say where did you 
get this money. It simply asks the chief official agent to report 
that so much money came from corporations. I’ll leave my 
answer there. I’m just going to take some more advice on the 
question, but the point I just want to make is that this section is 
all about what has to be included in the report that is filed by 
the chief official agent to the Chief Electoral Officer, and 
doesn’t speak to what your constituency association has to . . . 
what kind of reports it has to file. It doesn’t require your 
association to file any reports. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. Let me give you some indication 
where this is going then, Mr. Minister, because if in fact we 
don’t . . . if we’re not able to see the list of all people donating 
to your constituency association through the reporting 
requirements of 210, then where would we find it? If in fact you 
want to deal with yours as a personal level, then we’re dealing 
with section 218. Because if it went through your constituency 
association then, Mr. Minister, you would have used those 
monies for the funding of your own election, would you not 
have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I thought we were speaking generally 
about the obligation of parties year after year, rather than 
candidates at election time. So I’ve been answering in that 
manner. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well in essence we are, because monies 
that you’re raising this year and next year and the year after are 
all going towards your re-election, are they not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In a broad kind of sense, I suppose, in a 
broad sense. But when you come to the election campaign, the 
amount that will be spent on the campaign is governed by law 
and we can’t exceed it. And over the course of a year, in a 
broad sense I guess you could say, the function of political 
parties is to elect members. So in a broad sense, the member’s 
right. Although it seems to me that we do precious little 
politicking between elections that requires the constituency to 
spend any money. 
 
But I give the member the point. Obviously political parties are 
there for a purpose and the purpose is to get us elected. So I 
think the member’s probably right. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, let’s talk about how 
precious little politicking we do, because the reason that this 
mess got to be the mess it is, is because of some precious little 
slush funds which are in the millions of dollars, and those 
monies are raised outside of the election year but to be used by 
a registered party or the candidates of those parties, so they do 
fall in the Act. And it doesn’t matter if we’re talking about this 
year or election year, we’re really talking about one and the 
same, are we not? 
 



3156 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In a sense, in a sense, I think the 
member’s right. But we have been talking about 210 and that’s 
probably why I’ve been focused on that side, because 210 deals 
with returns other than election expenses. And that’s why I’ve 
been answering in the way that I have. 
 
Now the rules with respect to election expenses I don’t think 
are much different, but they are different. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well we’ll focus on 218. I think you’ll be 
more comfortable dealing with section 218 for awhile. And if 
you look at 218: “Within three months after the candidate 
returned . . .” Well I’ll just cut to the chase here: “detailed 
statements of:” This is what you’re going to have to report, I 
guess. Right? 
 
Look at 218(1)(e): 
 

the amount of money and the commercial value of goods 
and services provided for the use of the candidate, by way 
of loan, advance, deposit, contribution or gift, by: 
 
(i) individuals; 
(ii) corporations; 
(iii) societies; 
(iv) trade unions; 
(v) unincorporated organizations or associations; 

 
And associations there we’re talking constituency, as you had 
said before. Or: 
 

(vi) any other persons; 
 
So under your personal return or one of the say cabinet 
members’ personal return, would we then see individuals listed 
as the Act is laid out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Looking at section 218, I think it’s quite 
clear what the candidates have to include in the report of the 
business manager. This is a reporting requirement of business 
managers, as the member has observed, and is transmitted to the 
returning officer along with an auditor’s report. 
 
And what has to be reported are the matters that are specifically 
listed under section (e), and there are five spelled out, and “any 
other persons.” And the number of donors in each class of 
persons mentioned in those clauses. And then (f) goes on to 
deal with the naming the member of each class of persons who 
made a loan, etc., for more than $100, $100. So we all have to 
do that. And I think we all do. I don’t know if we see it or not, 
but our business manager has to comply with that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, if I were to look at a 
return  I don’t know, pick a return, pick the Premier’s return 
 because of section 218, as you have clearly laid it out, and 
under (v), associations, constituency associations . . . and of 
course you stepped me through (f), which is asking them for the 
names of each of the contributors to and through those 
constituency associations  so if I were to say to look at the 
Premier’s return I would . . . give me an idea how many 
donators I would see. Like 2 or 500? But they would all be  

there if they were over in fact $100? Is that right? It’s very clear 
in the Act? Is that how you read it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I have no idea how many would be 
included at all. I have no clue. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  But the Act is clear enough, I think, for all 
of us  isn’t it, Mr. Minister?  that in fact any contributions 
to or through that constituency association would be listed in 
that return. Would that be right, regardless of the number? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well my understanding of this section is 
as follows. Let’s say that in your  do you mind me using you 
as an example?  in your election campaign, the Wood River 
Liberal Association makes a cheque . . . gives a cheque to your 
business manager for $3,000. Then it is the obligation of the 
business manager to show in the return to the returning officer 
that that contribution of $3,000 was received. That was one of 
the contributors to your campaign. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Of who? What? I’m sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Of the Wood River Liberal Association. 
Is there a Wood River Liberal Association? 
 
If you got . . . if $3,000 came from the association to your 
business manager for your campaign, then your business 
manager would have to report that contribution from the Wood 
River Liberal Association. That’s clear. Now having done that, I 
think that nothing more is required of your business manager 
than to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister. And then if we go 
down to (f), the name of each member of each class. A class 
being (v) unincorporated organizations or associations, meaning 
one of our associations  party associations, Wood River or 
Riversdale. 
 
So the name of each member of each class of persons 
mentioned in that clause would also have to be listed. Correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t think so. I don’t think so. I think 
that it would have to identify it as the Wood River Liberal 
Association. But there is nothing in clause (f) that requires any 
breakdown of that number beyond that. 
 
I mean the association itself is a person under this Act and is 
. . . You’re no more required to break that down than you are 
when you look at a corporation to say, where did that money 
come from, that $3,000 that you received from wherever? How 
did you get that? Where does it come from? Who contributed to 
it? Or who are the members or whatever? Those questions don’t 
arise. 
 
This I think, is the nub of the problem we’re having in . . . Your 
advisers are reading that one way and we’re reading it another. 
And I think there’s the nub of it. 
 
Now that’s precisely why we brought this House amendment,  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3157 

to make it clear . . . Just use this example as being a perfect 
example. We propose to change the law in such a way that it is 
clear that the member’s question will have to be answered  
that the member’s question will have to be answered in the 
return that is filed by the business agent. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, we’re busy looking for some 
documents. The stack that I have for your enjoyment here today 
is rather deep, so I’ll be a moment until I can revisit that point. 
 
So if we look at this interpretation the way you have laid it out 
then, would that be following not only the letter of the law of 
this Act but the intent? As we step through that Hansard from 
the then attorney general, now Premier, of 1974 where he laid 
out what the Act was to do and the intent of the Act, and that is 
to disclose all names of all individuals and persons and 
corporations who donate to a registered political party or to a 
candidate, so with your interpretation, you feel that the intent of 
the Act is being lived up to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I’m certain it does because those 
are the very words used in the statute  the individuals, 
corporations, societies, trade unions, unincorporated 
organizations, unincorporated associations, and any other 
persons, and they just caught everybody. 
 
Now we’re coming right to the nub of the point here, Mr. Chair, 
and, Mr. Member, and let me just . . . I just want to take a 
moment on this because I think it’s so important. 
 
This is exactly how we perceived the problem to be. The debate 
we’re just having . . . we figured out where you are coming 
from with respect to the point that you were raising. You were 
reading into this Act far more than we had seen over the years 
and far more than anybody else had seen. 
 
And so we came with our House amendment, which the 
member has seen, to add clauses to what is now section 240 to 
cover these situations totally; so that when a contribution comes 
from a constituency association, it will have to have the detail 
that the member’s talking about  the step in clause (f). 
 
And when it comes from a corporation, or I should say a trust 
fund, it has to have that same information, just to make 
perfectly clear that people could look at it and not have the kind 
of questions and the kind of debates that we’ve just been having 
in the last few minutes. 
 
And we figured out from the press conference and the public 
statements of your leader that this was the problem and it got us 
thinking about this problem of political contributions. And we 
believe, we believe that we should improve that law. 
 
What we feel we’re doing is taking the member’s suggestions, 
the suggestions that come from the Liberal Party by virtue of 
this issue, and put them into the law. So that from now on there 
is no question that the position will be as Garrett Wilson has 
said it now is. We don't think it now is, but we think it should 
be that. So we want to amend it to be sure that from now on 
there’s no question  there’s no question. 
 

Now I think that’s a significant toughening up of the law. It’s a 
significant advance towards transparent political donations and 
the reporting of donations, and it is precisely why we prepared 
the amendment that we prepared. Not only did we grab the 
constituency associations, but we required the reporting of the 
federal income tax-creditable contributions, which up to now 
have been difficult to obtain. 
 
You’ve got to go to Ottawa to obtain them. Maybe they’re 
available in the provincial party offices, I don’t know. I think it 
depends on who you are, if you ask Emmet Reidy, and I don’t 
know what the situation is with respect to my party. But our 
amendment, if it’s accepted by the House, will make those 
contributions reportable as well, so that there is a significantly 
higher degree of transparency than there has been under the 
1970s law. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, so now what you’re 
telling me is when I read (f) and it’s saying the name of each 
member of each class  we know what the classes are  but 
the name of each member of each class of persons . . . so you’re 
saying the Wood River Liberal Association is a person? That’s 
essentially what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. And I say that because it’s a 
defined term in the Act. And it includes everybody  an 
individual, corporation, companies, society, trade union, 
unincorporated organization or association, syndicate, trust, 
blah, blah, blah, it goes on and on and on. And I don’t think 
there’s an organism alive that isn’t identified as a person. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. I’ll accept your argument for a 
moment and we’ll consider constituency associations to be 
persons. So under section 219(1): 
 

. . . a person ( or your constituency association) who makes 
a gift, contribution, loan, advance or deposit or provides 
other financial assistance to a candidate or registered party 
(now we’re taking in both) may use an agent for that 
purpose. 
 

Would this person be that constituency association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that in the case of all of our 
parties the associations make their contributions directly to the 
party. They don’t use an agent; they make it directly to the 
party. 
 
Let’s just, while I’m on my feet, let me just take an example of 
what I would see to be an agency situation. Let’s say that John 
Doe wants to make a contribution to the Liberal Party, but 
doesn’t want to make it directly and so asks his friend Charlie 
Brown to take this money and give it the Liberal Party and to 
take it down to Emmet Reidy, and deposit it with the provincial 
office of the Liberal Party. 
 
Now there is a situation where Charlie Brown is the agent of 
John Doe for the purpose of getting that contribution to the 
Liberals. And the provisions of the Act would clearly cover that 
situation. So I can’t give indirectly by hiding behind an agent. 
That has to be disclosed. But in the case of the association, I  



3158 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

don’t think there is any agency. I think it’s a direct contribution. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well it’s got to be disclosed one way or 
another. Do you agree with me in that sense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The Act has to complied with. And in 
the case of the Wood River Liberal Association making a 
contribution to your campaign, I’ve covered that situation. In a 
non-election year, it may send its contribution by way of quota 
or however you do that in the Liberal Party, directly to the 
provincial office. And then that is a contribution from the 
Wood River Liberal Association to the provincial office. And 
there are disclosure requirements about that. 
 
Maybe if I just . . . an example, it would not be acceptable, I 
don’t believe, for a chief official agent to say that we received 
$5,000 from corporations and put that in the return. It would 
not be acceptable for a chief official agent to file a return under 
210 that just said we received from corporations $5,000. The 
subsection (b) of 210, (2)(b), would require that those 
corporations be identified, I think, as I read the Act. 
 
But if the Wood River Liberal Association sent $5,000 in, that 
is a contribution from the Wood River Liberal Association and 
the following subsection doesn’t apply to require that all of that 
be underpinned by a bunch of detail about where that money 
came from. And we’re right down to the nub, I think, of the 
difference in our lawyers’ interpretation of this section. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  No, Mr. Minister, I don’t think we have a 
problem with interpretation. Now if you’re saying that 
corporate donators must be disclosed, I would agree with you. 
And you’re agreeing with that right now. You’re shaking your 
head yes. 
 
But what if those corporate donators were to donate heavily, 
thousands and thousands of dollars, to a constituency 
association to be then moved into the party. Would that have to 
be disclosed  those corporate donators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is exactly what we’re trying to 
answer with the amendment. We’re trying to make it perfectly 
clear that in those circumstances all those contributions must be 
disclosed. Because the constituency association, in forwarding 
its money to the provincial party, is going to have to, under the 
amendment, disclose who it is that is making those 
contributions. That’s why we want to do it. And it’s your 
suggestion so we expected that there would be some enthusiasm 
for that on your side of the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, there is enthusiasm for 
having lists of donors published, disclosed. 
 
Now if, as I hear you correctly, you’re saying that a 
constituency association is a person  and you told me that 
was the case in section 210 and 219 and . . . yes, in those two 
sections. So if I look at 219(3): “Where a person receives . . .” 
Where a person  now “person” meaning your constituency 
association of course, by your own words, definition: 

Where a person receives any gift, advance, loan, 
contribution, deposit or other financial assistance for a 
candidate or registered party . . . 

 
So that makes sense. If your association, your constituency 
association, is taking in any dollars at all, in any year, because 
it’s all going towards your re-election campaign: 
 

. . . for a candidate or registered party, that person is 
deemed to be the agent . . . 

 
And that makes sense: 
 

. . . of the person giving such financial assistance and he 
shall disclose to the business manager of the candidate, or 
to the registered agent of the party, the identity of the 
person for whom he is deemed to be an agent. 

 
So 219(3) would have you giving full disclosure of your 
constituency association every donation over and above a 
hundred dollars, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We get with subsection (3) the perfect 
example of my hypothetical example, the perfect . . . a perfect 
section with respect to the kind of arrangement I was describing 
where John Doe gives to Charlie Brown to give to the Liberal 
Party. And those are often difficult to trace and to prove. 
 
So what subsection (3) does is say that in some circumstances 
here is what the law is going to presume. And the circumstances 
are, where a person receives a gift or deposit, contribution, for a 
registered party as in my example  John Doe gives the money 
to Charlie Brown and it is for the political party  then in those 
circumstances it is clear that there is an agency. I’m the 
principal, that’s the agent, I’m in control of that. There’s no 
discretion to be exercised, not the agent spending it how he 
wishes or anything like that, but it’s clear what the purpose is 
and that that person is an agent; then the law deems that person 
to be an agent. 
 
Now if he’s not an agent it then becomes incumbent on him — 
the agent — or the principal, to show that that wasn’t an agency 
situation. It’s deemed to be by law, and unless they can satisfy 
the court otherwise, it will be so found. So the agency is 
deemed. The prosecutors don’t have to prove the agency; the 
agency is deemed. And that’s how subsection (3) is intended to 
operate. Everything depends upon the agency relationship and 
the purpose for the money, the purpose for the contribution. 
You’ve got to read the whole section you know, and consider 
what its purpose is. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, the purpose of The 
Election Act is to have complete, full disclosure of anyone 
making a donation to a political party or a candidate so that we 
would then know who is donating to that party in the event that 
they get government; and the public need to know if in fact, 
when large donations are being received by a party which is 
able to get government, gets contracts or gets favours from the 
government. That’s why we have disclosure. 
 
So getting back to 219(3) where a person . . . are we in  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3159 

agreement? You were saying a person is a constituency. Are we 
in agreement at that point? We are. Then I’m just going to 
change it to put your own words in here and if I get off track 
you stop me. 
 

(3) Where a person (or where a constituency) receives any 
gift, advance, loan, contribution, deposit or other financial 
assistance for a candidate or registered party, that person 
(that constituency) is deemed to be the agent . . . 

 
So you’re admitting that the constituency association is then the 
agent. Are we clear up to that point? 
 
An Hon. Member:  No. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  No? Where did I lose you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I’m not sure why the 
member is dealing so extensively with these details. I mean 
we’re not going to be able to solve the interpretation dispute 
that our lawyers’ advice has created for us in this House. You 
and I can badger away at each other about what subsection (3) 
means and what “person” means and all the rest of it, but we’re 
not going to solve that dispute. That’s going to be solved some 
place else . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’ll get a long way down that road . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well you can go as far as you like down 
that road. I don’t care. 
 
But I just point out to the member the obvious thing. And I 
think that the House would appreciate knowing that you and I 
can go as long as we like here and we’re not going to solve that 
dispute. That question is going to be solved somewhere else. 
Either the Chief Electoral Officer is going to decide it or the 
courts are going to decide it or somebody is going to decide it, 
but not you and I and not on the floor of this Assembly. 
 
But this is exactly what we’re trying to do with these 
amendments. And I’d like to focus the member’s attention on 
them. We are accepting the idea, we are advancing the idea, and 
we’re vigorously supporting the idea, that these contributions 
ought to be transparent. 
 
I mean I don’t know where the member thinks he’s going with 
this line of questioning because we have amendments to 
propose to Bill 92 which are completely responsive to the 
member’s point, completely responsive to the member’s point. 
 
So why are we at each other about the meaning of these words 
in those circumstances, where we have right in front of us the 
means to adopt the member’s ideas, put them into the law? You 
can take credit for it. If you don’t, we will, because I think it’s a 
significant advance in the law. We can look back at ’74 and say 
they should’ve done it then. But they didn’t do it then. 
 
And why don’t we get on with it? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, we were fine up to a point 
here. You agreed that where a person or constituency  

association receives a gift, advance, loan, contribution, deposit, 
or other financial assistance for their candidate or registered 
party, that person is deemed to be the agent. And this seems to 
be where we lost one another because you agree that that person 
is a constituency association but as soon as they become the 
agent, then you become very uncertain. 
 
So let me tell you where the problem lies. And either . . . it’s 
interesting, Mr. Minister, because you see a number of the 
MLAs in the House  and we’ll use . . . you’re the 
government, so we’ll use your MLAs  have followed this 
Act. And they have listed their contributions, and others 
haven’t. And you know we can talk about whether this is 
interpretation or fine detail, but let’s talk about how much detail 
we’re talking here. 
 
The transfers from NDP constituency associations to candidates 
and to the party in 1995  in that one year alone and we 
already know that it’s not just in that year that we’re banking up 
for elections  but transfers to the campaigns of cabinet 
ministers come to $349,996.68; to campaigns of back-benchers 
 $581,572.06; to the campaigns of unsuccessful NDP 
candidates  almost $207,000; and transfers through 
constituency associations to the New Democratic Party office is 
just about $149,000; totalling $1.331 million. 
 
So if you think that all we are is hung up on a little bit of 
terminology, that’s not the case. It’s not interpretation. You, 
Mr. Minister, and your party have either found a way, in your 
view, to circumvent the Act and channel millions of dollars that 
don’t have to be disclosed . . . well how else do you read it? 
 
Mr. Minister, we take certain candidates or MLAs. Now some, 
some were . . . Regina Victoria, good point. Some were able to, 
in fact, follow the law quite closely. I mean if we’re talking 
about transfers of constituency association monies of some, you 
know, 8, 9, $10,000, that’s possible. Is it not? Would you agree 
that’s possible? 
 
And we have the bake sales and the Hawaiian lottos and perogy 
sales  the Government House Leader is selling perogies, well 
in fact out of his constituency office. But I mean that’s legit. 
That could happen. But if we’re talking a million dollars, I say 
it can’t happen. 
 
And some of the members that you sit with in fact, well they 
follow it quite closely. Let me give you some examples here. 
Some of them in fact show just about all . . . well I guess all of 
their donations. Every personal donation, they show on their 
returns, and a lot smaller proportion coming through their 
constituency transfers. Now others . . . we have one here that 
. . . well we have more than one. We have several that are in the 
high 90s. Some are at a hundred per cent. 
 
Prince Albert Carlton, where is that member? He was in here 
just a moment ago. The member from Redberry Lake, 100 per 
cent constituency transfers. No donations? You don’t think he 
got a donation in the campaign? It all came through his 
constituency? That’s the point. What if in fact it was all from 
one corporate donator? You don’t think that would be the right 
thing to do, is to have that disclosed? 



3160 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We’re proposing in the amendment 
that’s before the House that this indeed be disclosable. That’s 
the purpose for the amendment. And my copy is all marked up 
with orange marker here, but the member has the same copy in 
front of him and it would put beyond doubt the question of 
reporting. 
 
Now I haven’t examined the returns and if I had I wouldn’t 
comment on them in this House. It’s not part of my 
responsibility in this Assembly and to this committee to start 
dealing with individual situations. But I point out to the 
member, and indeed to all members of the Assembly, that we 
have a proposed House amendment which will cover this matter 
in exactly the terms that the member is talking about. Exactly. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, what about the $1.331 
million? Do you feel . . . or can you tell me where I would find 
those lists of donators? I mean that’s almost a million and a half 
dollars, Mr. Minister. And clearly when we step through the 
Act, section 219(3) where you yourself informed me, you 
informed me that a person is a constituency association and 
when they receive these gifts and advances of the loans, 
contributions, deposits and other financial institution, either for 
the candidate or for the use of the party . . . and that’s what 
they’ve done, as I’ve laid out here, the $1.331 million  it’s 
got to be disclosed. And if it’s not disclosed then of course 
there’s penalties. 
 
And I guess eventually that any monies that aren’t disclosed 
have got to be returned back to the Chief Electoral Officer, and 
of course then going into the General Revenue Fund to the 
province. So tell me where the $1.331 million of donations are 
disclosed. And if they’re not, can you tell me why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I can tell you that all of our advice, 
including from the very best lawyers that we’re able to consult 
on these matters, is that the New Democratic Party is in 
compliance with The Election Act. So all has been disclosed 
that the law requires to be disclosed. 
 
I would have no way of answering the member’s question. 
There’s no way I could know that. But I can tell the member 
that the position is as I have stated  we’re in compliance. But 
we recognize from the line of questioning today, as we have 
from all of the previous utterances on this point, that the law 
ought to be toughened up. And it makes sense to introduce into 
the law the very notions and concepts that the members are 
talking about in this committee. And we propose to do that in 
this amendment. 
 
Now if we can look at this amendment and see how it can be 
toughened up, how it can be improved, then we’re glad to take 
a look at that. We’re quite pleased to take a look at that. 
 
These questions about whether or not the old law has or has not 
been complied with is not the business of this committee. This 
committee is not constituted to decide those questions. You and 
I will talk about it for as long as you wish, I suppose, but it 
won’t come to any resolution. That will be decided somewhere  

else. And the very arguments that the member is putting 
forward will no doubt be made in respect of those proceedings, 
whatever form they take. But we’re not going to do it here. I 
implore the member to . . . Let’s move ahead with a law that 
will, as I have repeatedly said, incorporate many of the 
member’s own ideas. Put them into the law so that it is 
perfectly clear in the future what the law is. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I say to you, the law is clear. 
And an example I’ll use would be the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
The Chair:  Order. I simply caution the member that the 
Chair is not to be involved, in any sense, in discussion. And I 
ask the hon. member to select another example. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. Well I have some people going 
through a list. I will say this to the Chair, that it was a 
favourable comment that I was going to be making to that 
member. 
 
Let’s just for a moment get back to what an agent is, because 
that’s really where we started and we’re still there. You haven’t 
defined an agent to me. You’re telling me constituency 
association is a person until we get down to section 219(3) 
where it creates a bit of problem for you in disclosure, and all 
of a sudden, well no, it’s not a person. So is it an agent? Well 
you don’t know. Tell me who an agent would be. 
 
You have some well-known people within your party 
organization that raise funds. Reg Gross, for one. Everybody 
who’s involved in politics in the province knows Reg Gross has 
for years raised money for the New Democrat Party and he gets 
a commission of 15 to 20 per cent, depending on who he’s 
dealing with. So would you consider Reg Gross to be an agent 
of your party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, with great respect, I have no 
idea. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Pardon me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I said, Mr. Chair, with great respect to 
the member, I have no idea. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m surprised you 
have no idea because we have those ideas. We know that. I 
mean everybody knows that Reg is raising a lot of money. 
 
Well let me pick another one. Here we have a member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. Now this member is following The 
Election Act as it’s laid out, and of course views it very clear, 
has zero constituency transfers. In fact he has recorded all of his 
donations; some $29,513 of donations are all clearly listed. Can 
you tell me why that member would know the provisions of the 
Act and why it would have to be followed — and he does 
follow it — but yet . . . let’s use the Premier; maybe the Premier 
didn’t do it. Can you tell me why even some of your own 
members follow the Act and others don’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well as the member will know, I  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3161 

couldn’t possibly answer that question. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Let’s get back to Reg Gross for a moment 
then as an agent, whether it be Reg or somebody else that you 
have in your operation to raise these funds. Let me give you an 
example. And I don’t know if this happens; perhaps it does. 
Let’s say the Premier went on a speaking tour and he’s in 
Calgary speaking to whomever  some associations. Maybe 
he’s down East talking to some trade union people and after he 
tells them all the great things his party is doing or where it’s 
going or . . . you know, I can only imagine he had some of these 
things to say before he brought in some the regressive labour 
laws that he did a few years ago. 
 
So let’s say this happened. And of course he would have, you 
know, I guess they refer to them as bagmen come by three, four 
days later and hit up on all of these people that were at the 
meeting. 
 
Now that person that would go out and receive those donations, 
would that be considered an agent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the requirements that  I mean I 
don’t know what the member wants of me  the requirements 
of the Act have to be complied with. I mean, there is a limit to 
how much I can interpret the Act. I’m only the minister 
responsible. 
 
I’ve tried to answer the member’s question, and I think we’ve 
canvassed all of these questions. It’s difficult for me to deal 
with a hypothetical example like the member puts forward, 
except in the most general terms, and say that whoever did that, 
whoever makes those . . . you know, receives those 
contributions better take a good look at The Election Act and 
make sure they comply. 
 
That’s all I can say. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. We can only assume that you’re 
going to have people complying with The Election Act if they 
are out there raising the hundreds of thousands, or in fact 
millions of dollars that you’re running into, or through your 
constituency associations or into your Tommy Douglas fund, or 
whatever that bank account is. 
 
And could you tell me then where I would find those lists of 
donators? Because those would be very interesting ones to have 
a record of, wouldn’t you agree? I mean much more than the 
$100 or $200 that an individual living within a constituency 
would want . . . or we would want them disclosed. 
 
But if we’re talking 50,000 or 80,000 or $150,000 from an 
organization or a trade union, say, cutting a cheque, and then 
we have laws coming forward, wouldn’t we want to see who 
was cutting the cheque and why, and what happens immediately 
before or after that cheque is cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think the hon. member knows my 
thinking on that and the thinking of the government by the 
House amendment that’s before the House. I don’t know how 
else I can say this except to repeat myself. 

We are interested in the concepts that underlie the position that 
the opposition has taken to the point where we propose . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now just a moment. The member 
doesn’t seem to be listening to me again. We are interested in 
these concepts to the point where we decided it was appropriate 
at this time to toughen up the election laws, the reporting of 
contributions. And that’s what this House amendment is all 
about. 
 
Now obviously in advancing that amendment, we agree as a 
matter of policy that those contributions ought to be reported. 
What more does the member want of us? I mean are we going 
to fight out the court cases though, or the investigation of the 
Chief Electoral Officer, right here on the floor of the 
Assembly? If so, we better get him in here and get him acting 
like a judge and we can pretend we’re lawyers and go at this 
thing. I don’t know. 
 
I don’t know what you’re trying to do. I don’t know what 
you’re trying to do with this exchange that we’re having this 
afternoon. These are serious questions that you’re raising. 
You’ve raised them often enough; obviously you’re serious 
with them. And you’re alleging that the law has not been 
complied with, and that’s a serious question. And it’s got to be 
resolved, but not here. 
 
All I can say is that you’re making some very interesting points 
— I just want to be sure that the members hear this, Mr. Chair 
— you’re making some very interesting points with respect to 
the very difficult issue of the transparency of political 
donations, to the point where we have proposed a House 
amendment that, in our view, incorporates all of the ideas that 
you’re putting forward, and others, and will embed them into 
the law. Now we’re in committee discussing Bill 92, clause by 
clause, and we’re offering a House amendment that covers your 
points. 
 
Now you and I are having an exchange which seems to me to be 
more like trying to paint me into a corner with respect to what’s 
happened in the past. And that can’t work and that shouldn’t 
work. This is not the place to have that out. The place is 
somewhere else, either in the Chief Electoral Officer’s office, 
or in the courts, or somewhere, but not in front of this 
committee. So I urge the member to consider the proposed 
amendment and see if it doesn’t exactly cover what the member 
is talking about in terms of what the law should be. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you would agree with me 
that The Election Act is to provide complete and full disclosure 
of people making donations to parties or candidates. I mean can 
we start with that simplistic statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The Election Act contains provisions 
with respect to disclosure. They were crafted in 1974 and 
amended later in the ‘70s, I remind the member, over the 
opposition of the party that he now represents, but they were 
adopted by this legislature anyway. And it does contain 
provisions for the disclosure of contributions, and the 
provisions are there. We’ve been arguing about them all 
afternoon this afternoon, and all morning yesterday, and there 
will be a determination of that in an appropriate place at an  



3162 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

appropriate time by an appropriate person. 
 
But what we’re doing in this House is adopting the member’s 
thinking. In effect, adopting the thinking of the Leader of the 
Opposition and offering to embed in the law the very principles 
that he’s putting forward; what greater compliment could we 
pay than that? 
 
Now remember, these are provisions that were in the drafts that 
we worked our way through when we were in the consultation 
phase with respect to this Bill. None of us picked up that these 
laws ought to be changed or amended. It was the disclosure of 
the Tory fund that riveted our attention to them. 
 
(1545) 
 
You pointed out your view of what the law was and we said, 
well that’s certainly not our view of what the law is and it’s not 
our legal advice, but, by George, those are good ideas and let’s 
embed them in the law. I mean we’re trying to approach this in 
the same spirit that we’ve approached this Act from the 
beginning. We accepted many of your recommendations as we 
were working the Bill through and in effect we’re prepared to 
accept this one. 
 
Now I plead with the opposition to approach it in this way, and 
let’s toughen up this law and make it the kind of law that the 
members obviously want. But what we’re doing, Mr. Member 
from Wood River, is threshing old straw. That’s what we’re 
doing. We’re trying to usurp the function of the Chief Electoral 
Officer or the functions of the court, or whatever, and I don’t 
think we should be wasting your time and my time in doing 
that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you know, when we’re 
talking about $1.31 million of monies not being disclosed, I 
don’t think it’s a waste; it’s not a waste of my time. And I hope 
you wouldn’t see it as though I’m wasting your time either, 
because you’re the one that’s bringing in amendments which, 
well, I say were poorly drafted, and a last ditch attempt to get 
out of some trouble here. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, when I look at the Premier’s own 
return, it’s whether or not . . . we have to have an understanding 
of whether or not you understand what The Election Act 
requires or not. Well in the return there are a number of 
individuals  I shouldn’t say a number; there’s about 10 of 
them  and/or corporations listed in the Premier’s own return. 
But the dollar value is quite small. It’s, you know, $4,000. And 
it was disclosed, as it should be. 
 
But contributions in excess of $100 on the first page, and it 
states on here, gifts from Riversdale NDP, and then it lists, you 
know, to cover cost of cheques, pay election expenses, signs, 
bumper stickers, on and on. So what we have, gifts from 
Riversdale NDP totalling $35,702. So if in fact we weren’t 
going to have to disclose that list, then we’re talking what?  
$99 per donation. So would we then expect that Riversdale 
received 360 donations to amount to this money? How else 
would you explain it? How does the Riversdale NDP 
Association fall into the Act? 

You’re making it very confusing. Because for a while you’re 
saying that they would be a person until you find out, when you 
read on, that they would then have to disclose these names, so 
you didn’t buy into that. So is that association an agent? 
 
Like I’m still not sure how you would view this association. 
Because many of your members  you’re right, you’re one of 
them  do disclose their donators. But the Premier doesn’t. 
And this is the person that brought the Bill forward in 1974 as 
attorney general. His intent was clear. We could revisit the 
Hansard of yesterday and talk about his intent . . . and how 
clear it was. 
 
But can you tell us how Riversdale . . . well you can let on this 
is a joke, Mr. Minister. You’re bringing in amendments, and 
we’re saying and half of your members are saying it’s not 
needed. Well tell us what Riversdale is and how they are going 
to report. They have got to report in one way or another. You’re 
talking about the Premier, who has done a great deal for certain 
companies, corporations, but especially trade unions. Don’t 
you, Mr. Minister, think that there should have been some 
disclosure of where the $35,702 came from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the member knows perfectly well, 
Mr. Chair, that in asking me that question and those questions, 
he knows that I am not able to answer those. That is a fact. Now 
I have no way of answering on behalf of the business manager 
of the Riversdale campaign. That would be impossible. And the 
member knows that when he asked me that question. 
 
I know that the Premier knows this Act better than anybody 
because he brought it in. The election expenses are in there 
because of the way in which . . . because of the Bill that he 
brought to this House. And he understands those laws far better 
than, with respect, the member from Wood River would. 
 
And we are in compliance with the law. 
 
Let me try this again, because I have the feeling, and I made a 
sign with my hands a moment ago indicating, that the member 
and I seem to be missing each other. He seems intent upon 
wanting to revisit the ’95 election campaign or the returns filed 
pursuant to that campaign or the returns filed in other years, as 
though that were going to help us in deciding what the election 
law should be for this province. 
 
Well I’m sorry, it’s not. It’s not going to do that. And I say to 
the member again, for probably the sixth or seventh time, that 
the proposed House amendment that we put before him covers 
the very matters that the member’s talking about. 
 
An Hon. Member:  You’re talking about a joke, what you’re 
doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t think this is a funny matter at all. 
Not a bit. I get no enjoyment out of this exchange whatever and 
I do not treat it as a joke. 
 
An Hon. Member:  You’re embarrassing yourself. You’re 
embarrassing all of us that have to watch . . . 
 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3163 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  And the member should not talk to me 
about embarrassing oneself. The member should definitely not 
do that. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and through you to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, do your concerns about the $2.7 
million trust fund . . . did those cause you any concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I think we’re all concerned. You 
know, obviously there was a great deal of media interest in it 
and, as far as I’m concerned, a fair bit of public interest in it, a 
lot of questions asked. And I’m glad that the Chief Electoral 
Officer is looking into that. I think that’s entirely appropriate. I 
think that’s responsive to the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I appreciate that and I know that 
your expression of concern then would support and substantiate 
the fact that there need to be a lot of questions asked of the 
principals, if you wish, the parties involved, to whatever extent. 
Would you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think, judging by the letter that the 
Liberal Party received from the Chief Electoral Officer and 
knowing that we received a letter, I would assume that a similar 
letter has gone to the Tories. In fact I think that that’s known, 
and that it asks the appropriate questions. And I’m glad it does. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Those questions that are now being asked by the 
Chief Electoral Officer, being asked of all the three political 
parties, gives us, gives a lot of people, cause for some concern 
as to how the amounts that we have brought forward have been 
amassed over a period of time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess, and this was not . . . And again I’m going 
to commend your staff and the people that worked a 
hundred-plus hours or whatever on the Bill that’s been 
presented. At the time that that Bill was being closely 
scrutinized, this concern was not an issue. Everything was felt 
to be strictly in order and above board. 
 
It was only after it was brought to our attention about the $2.75 
million PC metro trust fund that the Bill was revisited and some 
House amendments proposed, among some others. This was not 
even a concern when we initially discussed it with your staff 
and the other parties. 
 
I guess . . . And in reviewing the amendment, and I’m not sure 
if perhaps there might not be some more thought go into it 
because it detracts somewhat from what the law initially stated. 
It in fact I believe, lessens the effect of The Election Act within 
. . . particularly as it applies to the old section 219. That, with 
all due respect, Mr. Minister, is a concern. 
 
And I once again would just like to say  without losing any of 
all the work that’s gone into it  we have, since this issue has 
come to the attention of the public, have had other areas of the 
Bill brought to our attention as far as some concerns. One 
particular being section 30 of the proposed Act with respect to 
privacy of information with respect to individuals, Mr. Minister. 
That’s one. 
 

The Act will leave it to orders in council to determine which 
database may be used and what information may be gleaned 
from that — be left to orders in council, after all three parties 
are consulted. But what if one of those parties . . . or what if 
there’s no agreement? Then what happens? 
 
There are . . . I guess what I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is there are 
some very serious concerns; there are inquiries being made. Can 
we not allow those inquiries to be made full tilt without 
detracting from all the work that’s gone into the Bill, and deal 
with it in its finality with those other areas of the Bill where 
there may be some weaknesses that might be strengthened as 
we see . . . as we’ve found? 
 
Perhaps these House amendments need to be revisited when 
comparing them to the effectiveness, the stringency, if you 
wish, I guess I just . . . I find it almost unacceptable that, given 
what has just recently occurred, transpired, that we can’t wait 
until the next session to put it through. 
 
It will not change. It will not affect the by-election. The law the 
way it is now is fine. Those proposed amendments that we had 
discussed and we agreed to  the one about members’ election 
expenses; the advertising  that’s no problem. There’s no 
general election for at least two years, three years. The 
by-election will not be affected by this. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess once again in this House I make a sincere 
plea, and given what we’re trying to determine, allowing 
perhaps you an opportunity to review the direction that we 
believe we will have to take in order to underline what our 
serious concerns are. 
 
By that time the Chief Electoral Officer, the auditor . . . We will 
have people, and as you suggest, we may . . . perhaps should 
not be debating the interpretation of the law here. We make the 
laws and we should understand what they mean when we go out 
there. 
 
We’re in a little bit of difficulty here about interpreting the 
interpretation. The folks, and I include myself as a lay person, 
we have an extremely difficult time saying hey, what’s going on 
here? How can those people get away with that? And why 
aren’t you doing something about it? Why are you changing 
laws that appear to have been broken? 
 
Why don’t you wait until you determine beyond a reasonable 
doubt that either the current law is good and sound  let’s 
leave it the way it is; let’s not waste any more time on it right 
now  or if there are some improprieties that have come to 
light . . . and there seem to be very serious ones. And if our 
party gets caught up in it, so be it. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, the PC trust fund is one that surfaces and 
perhaps it spills over into the Tommy Douglas House and some 
part of the Liberal Party, then so be it. But then let’s step back 
and say, all right what we set out to do, we now have to do a 
little more work on. And instead of having to do the hundred 
hours all over again, it will just be a matter of doing an extra 
two, or three, or four, or half a dozen hours and saying yes, this 
section 30 maybe we should revisit. This section 233 we should  



3164 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

revisit because we overlooked it; we missed it. 
 
And now that it’s part and parcel of all these inquiries and 
investigations . . . There will be an investigation. There merely 
be . . . it’s an investigation of sorts, but not one that would be a 
full-scale, full-blown judicial inquiry but yet it’s better than 
what we had hoped for or . . . I said that wrong. We had hoped 
for something better than what we’re getting. But at least we’re 
happy that someone has taken the interest and will help both 
you and us determine if the original Act was weak, or if in fact 
the intent of the Act is right, and all we’re doing here is trying 
to push through a Bill that could be better dealt with in the next 
session without affecting anything that’s going to happen 
within the next 12 months. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I 
appreciate the sincerity of the member’s request. The member 
knows the respect I have for him and I accept that this is a 
genuine request for the purposes for which he states. Although 
one could draw a different conclusion considering the line of 
questioning that has been going on here. 
 
But I choose not to. I accept the Leader of the Opposition’s 
remarks on their face. We have spent a lot of time considering 
this very question because we have tried from the beginning to 
make this a consensus document. And I think it is a remarkable 
consensus among political parties in this Assembly who don’t 
always get along that well. 
 
And I think it was . . . we’re all to be congratulated for it. I just 
want to remind the member that we came out of that process 
with a problem about election advertising. We’ve made some 
progress on that with respect to a House amendment that we 
propose, and we could consider other ideas there to tighten that 
up. And the member will remember the pre-election expense 
issue, and that has already been addressed in the work of this 
committee, in the sense that we have debated that question. 
 
And so far as this business of the transparency of election 
contributions is concerned, I repeat, I’m not sure if the leader 
was in the House when I made this point or not, but we have, in 
effect, taken the thinking of the Leader of the Opposition and 
embedded it into the amendment, and perhaps even included 
more. And we still then have a consensus document which 
reflects a remarkable degree of unanimity in this House. 
 
And there are procedures and processes and requirements in 
this Act that require the administrative people, the 
administrators of this Act, to get on with it. 
 
And they tell me that if this is to be postponed to the next 
session it would so cramp them for time that some of these 
things just couldn’t be done. Now I’m not in a position to say 
which things could and couldn’t be done, but let me use an 
example. If they are to make any progress with respect to the 
enumeration in the ways that we have provided for in the Bill, 
then they have to get about that, and they just simply can’t be 
delayed a year in doing that. So that’s one factor. 
 

The other factor is that we are here with this consensus 
document and we’ve spent so much time doing it and we have 
very little debate about what’s in the Bill, and very little debate 
about what is the proposed amendment with respect to the 
reporting of election expenses. 
 
So as we see it, the logic of the situation practically demands 
that we just complete this work by passing the Bill. And we’re 
all going to come back here next year and we’re going to go 
through another session, and if something comes to light 
between now and then that requires the Act to be amended, then 
let’s open it up and amend it. We all want the best Election Act 
we can get. 
 
I remind the member just one more time before I take my place, 
we are agreed on its contents. There are some experimental 
things that we’re not sure how they’ll work. The member 
mentioned one about the use of data banks, and we’ve had that 
debate already before this committee about the importance of 
respecting privacy as we do that. Your member spoke to this. I 
spoke to this. We agreed completely on the need to be vigilant. 
 
So again, may I say with great respect, we just don’t see the 
logic in postponing it. And it seems to us that the logic points in 
the other direction — namely pass this law, and if it later 
becomes necessary to amend it, let’s resolve to amend it. 
 
Mr. Osika:  We’re really having a tough time agreeing on 
that particular thing, despite the fact that we’ve had consensus 
on a lot of other issues, Mr. Minister. And I have to agree, when 
I can’t contest the fact that you’re right, we did have consensus 
until . . . And there was consensus on those issues that did not 
deal, did not deal with the situations of trust funds that allowed 
donations to political parties to remain anonymous. 
 
Until that issue came to light, that there were these things in 
place and that there appeared to be . . . not appeared to be . . . 
well there appeared to be, and yes there was some evidence that 
the Act had been circumvented, the law had been broken. 
 
So now to propose amendments to that very area of the Act 
without determining . . . or at least having that matter of 
interpretation resolved, seems to me to be a little bit too soon. 
 
I guess what I’d like to see is have it determined whether or not 
that Act has been violated, that section. If it has not, then 
there’s no need for amendment. If it’s tight enough as it is, 
which it appears that it is, then why do we proceed with 
amendments that we will get into discussing? 
 
But I still have that concern that there’s not . . . And I 
appreciate if there are some parts of that Act that there’s 
consensus on and there needs to be work done, groundwork 
done, to get things under way  like the databases and what 
not. That shouldn’t affect this Bill waiting until the next session 
to be finalized. I wouldn’t think that the preliminary work 
should not be able to go ahead. Perhaps I’m wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I’m not the one to call the member 
wrong, except that my clear advice from the officials is that 
they just can’t do the job that we’re going to set for them to do  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3165 

if we don’t do this now. That’s why we came with it in this 
session rather than next session, you know. That’s why we 
moved right now to do it. 
 
We’re in the first year of our mandate. If it were as simple as 
the member’s remarks might indicate it is, then it could’ve 
waited until next year. But it couldn’t. That was the advice of 
the Chief Electoral Officer and the other officials who are 
concerned with how this Act will be implemented. And I’m 
sorry that I can’t agree with the member, but in the face of that 
advice I just simply can’t do it. 
 
I know I’ve acknowledged how this issue arose. And I want to 
impress on the Leader of the Opposition that we made a special 
effort, in crafting the amendment, to accept what we understood 
the Leader of the Opposition to be saying as to what the law 
should be. It struck a very responsive chord in the government 
because for endless years the NDP has been arguing that the 
election contribution disclosure laws should be toughened up. 
And it struck a responsive chord and that’s why we came with 
this particular House amendment. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, if in fact . . . would there be . . . 
would it make any difference if the Chief Electoral Officer 
himself indicated that there’s . . . you know, from his 
perspective that it may be wise to leave this Bill until the next 
session? That’s my first question and perhaps it’s not even an 
issue, but I’d like to ask that. 
 
The other one was, if you in fact have some advice from your 
Chief Electoral Officer on this matter, could you table it for us 
or could it be made available to us? The interpretation or any 
advice that the Chief Electoral Officer may have given with 
respect to this new Bill . . . has there been any given from his 
perspective? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the Chief Electoral Officer of 
course has been intimately involved in the reform of the law. 
He has a perspective that none of us have, and his contributions 
to Bill 92 have been considerable. I have nothing that I would 
like to table. I mean it would just amount to piles and piles of 
drafts and discussion notes and all kinds of things, and I 
wouldn’t table that. I mean our officials have to work without 
having their drafts and their notes and their advice to ministers 
tabled in this House. That would be most unusual. 
 
I don’t think the member was asking for that. What I 
understood the member to be asking for was whether, in the 
implementation of this Bill, there had been any advice. And I 
have to say that I got no written advice with respect to that. My 
discussions have been verbal and I’m just simply reporting 
them to you as they came to me. 
 
Mr. Osika:  We talked about this earlier, Mr. Minister, and 
you had indicated that the Bill going through the House would 
not affect any decisions that may come to light with respect to 
violations of the Act. That is unequivocal. Is that . . . go without 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, the Act is not retroactive in any 
way. The Act will go into effect on the date of proclamation,  

and my advice is that that can’t realistically be before January 1, 
1997. So what is happening in the Chief Electoral Officer’s 
purview now with respect to the letters that he wrote will all be 
under the old Act. And the new Act won’t have any effect at all 
except on situations from that time forward — from that time 
forward. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I’ve heard you 
comment over the course of the afternoon a couple times about 
what got us started on this whole business of disclosure in 
funds, and of course that’s the PC metro fund, then earlier than 
that was the $400,000 secret fund that the new third party came 
up with. 
 
Can you enlighten a new member as to what the difference is 
between that PC metro fund, in your mind, and the Tommy 
Douglas fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I can’t, no. I know next to nothing about 
the Conservative fund and I know the bare bones of the Tommy 
Douglas House fund. It was established to build the provincial 
office building down on Saskatchewan Drive and to maintain 
that building. And that’s what I know. I don’t know who the 
officers are or anything like that. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Just, Mr. Minister, as well, listening this 
afternoon and perusing your amendment, and the discussions 
that have taken place, do you not think that what the 
amendment does is . . . serves as an escape or tends to exonerate 
or forgive some of the activities that have already taken place, 
those activities that we’re concerned about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We were at great pains to try to capture 
the ideas that were being discussed as to . . . mostly by the 
Leader of the Opposition. We in no way, shape or form present 
the Bill or the amendments as being retroactive at all. People 
are going to have to deal with their problems, whoever they are, 
under the old law. We’re not . . . that will continue to be in 
effect. If people have violated the law, they’re going to have to 
answer for it. If they haven’t violated the law, well and good. 
But it is the old law that is going to be applied. 
 
This Act, if we pass it  and I tried to make this clear to the 
Leader of the Opposition  will not come into effect until the 
date to be proclaimed. And my advice is that the earlier 
practical date for doing that will be January 1, 1997. Hopefully 
these investigations will all have been completed by that time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So what will you 
do, as the minister, to ensure that in the past that there is no 
irregularities and that disclosure has been in agreement with 
what the Act says over the course of the next six months, or a 
year, or two years? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I don’t 
plan to take any initiatives, for the reason that I think it’s 
already under way. 
 
Probably the institution that is responsible, primarily  



3166 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

responsible, for sorting out the kind of questions that have been 
raised is the Chief Electoral Officer, and that’s already in the 
works. The auditor has written a letter indicating what he will 
be doing. And I have said all over the place, including here I 
think, that if anybody can get standing in the courts to question 
this  whether that’s a political party, or an individual, or 
whoever it is  the courts are there to deal with questions of 
statutory interpretation. 
 
I’m not saying that as a lawyer  I’m considered that  but 
my life experience tells me that when you get a breach of a 
statute, there are remedies available to people who have an 
interest in it, to bring that breach into the courts. So I assume 
that’s there too, but I don’t plan to start any such action. I think 
that the matter can probably be resolved by the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one further 
question on the proposed amendments. I think I heard you say 
earlier in the House today that a person, a definition of a 
person, might include any living organism. And in this 
amendment you talked about restricting a person to three 
classes  and that being a constituency association, 
corporation, or trust fund. I’m wondering why you would 
restrict it to those three and possibly why not include a trade 
union into that same category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m advised that the term “person” 
under Bill 92 covers exactly the same ground as person under 
the previous Act. 
 
I think the member mentioned trade unions, and they are 
covered in what is now section 150(2) in that a return from the 
chief official agent must set out contributions from trade unions 
and that’s in the same way as contributions from corporations 
or contributions from individuals. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce some distinguished visitors in the Speaker’s 
gallery. One of the nations with whom Canada’s trade is 
increasing rapidly is the Philippines. This is a nation of some 60 
million people living on some 3 to 4,000 islands, and it is a 
nation which in some ways is politically complex like ours. For 
whatever reason, our trade is increasing, and these are 
becoming increasingly important contacts for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We are honoured today to have with us the following, and I’ll 
ask you to stand as I read your name perhaps. Mayor Vicente 
Bermejo, who is the mayor of Pan-ay in the Philippines. He is 
accompanied by his wife, Mariter Bermejo. They have with 
them Dante Bermejo, who is a planning coordinator for the city. 

And accompanying them are two Saskatchewan business 
people, Glenn Dynna and Donna Dynna of MuniSoft. And 
finally they’re accompanied as well by Bill Hamilton, who’s 
administrator of the town of Bridgetown in Nova Scotia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, once again 
through you to the minister. Dealing with your amendments, sir, 
I just want to . . . you indicate in those amendments that you’re 
requesting the names of people who contribute to corporations, 
constituencies, associations, and trust funds to be revealed. But 
you don’t want to do the same thing with the trade unions. 
There’s no indication that trade unions will be treated similarly. 
I just wondered why. Would it not make sense to treat those the 
same way as you would the other organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The trade unions and corporations are 
of course covered, as I observed earlier, in section 250, which is 
a requirement under the old law that is being carried forward 
under the new law. The trade unions, or at least some of them, 
have money that comes from contributions and dues from their 
members, and check-offs, and that sort of thing, and the trade 
union makes its contribution to the political party, and not 
always but often our political party; depends on how the mood 
is, I guess. And we report those and that’s appropriate. 
Similarly, donations by corporations are reportable. 
 
It’s included in these amendments because we would assume 
that the Assembly would want this to apply to Tommy Douglas 
House Inc. Tommy Douglas House Incorporated is not a 
constituency association and not a trust fund; it’s a corporation. 
You know we couldn’t proffer this amendment without 
covering that situation. We think you’re right. We think those 
contributions ought to be disclosed, so that’s why it’s there. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, so that clarifies that the names of those 
donors, not unlike the corporations, etc., will also be included 
in the list. 
 
Forgive me if I’ve missed it, and I’m not sure whether it may be 
in there or not, but do we have a definition of trust fund within 
the Bill or the amendments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The draftsperson of the Bill, Ian Brown, 
is assisting the committee today and he advises that the term 
trust fund is a recognized term in law and that its inclusion in 
this Bill will be easily interpreted by the courts. They’ll know 
what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Osika:  So, just to confirm and clarify, there will be 
nothing, no interpretation of a trust fund, in the new Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s right. In the Bill, both the Bill  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3167 

and the amendments we propose, there is no definition for the 
term. And I just repeat, the reason is that our legal advice, the 
draftsperson, regards trust fund as a commonly understood term 
in law and that it will serve our purpose. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again, not being a 
lawyer, forgive me for asking this next question. Is a trust 
different from a trust fund or could it be interpreted . . . could 
those be interpreted in different ways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  They would be taken to be the same 
term. They would be taken to mean the same thing. In the 
context of what we’re talking about here, they’d be taken to be 
the same thing. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Would it not be wise to have an interpretation of 
trust fund for the purposes of The Election Act, given that there 
is now being changes made and this new Bill proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m advised that it’s a very, very broad 
concept. A trust can arise in all sorts of ways. It can be 
deliberately set up as a trust fund. It can arise as a result of 
operation of law. It can arise by virtue of the operation of 
statutes. It can happen in many different ways. 
 
And if we start defining it, we really set our self a task of work, 
because we then, as soon as we start defining it, we start 
limiting it. And as soon as we start limiting it, somebody 
somewhere will find a way around it and set up a fund that is 
not a trust fund because it doesn’t fall within this definition. At 
least that’s always the danger  that’s always the danger  in 
statutory drafting. You get too precise, you begin to limit the 
effect of what you’re doing. You take a term like a trust fund, 
which is well understood at law and which covers a very broad 
field indeed, and if you define it, you begin to limit it. 
 
And I think we would be getting onto dangerous ground there 
because we want this to cover a wide field and not a narrow 
one. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I understand that, and I appreciate 
that, Mr. Minister. And I guess that was one of my concerns, is 
again getting into interpretations that for the purpose of a 
particular statute, or a particular law, or dealing, or business 
dealing, it’s interpreted one way. I would have thought that 
perhaps if there was an interpretation for trust fund under the 
meaning of The Election Act  or within the meaning of The 
Election Act, pardon me  then there would not be the 
argument or the interpretations saying that in a broad sense it’s 
this, that, or whatever, for all intents and purposes in a global 
sense; as opposed to if it was interpreted within the meaning of 
The Election Act, a trust fund will be considered to be 
something that people donate into without having to . . . or by 
not disclosing their names, their identification, the source of the 
monies, or the fundings. 
 
That would be my only concern. And there would not be the 
need for any wrangling about that interpretation’s right, or that 
one’s right, under this statute or the general interpretation of 
trust and/or trust funds. 
 

(1630) 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to 
the minister for allowing and other members of the House. To 
you, Mr. Chair, and to all my colleagues in the House, I’d like 
to introduce three gentlemen in the far top row of the Speaker’s 
gallery, Mr. Jim Shields, Mr. Ron Walter, and Mr. Don Lloyd. 
 
These three gentlemen are members of SASBO (Saskatchewan 
Association of School Business Officials), which is of course 
the association of school business officials, and have been 
working very diligently through the year with their own school 
divisions, and being part of SASBO, I understand that they’re in 
deliberations right now. 
 
Welcome to the legislature and enjoy your visit. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I got some good 
legal advice during the break. The advice is that The 
Interpretation Act directs the courts to give a broad, liberal 
interpretation to the terms that this Assembly adopts . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Liberal with a capital L. 
 
The advice given by my two advisers, who are really expert at 
these things, is that we can best accomplish our purposes in this 
legislature by not defining the term. If we try to define the term 
we will limit it. We all know our intention is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I’m trying to explain to the member 
exactly what it is. 
 
Let me start back and do it again. The professional advice that I 
have with me today, which I regard as being the finest available 
because of the experience that these advisers have had, is that 
we can best accomplish our purposes by going with the term, 
trust fund, which is a term which the courts will have no 
difficulty interpreting, in the context of this Act, to cover 
exactly the kind of situation that I think the members of this 
House are all concerned with, namely the PC metro fund and 
however that’s set up. 
 
But if we begin to define it, we will of necessity, start to limit it 
because the courts will then look at it and say, well the 
legislature intended to cover this type of trust fund  no others 
but this  and that will limit the application of our law. 
 



3168 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

And I don’t think we should do that. I think, based on the 
advice that I’m getting, we should use the general term and 
thereby cover more ground than we will if we try to define it. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Just getting back to another definition. Is there a 
definition of a constituency association in the Bill? If I’ve 
overlooked it, excuse me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No, there is not. A constituency 
association is caught by the definition of person under section 
2. It is a person, but it is not a defined term in itself. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you for the pre-pause that I had when I 
stood up before. That was for station identification. 
 
Just a question on . . . some parties have youth organizations, 
women’s organizations, men’s organizations, seniors and so on, 
and other clubs all at the constituency level. Would all these be 
considered as constituency associations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the member raises a very 
interesting question. We want to cover things like youth clubs 
and women’s clubs and whatever kind of organizations there 
are, but there are so many that you don’t know how to define 
them, and if you use one term, who are including . . . why aren’t 
you including . . . but it’s a perplexing matter. 
 
We want to cover people like the Young New Democrats for 
example, and the New Democratic Women, two organizations 
of long standing in our party. They have a constitutional life 
under our constitution and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Pardon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’d be surprised. 
 
Here’s what our plan is. The Chief Electoral Officer will issue 
guidelines under the Act which will make it clear that the idea 
of constituency associations includes these broader groups. And 
our back-up to that, if that doesn’t work, is to use the power to 
make regulations to sweep these organizations in underneath 
the term. We can do that in the first clause of the regulation 
section. 
 
But we do not intend to let this be circumvented. I would tell 
the member that on the public record. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I take it then that that will include the broad 
range of youth groups, as you mentioned, university clubs, 
political action committees, and so forth. So that will all be 
inclusive. Okay. 
 
If I may just continue to deal with the proposed House 
amendment, the lengthier one, in clause no. 12, I wonder if you 
could just help me with that one a little bit, please. Your 
officials may refer to that . . . I find it a little bit confusing. It 
says: 
 

“(12) No constituency association, corporation, trust fund, 
registered party, chief official agent, business manager, 
office of constituency association, officer or director of a 
corporation or trustee of a trust fund shall fail to comply 
with subsections (5) to (10) or with a request made 
pursuant to subsection (11)”. 

But the request under subsection (11) made by the Chief 
Electoral Officer provides . . . only apply to constituency 
associations, corporations, or trust funds, not registered parties. 
I just wondered why the discrepancy there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The purpose for (12) is to set up the 
mandatory requirements to comply, so that failure to comply 
sets up an offence under the offence section of the Act, which I 
think is 216 in the new Bill, in Bill 92. So that’s the purpose for 
section 12 . . . subsection (12). 
 
Now speaking directly to the member’s point, the words here 
have to be read in the context of subsections (1) to (11). So that 
when you come to (11), there is a . . . It doesn’t apply to 
everybody; it applies to only certain people. And of course you 
can only . . . you only have to comply with what the Act 
requires you to comply with. 
 
So that it has to be read in the context of the rest of the 
subsections. And it’s done like that for simplicity of drafting 
and so that you don’t repeat yourself endlessly as to who has to 
do what. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure . . . I can 
now understand why people say, how come you make these 
laws so complicated? But I understand the need as well. 
 
This clause 240, am I correct in suggesting that that now 
replaces, virtually replaces, 219 in the existing Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. Mr. Chair, and to the member, 
section 219 as it is in Bill 92 is intact. The definition of 
registered party is put in at the top of the section. And then the 
subsections are added after the existing provisions in the old 
section 219. So the old 219 comes into the new Act as section 
240 intact, with these subsections added to it. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I wonder if you could help me once again and 
point out what specifically has been added to 219. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Let me just summarize the subsections 
that are included in the proposed House amendment. 
 
Where a constituency association or a corporation  Tommy 
Douglas House being the example we used a few moments ago 
 or a trust fund makes a contribution to a registered political 
party or a candidate, then that entity has to provide the chief 
official agent of the party or the candidate’s business manager 
with a statement setting out the name of the person who 
authorized the contribution; and secondly, the name of and the 
amount contributed by each person who made a contribution in 
excess of $250 in a year and whose contribution was used to 
make up the funds contributed by the constituency association, 
corporation, or trust fund. 
 
So that’s (5); (6) takes in the federal situation where a 
registered party, for which read, a federal registered party, 
makes a contribution to the provincial party or to a candidate — 
then that has to be included. 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3169 

And (7) is a time question, a timeliness question. Subsection 
(8), if the statement is not there then the agent or the business 
manager shall not accept the contribution. Subsection (9), if the 
federal party, the registered party, does not provide the 
statement mentioned in subsection (6) to the official agent or 
the business manager, then that person shall not accept that 
contribution from the registered party. 
 
Subsection (10), if the official agent or business manager learns 
that the registered political party, that would be the provincial 
party, or the candidate has accepted a contribution from one of 
these entities contrary to subsection (8) or from a federal party 
contrary to subsection (9), then the chief official agent or 
business manager shall return the contribution to that entity. 
 
And in subsection (11) the Chief Electoral Officer may request 
the entity to submit a statement setting out the name of the 
person who authorized the contribution and the names of the 
contributors in excess of $250 in a year. And then 12, we 
discussed a few moments ago. So that’s the sum of it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I had 
to step out for a moment so I’m probably going to ask a couple 
of questions that you’ve already answered. But what I believe I 
just heard is that the amendment, the proposed House 
amendment, 240, is replacing the present section 219. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The section 240 that is in Bill 92 is the 
former 219 brought forward, and the House amendment would 
add to the former section 219. So it doesn’t change but adds to. 
 
An Hon. Member:  This replaces 219? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, 219 is brought forward into Bill 92 
as section 240. And then we’re proposing to amend section 240 
by adding subsections 5 to 12 to it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  And so then I have it correct, that you 
believe that your amendment to clause 240 is much tougher 
than the present 219. Right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I think it is. It certainly is in our 
view, based upon the interpretation that we placed upon the 
existing Act and all the advice that we have in that regard. So 
we think this is a very significant contribution to the law, a very 
significant toughening of the requirement to be transparent 
about political donations. 
 
And also it makes clear that the federal party information, 
which we all know is difficult to get, the tax-creditable 
contributions — the information is there but it’s very difficult 
to access it — we have ensured that that is plainly visible in 
Saskatchewan and will be included so that people who are 
interested can find out. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well I don’t think anybody asked for the 
federal situation to be cleared up because that has full 
disclosure under the Canada Elections Act, so I wouldn’t want 
. . . well I would hope, Mr. Minister, that what is before us isn’t 
just enough words to make it appear that it’s something  

worthwhile. Because what we really have in 240 is in fact a 
very weak sister to 219. 
 
And we’ll take a look at why. In your proposed House 
amendment, you’re dealing with constituency associations, 
corporations, or trust funds. And it isn’t much broader than that, 
is it? Is that exactly what 240 is dealing with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well as the member knows, 240 is the 
old 219. Section 240 under Bill 92 is the old 219. So all of 
those requirements continue in existence. They’re there. And 
then to that is added specific requirements to cover constituency 
associations, to cover corporations, and to cover trust funds, to 
make it perfectly clear the degree of disclosure that is required 
with respect to those. 
 
So I think we’ve done a great thing here. And I had expected 
the member to recognize that these were the Liberal Party’s 
ideas that we are trying to capture and include in this Bill, in 
addition to the requirements that are already there. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well it’s not that we were putting forward 
any ideas that needed capturing. We were saying the present 
Act fits the bill, takes care of all the problems  it just has to 
be followed. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes, I know that’s your position. Yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I know you know that’s our position and 
now that I’ve listened to questions from the member from Arm 
River and the Leader of the Official Opposition, asking some 
questions on definition, I’m even more convinced that what we 
had is all we needed, it just had to be followed. 
 
As we talked about earlier, half of your members report in that 
way. And all of our members do. And the third party, who have 
vacated once again in this session, especially when it’s on The 
Election Act, we don’t know how they report. They’ve 
obviously got some serious problems. They’d rather not be here 
today. 
 
Under definitions, a person, and beyond the living organism or 
whatever you were talking about before, it already . . . well let’s 
read it into the record. Person includes an individual, a 
corporation. Even though you felt you had to add corporation 
once again. We don’t think you did. 
 
Corporation, a company, society, trade union, unincorporated 
organization, or association. And as you and I have had the 
discussion today, and you’ve offered up your opinion of 
association, your officials also, that association in these 
definitions is deemed to be in a constituency association. I 
mean we have beaten that one to death. 
 
A syndicate or a trust. Minutes ago you and your officials said 
that this trust is a trust fund. Firm, partnership owners, political 
party, registered party, and a political party that was registered 
pursuant to the Canada Elections Act as amended from time to 
time. It basically covers absolutely everything we can think of. 
That’s the present Act, not yours. All you’ve done is try to 
appease us by throwing in some very simplistic, I think,  



3170 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

solutions here. 
 
Because if we take a look at section 219 and what the present 
requirements are, a person  and that person would be under 
the present definitions in section 219  would already include 
to be a corporation, constituency association, or a trust fund — 
right? — in the present Act, who makes a gift, contribution, 
loan, advance, or deposit or provides other financial assistance 
to a candidate or registered party may use an agent. 
 
Then it goes on to say that in fact it must be fully disclosed in 
219(3): “Where a person receives . . .”  a person being once 
again that corporation, that constituency association, or that 
secret trust fund or trust fund or however you word that  “. . . 
receives any gift . . .”  gift meaning the kind of gifts that the 
Premier would have had in Riversdale. And if you want, we can 
go back through there. It’s listed as gifts from Riversdale NDP. 
So that clearly is covered. 
 
“Advance, loan . . .”  you weren’t sure about loans, but I’m 
sure about loans. 
 
I just read a news article. And of course I’ve set it down here 
and won’t find . . . Oh, here we go: “Loans to NDP missing 
from reports”  this is a Dale Eisler column  $2 million 
worth of loans never reported. If you want a copy of that, I can 
send it across. But I think it covers it, what we’re getting at 
here. 
 
Loans, contributions, and of course there again the trust funds, 
the constituency associations, corporations, trade unions  
they’re all covered in there. Any contribution . . . (inaudible) 
. . . make “deposit or other financial assistance for a candidate 
or registered party . . .” That takes care of either/or coming 
through that candidate or through the party central or through 
that party’s constituency office. 
 

. . . that person . . . (and I won’t get into that; you know 
exactly what the person is) . . . is deemed to be the agent of 
the person giving such financial assistance and he shall 
disclose to the business manager of the candidate, or to the 
registered agent of the party, the identity of the person for 
whom he is deemed to be the agent. 

 
How, Mr. Minister, can you not accept . . . or how can you 
make some argument that it’s interpretation? The definitions are 
too clear. Your answers to our questions are too clear. This is 
very clear  what’s being said here. It’s not confusing. 
 
I have seen some of the legislation that’s been brought forward 
by your government and it is confusing to me. Firstly, the 
reason why you bring some things forward. But also in the way 
it’s written. But this I think, is very clear. It’s just not being 
followed. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s take the definition of trust as a person, right? 
And it’s right here and you’ve agreed to what it is. All right. So 
the PC metro fund is a trust, and under section 219(3) that trust, 
that person . . . that trust, having received any monies  and 
you can go through the whole list of loans and contributions 
and the like  basically had to disclose every name. 

And so in your opinion, with that very clear, with that very clear 
definition and part of the Act, do you believe that the PC metro 
fund, by having that fund and not disclosing that fund . . . I 
have another article here about where one of the Conservative 
. . . I don’t know if it’s a director, executive director, or in fact 
the Leader of the Third Party himself said they don’t have to 
disclose it. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, firstly, do you believe they should’ve had to 
disclose it? And secondly, by not disclosing it, in your opinion 
would then 219(4) . . . well if they don’t disclose it, it basically 
goes right to where it would have to be considered an 
anonymous donation and given to the Chief Electoral Officer. 
Not too far off of what you’re trying to bring in in the House 
amendment, but clearly already there. Right or wrong? And 
we’ll stay to the PC metro fund for the time being. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 
member. I have said before, I can’t pronounce on the PC fund. I 
don’t have enough information to pronounce on it and it’s not 
my . . . it’s not appropriate for me to pronounce on it. That’s a 
question that, as we speak, is before the Chief Electoral Officer 
and that’s probably where it should be. And that will play itself 
out. 
 
As to the earlier part of the member’s question, we’ve been 
debating this very question for the better part of two days now. 
And you have your interpretation of the Act based upon the 
legal advice that you get and how you read the words. We have 
our interpretation based upon all of the advice that we have and 
the words. And we’re obviously not agreeing to it. And you’ve 
tested me for a couple of days on my views as to the Act and I 
have answered your questions as best I can. There’s no point in 
repeating them. 
 
Obviously we have a different view. What you are saying that 
. . . in effect is that your view is the correct one and no other 
views are correct and therefore no changes to the Act are 
necessary. And I caution the member that that’s not how things 
work. We have a difference of opinion here which . . . put 
forward by very reputable law firms who are advising us to the 
opposite effect, as to the meaning of that section, and that’s 
why we’re introducing these amendments. 
 
And these catch situations that the member wants us to catch, 
where funds are bundled up and sent on in the name of the 
entity that does the bundling, without any information being 
included — you say it’s in the present Act; we say it’s not. Let’s 
put it beyond doubt by introducing the requirement in clear, 
precise terms so that in the future there will be no doubt about 
it. And I think it’s a very significant advance in the law and I’m 
enthusiastic about it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I don’t think you think that 
at all because I think these definitions are too plain. I’m going 
to send this across to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, 
you might as well have a copy, it’s bigger print. Maybe that’s 
the problem. Maybe that’s the problem we can’t get at. 
 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3171 

A person is a corporation, association, a constituency 
association, or a trust. And you’re saying, well that’s our 
interpretation. No it’s not. That’s the interpretation in The 
Election Act. That’s how it’s defined in The Election Act. Do 
we have to just start one word at a time and work through this? 
 
Now I think the question was rather simple. Is the PC metro 
fund considered to be a trust as defined in the current Election 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thanks, Mr. Chair, and to the member, I 
repeat, I don’t know anything about that particular fund, but 
just on the face of the definition, it includes trusts. The 
newspapers are reporting that fund and they describe it themself 
as being some kind of a trust, as I recall, some kind of a trust 
fund or whatever. So just on the basis of the newspaper reports, 
I would expect that it would fall within that definition. But I 
can’t pronounce on that, nor should I. That’s something that the 
Chief Electoral Officer is already investigating. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, now, this trust that you 
know nothing about though is donating  what was it  
hundreds of thousands of dollars each year into the 
Conservative Party, the registered party, to be used for election 
purposes. So would that be in contravention of the Act if they 
didn’t disclose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Now with great respect, that’s not a fair 
question. That very question is before the Chief Electoral 
Officer and it is just not appropriate that I stand here in this 
committee and start pronouncing on those things. That’s not my 
. . . any part of my function, to pronounce on that. That is going 
to have to be determined by Mr. Kuziak, or in any event 
somewhere else, not here. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Are you, Mr. Minister, are you ensuring 
that Mr. Kuziak has ample funds to have this very complete and 
thorough inquiry? Are you adding to his budget? Are you 
allowing him to continue with the present budget? Or how do 
you expect him to address, under the tight fiscal restraints that 
you put on everybody in this province . . . how do you expect 
him to have this full inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That issue, that question, hasn’t arisen 
in my presence, but I can say to the member that if the Chief 
Electoral Officer needs more money in order to do his job with 
respect to these or any other issues, he’ll get the money. No 
question about that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Are you going to make that offer to the 
chief electoral office or are you expecting him to try and work 
within a certain budget and approach you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well he will . . . he’s no doubt watching 
us right now. He heard me; its a matter of the public record. 
And you know he will, if he can, do it within his existing 
budget — fine and good. If he needs more money to do it, that’s 
fine too. We certainly won’t compromise his performance of his 
duties here by a lack of funds. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, certain sections  well not 

certain sections, I’ll have to go through it  226 . . . bear with 
me a moment. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll just take a shot in the dark. I think it’s 
226, dealing with anonymous donations. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Old Act or new Act? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  The present Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, my copy of the old Act has 
226 as being an offences section that defines the penalty for 
contravention of certain sections of the Act. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you. A new Mr. Minister here. So 
we will . . . I’m not sure where to take this. Is the minister 
coming back? 
 
An Hon. Member:  What you want to try to do is get me 
contradicting him. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member:  You want to try to get me contradicting 
what Bob said. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  No, I’d rather have him contradicting The 
Election Act. So should we take a brief recess while we wait for 
him to come back? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well just ask the questions and we’ll 
. . .he’ll only be a few minutes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. How then, because somehow we 
haven’t been able to establish who contravenes the Act or how 
it’s done, how do you actually come up with who is an 
anonymous donator under the current Act? Who could possibly 
. . . it? If it’s all in interpretation we’d never get to that part. 
Why was it ever put in the original Act if there is no way of 
deciding who would ever be an anonymous donation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  In this Act that I have, it’s section 221, 
page E-6, deals with the anonymous donors: 
 

(1) No business manager or registered agent who receives 
any gift, contribution, loan, advance, deposit or other 
financial assistance in an amount exceeding $100 from an 
anonymous donor or in an amount referred to in subsection 
219(2.1) shall use the money for any purpose. 
 
(2) A business manager or registered agent who receives 
an amount mentioned in subsection (1) . . . 

 
So that’s the part that covers the anonymous donor. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, and welcome back, Mr. 
Minister. Can you tell me how one would become an 
anonymous donator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that the term is self-explanatory. 
It would be a donation from you don’t know who. Well the 



3172 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

member laughs. I’m sorry, but . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s kind of the point I’ve been 
making for hours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The Act says in section 221 for 
example, in the old Act, no business manager or registered 
agent who receives any contribution, etc., in an amount 
exceeding $100 from an anonymous donor shall use the money 
for any purpose. There the term is; it’s not defined in the Act, 
and so it bears its ordinary, plain, simple, grammatical meaning. 
A donor who doesn’t have a name. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well believe it, Mr. Minister, I actually 
think we’re getting somewhere here now. That is the point 
we’ve been making for hours, is that if the donator doesn’t have 
a name, if you can’t attach a name, then the money can’t be 
used for any purpose. And if in fact it is used and you can’t 
attach a name to it, then as you read on in the Act, you have to 
give it to the Chief Electoral Officer who will then put it into 
the General Revenue Fund. 
 
So the question is, following up on your very clear statement, if 
an anonymous donor is somebody that you don’t know the 
name of, then the people that have donated to the PC metro 
fund, and you don’t know their names, are they, in your 
opinion, anonymous donors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I don’t know. Again the member 
is trying to put me into a position as though I were the Chief 
Electoral Officer and had some responsibility to determine in a 
specific fact situation what was the legal outcome. 
 
And I can’t do that. I mean nobody can do that. You can make 
all the allegations you like, but I’m not in a position to 
pronounce as to whether or not any specific fact situation is or 
is not anything. 
 
We have been talking about the Act for many days now, and it 
is perfectly clear that we have a serious disagreement as to the 
interpretation of the obligations to disclose donors under the 
Act. You’re acting on the basis of your legal advice. We’re 
acting on the basis of ours. We respect the fact that you’re 
getting contrary legal advice. 
 
And so we propose to amend the Act, considerably toughen it 
up from what we regard as the present provisions, by adopting 
practically all of the arguments, I think all of the arguments, 
that you’re making about what the donation law should be, and 
here we are. 
 
I don’t know what the member is seeking to get from me. I 
don’t know what you’re looking for. If you’re looking for me to 
usurp the role of the Chief Electoral Officer and start deciding 
who’s right and who’s wrong here, forget it. I can’t do that. It’s 
not . . . It would be not be appropriate for me to do that. It’s not 
part of my responsibility. 
 
(1715) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  But, Mr. Minister, you do have a  

responsibility, because for days the Liberal official opposition 
brought forward through the House, through different avenues 
in this House, ways that you could have called for a judicial 
inquiry to have these things answered. So why didn’t you do 
that? If you feel you can’t answer it, why didn’t you allow 
others to answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We have mechanisms in place that can 
be used to answer that question. One of them is already in full 
flight, as I understand the correspondence, and that is the Chief 
Electoral Officer, who does have jurisdiction to sort these 
things out. 
 
There are other ways to do it also. 
 
We will not resolve that question in debate in this House. That 
is clear. You can say what your understanding is; I can say what 
mine is. We can quibble away about words, but in the end, it’s 
not going to resolve anything. And what we are here to do and 
what we should do is to decide on what should be the election 
law that will go into effect on or about January 1. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the $1.331 million that was 
transferred through your constituency associations, would you 
consider those to be firstly anonymous donations if they’re not 
listed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Certainly not. I mean unless they are. I 
mean I have no idea. I don’t know how I’d begin to answer that 
question. I can tell the member this. We have complied with the 
existing law in the reporting of these matters. We have been 
meticulous about doing that. But I have no way of answering 
the question with any degree of specificity. 
 
We have been talking for days now about what is the 
interpretation, and you put forward your interpretation and ask 
me questions about it and I answer with my interpretation. And 
basically what we’ve got is conflicting legal advice by very, 
very prominent lawyers. It’s a situation that cries out for a 
remedy, and the remedy we propose is included in the proposed 
House amendments. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the $1.331 million that your 
party hasn’t disclosed, in your opinion, that transfer, even 
though it wasn’t disclosed in any way, shape or form  we 
have no idea who put that money through those constituency 
associations  in your view though, that is legal, and in your 
view, that follows the intent of the legislation as it was brought 
in in 1974? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the answer is yes. We consider 
that we have complied with the law. We have been doing it ever 
since the law was introduced by the now Premier back in the 
’70s. We have been complying with it. And yes, we consider 
we’re in full compliance. 
 
Let me just repeat this point. We take the member’s point, 
though. This issue sprang up less than three weeks ago  I 
guess it is exactly three weeks ago  and it’s captured all of 
our attention, and we’re moving with the House amendments to 
try and ensure that the law is tougher than we considered it ever  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3173 

was, perhaps in line with what Garrett Wilson always 
considered it was. But in any event, it will resolve the problem 
for the future. 
 
So far as the problem in the past is concerned, what’s already 
behind us, that’s going to have to be sorted out by appropriate 
authorities. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So in your proposed House amendment, in 
the proposed House amendment, can you tell me how political 
action committees of the sort that they have in the United 
States, how they would be dealt with in your amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  They will either be a corporation or a 
trust fund or they will be included in the concept of a 
constituency association. One way or another, they will be 
caught directly, depending on . . . well it may be a corporation 
in the event of an incorporated body. It may be a trust fund. 
That’s a very wide concept in law. Failing all that, we can get it 
included in the concept of constituency associations. 
 
I’d indicated to your leader some time ago that that’s going to 
cover more than just the Wood River Liberal Association or the 
Fairview Constituency Association, because we will sweep in 
our youth organizations and our women’s organizations and all 
of those things, to ensure that any of these groups that are 
bundling up money to hand over to the party are going to have 
to comply with that law. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So then as you’re saying, it’s the present 
Act that’s going to catch anyone such as a political action 
committee or your youth groups. So really then if we can accept 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  The amended Act. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Pardon me? The amended Act? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well no, no, that’s not what I heard 
you say, because you’re telling me that it would fall under the 
definition of persons under corporation, and that would catch it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I said that with respect to any of these 
groups that are bundling up money and sending them over to 
the party, they’re going to be caught by these terms, one or the 
other of them, and will have to comply with the disclosure 
requirements here in the proposed House amendment to Bill 92. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. 
Minister, when you’re defining . . . you have the constituency 
associations defined in the Act. How many constituency 
associations can you have for each constituency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It is not a defined term. We all know 
what our constituencies are. In the case of the member, it’s the 
Arm River constituency. And we have a sense of the traditional 
meaning of “constituency association.” But association could 
be any group that is engaging in activities that are covered by 
this Act, so it’s not a confined term. It will cover our traditional 
constituency organizations and any other organizations that 
have a similar purpose in mind; namely, to get us elected. 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thanks, Mr. Minister. Do you think it would 
be appropriate, however, to have that term defined, in light of 
some of the events that have happened in the past, have it 
tightly defined and go so far as to include how many 
constituency associations you can have per constituency, as 
opposed to leaving it wide open and I guess at the discretion of 
an individual constituency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Again “constituency association” covers 
a lot of ground, an association in respect of a particular 
constituency. And if we start defining it, we run into the same 
problem as with trust funds. We start to limit it as soon as we 
define it. 
 
If you want to limit something, define it, because the courts will 
then read it strictly. If you want it to cover the maximum 
possible ground, then just use the general, commonly 
understood words and know that by doing that you’ve covered 
more than you would if you tried to define it. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thanks, Mr. Minister. We talked before about 
what brought us to all this and to this discussion. And certainly, 
as I mentioned before, I do believe that it was the disclosure of 
 whether by accident or by media or whoever it was  of the 
first secret fund of the third party, the new Progressive 
Conservative Party, and of course the opening up by the media 
of the $2.47 million fund, whatever it was, of the 
Conservatives. 
 
And that’s prompted a lot of calls to me and discussion to me 
by constituents and people from across the province asking, 
well where did this money come from, in light of some of the 
events that have happened over the past year with court 
challenges and court cases and convictions and what have you. 
 
And so I guess as an MLA representing a constituency, people 
want to know how we’re going to address this problem, how 
we’re going to fix it and to ensure that it doesn’t happen again. 
So that’s where I think a lot of our discussion within caucus and 
in this forum has come from, and in particular my short bit of 
questioning and dialogue on this very topic. 
 
So I think, I hope, you understand and I hope the people of the 
province understand, where we’re coming from in trying to 
address the problem and get some credibility back for our 
elected people, which includes yourself and myself and our 
caucus and a lot of your caucus members as well. 
 
So just in closing, and I’ll turn it back to my colleagues, that I 
hope that the discussion here has helped in ensuring that 
appropriate steps are being taken, whether it’s by the Chief 
Electoral Officer or by the Provincial Auditor, to ensure that the 
concerns of the people of the province are addressed. And I 
hope that . . . and I know you will be certainly supportive of 
those actions in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I agree. The discussion here has 
certainly highlighted the issues in all of our minds, and we’re 
the better for it. And I just want to say that if, you know, as this 
situation develops, if the law needs further buttressing, let’s 
come back next year and buttress it, because we have common  



3174 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

ends here in so far as the future is concerned. We have a 
common purpose. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
your proposed House amendment, I really don’t see a lot of 
difference or change. If a party isn’t prepared to follow the 
intent of section 219, why does section 240 change? I mean if 
you’re not prepared to follow the intent of a law then it doesn’t 
matter what you’re going to bring in or play with here. The 
intent is very clear. I know that you know it’s very clear. And 
the Premier has put you to lead a charge which I’m sure that 
you’re not comfortable leading. Well that’s my interpretation. 
We’re back to interpretations. And I think you know very well 
that you’re in a tough spot and we’ll accept that you don’t have 
any alternatives. You have your marching orders and must see 
those through. 
 
However you are the minister that’s bringing forward 
amendments, and in the amendments I would like you to 
explain to me . . . especially after yesterday’s comments, 
because you had told me or this House that in fact you looked at 
several other jurisdictions before bringing forward the 
amendments and reopening The Election Act, which surprised 
me because the intent can be easily not followed in 240 as in 
present 219, unless in fact you had some guidelines to follow as 
they do in Alberta. 
 
And I noticed in the Alberta Election Finances And 
Contributions Disclosure Act . . . and this is why I’m really not 
sure why, if you’ve recognized now, it’s come to light that 
there’s all these problems, why in fact you wouldn’t move in 
the area that Alberta did and in fact have an annual reporting by 
a constituency association. I mean if you really and truly wanted 
to clean up a problem, why wouldn’t you take it to that level, 
because that’s where the problem is. 
 
I mean for the longest time, for the longest time, your 
government and of course the PC Party wanted to confuse this, 
that it was something to do with the Canada Elections Act. 
There was these federal contributions . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well you can shake your head no, but that’s 
exactly where you were trying to lead us for the longest time. 
 
(1730) 
 
But it’s the constituency associations. That’s where the problem 
is. That’s where the 1.331 million problem that you have . . . It 
doesn’t address the PC metro fund where they have  what is 
it?  two and a half million dollars. And it is so clear in 
definitions, and you’ve admitted that definition is clear under 
person being a trust and the trust being a trust fund, that section 
219 (3) clearly deals with it. 
 
And yet when you stand up to give an answer, well you have no 
idea; it’s interpretation problems. I know that that’s not the 
case, Mr. Minister. You know, really, you’ve got the majority. 
You’re going to ram this through. So be it. But in one way I 
think it’s . . . well it’s disappointing that if in fact you looked at 
the other jurisdictions, that you wouldn’t go right to where the 
problem is for your own sake, for your own members’ sake, and 
deal with it at the constituency level as they did in Alberta. Can  

you tell us why you didn’t address that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well granted we’ve taken a different 
formulation from Alberta. As the member knows from an 
answer I gave yesterday, I was operating on incomplete briefing 
with respect to Alberta. But we have here a requirement that I 
think accomplishes the same purpose as the member is urging, 
namely that the monies that are brought forward from 
constituency organizations to the party or to a candidate have to 
disclose the source of the funds. And that’s the same position 
that Alberta winds up in. 
 
Shall I repeat some of that answer? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Please, would you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I don’t mind at all. I, for some 
reason, was not aware of the Alberta law at the time of the 
drafting of these provisions. My information was that Alberta 
really didn’t have any law in this area. That was wrong, and I 
received briefing this morning that indicated that, what the true 
situation was, and I apologize to the House for that but that 
sometimes happens. 
 
But I think that what we have here in the proposed House 
amendment gets us to the same end, because the constituency 
association, if it passes the money to the party or to the 
candidate, has to disclose where the money came from. So in 
effect, if it’s using the money for political purposes, it has to 
comply with this law, and I think this is a good law. 
 
I want to say, you know, the member doesn’t do me justice. 
With all respect, I have tried as hard as I can, with all the ability 
I have, to be fully responsive to the member’s questions. And 
he’s asked some zingers and not intended to make me look 
good. So be it and that’s fair. But I want to say plainly to the 
member that I have tried very, very hard to deal frankly and 
forthrightly with the questions that you’ve raised. 
 
Now maybe taking my answers through your perceptual screen, 
you have a different interpretation, but I say to the member that 
I stand here as sincere as I can be about these questions, and tell 
you and give you the answers that I’ve given  all of which 
indicates that our parties and our advisers have different views 
as to the obligations under this Act. 
 
If we will pass this Bill with these amendments, there will be no 
confusion any more. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And through you to 
the minister, again from the perspective of lay people and 
perhaps what we discussed earlier about unequivocally, if there 
is in fact improprieties found as a result of the inquires that are 
going on, they will be dealt with under this existing Act, the 
concern still exists that the amendment as proposed now to be 
implemented at this point in time, furthermore may undermine 
possible . . . possibly undermine or could undermine 
prosecutions under the old rules. 
 
And again in legal terms and perhaps from a legal perspective 
maybe, I’m totally wrong. However it might give or it could  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3175 

give defendants in the future the opportunity to argue that in the 
absence of the material that now exists, they would not have 
done anything wrong. I guess that’s a concern with now 
changing a law to say, well it’s okay if you did it today, but 
because you did it last week, you’re going to be prosecuted. 
 
And it could very well undermine  undermine — any 
prosecutions if there is a defence by defendant saying, well in 
the absence of the regulations, the rules, the new law, okay 
we’ve done nothing wrong had those been in place before. So 
why are you prosecuting us now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I appreciate the member’s question and 
I finally understand the reluctance to amend section 219 or what 
is now 240 in the Bill. 
 
This law will have no effect on any proceedings that arise from 
events that have occurred before this Act comes into force. The 
Interpretation Act, I’m told, is perfectly clear, that any violation 
of the repealed Act will be continued and will be dealt with 
under the terms of the old Act. And what we’re doing today 
with Bill 92 will have no effect whatever on those situations, 
whether they’re investigations or court actions or prosecutions 
or what have you. They will continue in every respect as though 
we were doing nothing today, that we were gone golfing and 
not bothered with Bill 92. 
 
But I understand the member’s concern now and I give him that 
answer, which I know to be so myself and which I’m advised 
by my officials is so. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you and forgive me for asking it one 
more time with respect to . . . given your esteemed legal 
advisers and counsel. Could it in fact be used . . . Now that this 
is in the new Act, in a new Bill, could it be used by the defence 
to say, well evidently had this been in before, this should not be 
a problem, and would that weigh the decisions or concerns or 
defence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the law 
is clear that what we are doing today will have no effect on 
those situations. The law is clear. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, does 
present legislation, any time legislation is . . . the present 
legislation or the ongoing legislation, does it always override 
any previous legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  A new piece of legislation, it will be 
clear from it if it’s properly drafted, what its effect will be. It 
will not have any retroactive effect unless this Assembly gives 
it retroactive effect. It will speak only from the day in which it 
comes into effect. Some pieces of legislation, as we all know, 
come into effect on the day that they’re approved by the 
Lieutenant Governor. Others come into effect on a date to be 
proclaimed, which is the situation here. It’s coming into effect 
on a date to be proclaimed and the best guess is January 1, 
1997. Until that date, the old Election Act continues in force 
and the new amendments have no effect at all until they’re 
proclaimed. I think that’s the question I was asked. 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to follow 
up on that. In going back to again a concern I expressed, can I 
use an analogy to try and explain the feeling that . . . The speed 
limit is 100 kilometres per hour and a person gets a ticket for it 
and is pending prosecution. In the meantime, there is legislation 
change for that stretch of highway to put it up to 110. So when 
the individual goes before the judge, the judge looks at it and 
says, well yes, you were going 110 when it was 100, but now 
it’s 110. It lessens the impact of the offence, or whatever you 
did, we’re letting you off, absolute discharge. 
 
That is, in very simple terms, what the concern is, what I’ve 
been trying to express as a concern, if in fact there are 
improprieties and prosecutions, heaven forbid. But if it’s 
necessary and then it’s viewed as, well had the law been like 
this before it would’ve been no problem so everybody gets off 
and nobody then answers for having breached the law since it 
was passed with amendments from 1974, amendments in ’78, 
to this day. 
 
And someone’s amassed $2.75 million in direct contravention 
of the Act and someone else may have perhaps amassed $1.33 
million in contravention of the Act. Now to have the inquiries 
reveal that yes, there’s been a contravention; however, when it 
does come before our learned courts and they look at the whole 
exercise and say, well had this been in place before, this 
wouldn’t have happened so the intent was not there, and the 
impact is not as great, and let’s not worry about it, it’s over and 
done with, and everybody’s off scot-free. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I could repeat my previous answer with 
respect to the application of the law. And we can be completely 
confident in this Assembly that the courts will follow The 
Interpretation Act and will apply the law as it existed at the 
time. That’s perfectly clear. 
 
The member will know from his experience that it’s difficult to 
predict how any individual judge may handle a sentencing 
situation in the event that there’s a conviction. Again the law is 
clear. People have to answer for their actions . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Right. I mean no. To quote myself, no. 
 
You know, with judges the law is clear, but there’s nobody can 
give assurances about anything. I would expect that, you know, 
if there are offences connected with this kind of money that the 
penalties would be significant, but who am I? I’m only a 
cabinet minister as you’re only a leader of an opposition. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
guess if we added up all the hours in the last month in question 
period . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  We got to know each other well. 
 
(1745) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh, we’ve got to know each other well. 
And the hours that we put in yesterday and the full day today, it 
has become very clear that you’re not going to pull the Bill, let 
it die on the order paper. I think you should. I think it would be 
the best thing to do given I think what transpired and where  



3176 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

we’re at with the Chief Electoral Officer and the investigations 
by the Provincial Auditor and where this is going to go. I think 
to do the Act now is wrong. 
 
I don’t think there’s any reason why it should be hurried 
through right at this time, given that it’s still, you know, three 
years away from an election. I guess you’d know that better 
than I. We could give you a written commitment that it would 
be dealt with first order of business in the next session if you 
would choose to pull it, I think for both . . . or for everyone’s 
sake, but that’ll be your decision to make right away. 
 
There’s not much more that we can say about the present Act 
and the one that you’re in fact proposing, some of the 
amendments, other than it’s very clear to us and always has 
been for those of us . . . or for those in our party that have to 
follow these rules, that if you get money for either your 
candidate or your party, you must disclose it. And in the 
definitions right here, of persons, it so thoroughly covers all the 
angles that could be dealt with  trusts and constituencies. 
 
And we’ve went through that. Just when I think I’ve got 
agreement from you that we’re at that stage, then I can’t get 
answers. And I know the difficulty that you are in. As I said 
before, within your own cabinet, if you have instructions to put 
it through, it’s going to go through. 
 
I also want to at this time thank the officials that you brought 
with you. And I also know the difficult position that they’ve 
been in, because, Mr. Minister, they’re trying to help you get 
through something that I don’t think any of you are very 
comfortable with at all. Nor do I think that you believe that it’s 
necessary or in fact that it’s well-planned or thought out. 
 
And so with that, we’re going to let things move along, unless 
of course all of a sudden we’re going to see the Conservative 
Party step in here and answer some of the questions that you 
should have been answering on the PC metro fund. I see many 
enjoy that, except the Tories who are never here. And I can’t 
comment on them not being in their seats today, can I, Mr. 
Chair. But it’s definitely been an ongoing problem. 
 
So with that, I will say that we’re going to stop asking questions 
today. We won’t be supporting what your efforts are here today, 
even on the proposed amendment, because we’ve clearly stated 
on several occasions, not that the amendment doesn’t have all 
the right words for what you’re trying to have it achieve, but in 
fact because that it’s not needed. 
 
Let’s make it very clear. I’m sure that when you’ll take Hansard 
and show everyone that firstly the Liberal Party are asking that 
something get cleaned up, and my God you brought forward 
amendments to help clean it up and they didn’t vote for it. Oh, 
you go and do that politics if you want, but quite frankly I’m 
too tired for it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Twenty-two years from now. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Twenty-two years from now. Oh, 
whatever. I’m sure some of your colleagues will enjoy that little 
bit of politics, but the truth of the matter is we’re not supporting  

it because we just don’t think it’s required. I’ll leave it at that 
but in wrapping up  and we won’t support the Bill either, by 
the way  but in wrapping up, I’m going to ask for one 
commitment from you. And we can argue definitions on 
constituency associations and whether that money was rightly 
or wrongly handled or dealt with or disclosed. But something is 
very, very clear, and that is there are funds; there is a PC metro 
fund and maybe more; I mean they may have a metro fund and 
a rural fund and how many funds, we don’t know. 
 
But I want your commitment, Mr. Minister, that because you’re 
the one championing this amendment, this Act through, that in 
fact you will do what is in . . . well that you’re able to do either 
. . . with the funds that are going to be required by Provincial 
Auditor, by Chief Electoral Officer, to get to the bottom of 
these huge millions of dollars in secret funds. I think it’s 
incumbent upon you to stand in this House today and give that 
commitment to the people, that you will get to the bottom of 
that. That in fact the abuses that happened all throughout the 
‘80s won’t happen again. 
 
The Liberal Party, by the way, in our view and in the view, I’m 
sure, in many . . . are the only ones that have always fully 
disclosed those types of donations, and I would like to see what 
you feel about giving that commitment here today. 
 
With that, I once again thank your officials. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I just want to reply to the 
member’s request. I think that I have made clear that if the 
Chief Electoral Officer requires more resources in order to deal 
with these cases then we will be responsive to him on his 
describing the problem to us and doing what would normally be 
done in those situations. We will not compromise in any way 
these investigations because of funding problems. 
 
The member maintained his position right to the end, and I 
know he was sincere in putting his position forward. And he 
has to give me the fact that I was sincere in responding to them, 
because we believe very, very strongly in the concept of the 
transparency of political donations. And the law that was 
passed in 1974 and amended later in the ‘70s in this Assembly 
reflected our commitment to that idea. 
 
It surprises me in retrospect that when we were working on this 
Bill, when we were working on this Bill, we didn’t think about 
this. We didn’t, you didn’t, the Tories didn’t. We just didn’t 
have any conversation about it at all. And I think it’s to our 
credit that when we . . . all of us, that when our minds were 
directed to this issue, we responded in the way that we did. 
 
Because, you know, when you boil down all the rhetoric, when 
you eliminate all of the politics here, the fact of the matter is 
that we are on the same path. We believe that there ought to be 
far more transparency in political donations. And that’s a 
remarkable thing. This, as I mentioned earlier a number of 
times, has been a subject of huge debate across this country for 
years and years. And here we are in little old Saskatchewan 
agreeing on a formulation of the law which in my view is a  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3177 

substantial improvement over what we had before. 
 
Now you may not share that view, fair enough  you’ve made 
that clear right to the end. But that is certainly our view, and 
that we have the concurrence of the Liberal Party to that kind of 
formulation is a very interesting idea. Because for better or for 
worse, your party in this province has not been behind these 
kind of initiatives in the past. It is now and I think that speaks 
well. 
 
I want to say to the member, finally, I just got to wrap this up 
though. I want to say once again how much I and my colleagues 
appreciated the level of cooperation and consultation that took 
place with respect to this Bill. It was remarkable and we are 
very pleased that it went  very pleased that it went. Now the 
member says, not asking to support it. That’s fine, but we did a 
lot of work together on it and we accommodated each other’s 
wishes on it to a remarkable extent, and I want to say that in 
closing for the record and to my friends opposite. 
 
The Chair:  Before we start on the Bill clause by clause, I 
would ask leave of the committee that we do the clauses in 
groups seeing as there are 291 clauses. Is that agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 239 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 240 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I have tabled a proposed 
House amendment to clause 240 of the printed Bill. It consists 
of . . . the amendment consists of two parts. 
 

(a) by adding the following subsection before subsection 
(1): 
 

I will read the proposed new subsection 1: 
 

“(1) In this section, ‘registered party’ means a registered 
party within the meaning of the Canada Elections Act”; 
and 

 
Now the (b) part of the proposed amendment to clause 240 is as 
follows: 
 

Amend Clause 240 of the printed Bill: 
 

(b) by adding the following subsections after subsection 
(4): 

 
“(5) If a constituency association, corporation or trust 
fund makes a contribution to a registered political party 
or a candidate, the constituency association, corporation 
or trust fund shall provide the chief official agent of the 
registered political party or the candidate’s business 
manager with a statement setting out: 

 
(a) the name of the person who authorized the  

contribution on behalf of the constituency association, 
corporation or trust fund; and 

 
(b) the name of, and the amount contributed by, each 
person who made a contribution in excess of $250 in a 
year and whose contribution was used to make up the 
funds contributed by the constituency association, 
corporation or trust fund. 

 
“(6) If a registered party makes a contribution to a 
registered political party or a candidate, the registered 
party shall provide the chief official agent of the 
registered political party or the candidate’s business 
manager with a statement setting out the name of, and 
the amount contributed by, each person who made a 
contribution in excess of $250 in a year and whose 
contribution was used to make up the funds contributed 
by the registered party. 

 
“(7) The statements mentioned in subsections (5) and (6) 
must be provided at the time the contribution is made. 

 
“(8) If the constituency association, corporation or trust 
fund does not provide the statement mentioned in 
subsection (5) to the chief official agent or business 
manager, the chief official agent or business manager 
shall not accept the contribution from the constituency 
association, corporation or trust fund. 

 
“(9) If the registered party does not provide the 
statement mentioned in subsection (6) to the chief 
official agent or business manager, the chief official 
agent or business manager shall not accept the 
contribution from the registered party. 

 
“(10) If the chief official agent or business manager 
learns that the registered political party or candidate has 
accepted a contribution from a constituency association, 
corporation or a trust fund contrary to subsection (8) or 
from a registered party contrary to subsection (9), the 
chief official agent or business manager shall return the 
contribution to the constituency association, corporation, 
trust fund or registered party. 
 
“(11) The Chief Electoral Officer may request a 
constituency association, corporation or trust fund that 
makes a contribution to a registered political party or 
candidate to submit a statement setting out: 
 

(a) the name of the person who authorized the 
contribution on behalf of the constituency association, 
corporation or trust fund; and 
 
(b) the name of, and the amount contributed by, each 
person who made a contribution in excess of $250 in a 
year and whose contribution was used to make up the 
funds contributed by the constituency association, 
corporation or trust fund. 
 

“(12) No constituency association, corporation, trust 
fund, registered party, chief official agent, business  



3178 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

manager, officer of a constituency association, officer or 
director of a corporation or trustee of a trust fund shall 
fail to comply with subsections (5) to (1) or with a 
request made pursuant to subsection (11)”. 

 
I move that amendment, Mr. Chair. 
 
(1800) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to propose a subamendment to the minister’s amendment. I 
believe that one item that we’ve discussed earlier has been 
missed out on in this particular area, and that is the inclusion of 
trade unions under this particular amendment, House 
amendment. 
 
Every place else in the Bill, where it talks of private donations, 
where it talks of corporations, it includes the words, trade 
union. Only in this section in the amendment, as proposed by 
the minister, are the term trade union not included. I believe in 
this particular case, Mr. Minister, as in the two other clauses 
where corporations and private donations are being considered, 
the words trade union appear. I believe in this particular clause 
that trade unions should also appear. 
 
Therefore I would propose, Mr. Minister, the following 
amendment: 
 

Amend subsections (5), (8), (10), (11) and (12) of Clause 
240 as proposed to be added to the Bill by the motion 
before the committee by adding after every occurrence of 
the word “corporation” therein the following: “, trade 
union”. 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the 
member, we have, during consultation, discussed this idea. We 
weren’t agreeable to changing the Bill at the time, and we’re 
not agreeable to accepting the amendment now and I want to 
say why. 
 
The requirements for reporting contributions from corporations 
and trade unions  direct contributions  are already set out 
in the Act; have been for years, continue there. 
 
What we’re trying to get at with the amendments to section 240 
are corporations, of which Tommy Douglas House is the 
example that we were using in the discussion in committee 
earlier this afternoon, corporations that are connected to the 
political process in one way or another. 
 
And trade unions just aren’t involved in that. Their 
contributions come directly to . . . no doubt to the Tory Party 
because of the great supporters that they’ve been. I say that with 
sarcasm, all the sarcasm that I can possibly muster. 
 
But the direct contributions from corporations are already 
covered in the Act. This is to get at the indirect ones, the ones 
that are bundled up . . . these are bundled up by a corporate 
entity and passed on to the party. 

So for those reasons, Mr. Chair, we are not agreeable to the 
proposed subamendment. 
 
Subamendment negatived on division. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 240 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 241 to 249 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 250 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I move: 
 

That clause 250 of the printed Bill be amended as follows: 
 

(a) in clause (2)(b) by adding “, and the amount 
contributed by,” after “the name of”; and 
 
(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (2): 
 

“(3) A return required by subsection (1) must be 
accompanied by a copy, certified by the chief official 
agent to be a true copy, of every statement received by 
the registered political party pursuant to subsections 
240(5) and (6) in the fiscal year”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 250 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 251 to 260 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 261 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I propose that 
clause 261 of the printed Bill be amended by adding the 
following subsection after subsection (2): 
 

“(3) An election expenses return required by subsection (1) 
must be accompanied by a copy, certified by the candidate 
or the candidate’s business manager to be a true copy, of 
every statement received by the candidate pursuant to 
subsections 240(5) and (6) respecting contributions made 
during the election”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 261 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 262 to 276 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 277 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I propose that clause 277 of the printed 
Bill be amended in the following way: 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3179 

Amend clause 5(b) of Clause 277 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “corporation’s business” and substituting 
“Crown corporation’s competitive business interests”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 277 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 278 to 291 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
The Chair:  That ends the work of the committee. If I can 
have leave of the Assembly for about 30 seconds, I would like 
to say some thank-you’s to some people for making the work of 
the working of the committee work so well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Chair:  First of all, I guess the staff in the Speaker’s 
office for making our job . . . and also the staff in the Clerk’s 
office for helping us out, the people from Hansard and 
broadcast services for making it go. Certainly the pages, and a 
special thank-you to you, the members, for your cooperation 
and your patience at certain times that was needed to keep the 
committee working. 
 
And I guess I want to say even right on record a special 
thank-you to our spouses for the patience they’ve had for us 
being in here as long as we have been, all summer it seems like 
and spring, and a great thank-you to the ones that really make 
the committee work, are the Clerks here at the Table, Gwenn 
and Greg and Meta. I know new in the position down here it 
would have been very difficult without them so I want to say a 
big thank-you to them. 
 
And to everyone, I want to finish by saying have a great 
summer and God willing we’ll see you all back here for the 
next session. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1815) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move that Bill No. 92 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
The division bells rang from 6:19 p.m. until 6:20 p.m. 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. All hon. members know that 
debate is not allowed during the taking of the vote. I’ll ask all 
hon. members to come to order. 
 

Yeas  35 
 
Mitchell Wiens Shillington 
Anguish Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Goulet Upshall 
Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 
Koenker Trew Bradley 
Scott Teichrob Nilson 
Serby Stanger Hamilton 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Sonntag Jess 
Flavel Murrell Thomson 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Goohsen Haverstock  
 

Nays  9 
 
Osika McLane Draude 
McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 
Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 6:25 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No.  5 - An Act to amend The Education Act 
Bill No.  98 - An Act respecting the Application to 

Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil 
Aspects of International Child Abduction 
/Projet de loi No. 98 - Loi concernant 
l’application à la Saskatchewan de la 
Convention sur les aspects civils de 
l’enlèvement international d’enfants 

Bill No.  99 - An Act respecting Co-operatives/Projet de loi 
No. 99 - Loi concernant les coopératives 

Bill No. 100 - An Act respecting the Regulation of Drivers 
and Traffic on Saskatchewan Highways/Projet 
de loi No. 100 - Loi concernant la 
réglementation de la conduite automobile et de 
la circulation sur les routes de la Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 101 - An Act respecting Wills/Projet de loi No. 101 - 
Loi concernant les testaments 

Bill No. 102 - An Act respecting the Distribution of Estates of 
Intestates/Projet de loi No. 102 - Loi 
concernant le partage des successions non 
testamentaires 

Bill No. 103 - An Act respecting Powers of Attorney/Projet 
de loi No. 103 - Loi concernant les 
procurations 

Bill No. 104 - An Act to facilitate the Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Judgements and Awards/Projet  



3180 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

  de loi No. 104 - Loi visant à faciliter 
l’exécution réciproque des jugements et des 
sentences arbitrales 

Bill No. 105 - An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations 
Convention on the Recognition and 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards/Projet 
de loi No. 105 - Loi concernant l’application 
en Saskatchewan de la Convention des Nations 
Unies pour la reconnaissance et l’exécution des 
sentences arbitrales étrangères 

Bill No. 106 - An Act respecting the Maintenance of 
Dependants of Testators and Intestates/Projet 
de loi No. 106 - Loi concernant l’aide aux 
personnes à charge des testateurs et des 
intestats 

Bill No. 107 - An Act respecting the Reciprocal Enforcement 
of Maintenance Orders/Projet de loi No. 107 - 
Loi concernant l’exécution réciproque des 
ordonnances alimentaires 

Bill No. 108 - An Act to amend The Change of Name Act, 
1995/Projet de loi No. 108 - Loi modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur le changement de nom 

Bill No. 110 - An Act to amend The Education Act, 
1995/Projet de loi No. 110 - Loi modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No.  55 - An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act 

Bill No.  65 - An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

Bill No.  64 - An Act respecting Pensions for Public 
Employees 

Bill No.  63 - An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Pension 
Annuity Fund 

Bill No.  88 - An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
Bill No.  91 - An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 
Bill No.  44 - An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 

1993 
Bill No.  39 - An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain 

Irrigation 
Bill No.  87 - An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

(No. 2) 
Bill No.  38 - An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
Bill No.  21 - An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 

and to enact a related amendment/Projet de loi 
No. 21 - Loi modifiant la Loi d’interprétation 
de 1995 et édictant une modification 
corrélative 

Bill No. 113 - An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc. 
Bill No.  94 - An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 
Bill No.  95 - An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 
Bill No.  80 - An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act 
Bill No.  84 - An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
Bill No.  85 - An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 
Bill No.  46 - An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
Bill No.  45 - An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act  

  and to make a consequential amendment to The 
Provincial Mediation Board Act 

Bill No.  86 - An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

Bill No. 118 - An Act to amend The Trust and Loan 
Corporations Act 

Bill No. 109 - An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 
1995/Projet de loi No. 109 - Loi modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 

Bill No.  54 - An Act respecting Conservation Easements and 
to make consequential amendments to other 
Acts 

Bill No.  43 - An Act respecting the Development, 
Implementation and Operation of an 
Emergency 911 System and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts 

Bill No.  70 - An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984 and to make consequential amendments 
to other Acts 

Bill No.  71 - An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 and to make a consequential amendment 
to The Municipal Board Act 

Bill No.  72 - An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 
Act and to make a consequential amendment to 
another Act 

Bill No. 111 - An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance 
(Government Contributory) Act 

Bill No. 112 - An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Act 

Bill No.  96 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act 

Bill No.  97 - An Act to amend The Department of 
Agriculture Act 

Bill No.  20 - An Act respecting the Management of Forest 
Resources 

Bill No.  77 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

Bill No. 114 - An Act respecting the Establishment of a 
Crown Foundation for District Health Boards 
and their Affiliates 

Bill No. 120 - An Act respecting the Reorganization of 
Labour Relations between Health Sector 
Employers and Employees 

Bill No.  82 - An Act respecting Health Facilities 
Bill No.  76 - An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to 

repeal The Union Hospital Act and The 
Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts 

Bill No.  92 - An Act respecting Elections 
 
His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 123 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years 
ending respectively on March 31, 1996 and on March 31, 1997 
 
His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 6:34 p.m. 
 



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3181 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before moving a couple of motions, 
one by leave, I would ask for leave to make a few comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by 
thanking I think, all hon. members. This is our first session after 
the election. We had a number of new members. I think all in 
all new members and old have discharged their duties with 
civility and I think they’ve discharged them well. 
 
I want to say I think as well that members have discharged their 
duties with perhaps more than the amount of decorum which 
we’ve had in the past. I think the standards this session have 
increased. That doesn’t mean we’re less partisan. It doesn’t 
mean we agree. It does mean we respect each other, and as we 
learn to respect each other perhaps some of the public respect 
which we’ve lost over the years will return. So I for one see the 
return of civility and mutual respect to be a very positive thing. 
 
There was one other thing that was a first. You’re not the first 
Speaker to be elected but I think you are the first Speaker to be 
opposed in your election, and therefore in many ways that 
makes your election the first. You were also elected by a free 
vote of the caucuses, and I think that’s important. That will be 
for each government and each caucus to make the decision after 
each election. I for one hope the decision, hope the practice, of 
having free votes continues. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, you have discharged your duties with 
dedication, fairness, and patience but I think you’ve also had a 
certain moral authority which comes from having been elected 
by a free vote. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that continues no 
matter who is in office after the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people who work behind the 
scenes, some of them not behind the scenes, some of the at the 
Table, some behind the scenes. I know all hon. members would 
want me to thank these people. 
 
To Gwenn Ronyk, the Clerk of the Assembly who has been 
here for a goodly number of years. If at any time we look as if 
we know what we’re doing, it is because Ms. Ronyk has been 
there to advise us. Deputy Clerk Greg Putz, Clerk Assistant 
Meta Woods, all of you have discharged your duties well and 
you have been of enormous assistance to us. 
 
I want to thank as well the secretary to the Clerk, Monique 
Lovatt, and the secretary to the Clerk at the Table, Pam Scott. 
 
I also want to recognize the work done by our 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw. He by and large kept us in 
good order. Your predecessors used to wear a sword. You no 
longer I see wear that sword but you do manage to keep us in 
order in any event. 
 
I want to thank all of the Legislative Assembly employees, 
those in the personnel and administration, Linda Kaminski, and 
the other staff members who work in that area. 
 
In the Journals we want to thank clerk assistant, Rose Zerr, and  

the assistant Journals clerk, Teena Embury. And in the financial 
services area the director, Marilyn Borowski, and her staff. 
 
The broadcast of these proceedings wouldn’t be possible 
without the work of our broadcasting services director, Gary 
Ward, and the other technicians who work in that area. 
 
I also want to recognize on behalf of the members of the 
Assembly, the hard work that goes into visitor services. The 
director, whom I call by her first name and I’m afraid I’m not 
going to do the second name justice, I believe it’s deMontigny, 
Lorraine deMontigny, who works closely with getting people 
into the galleries and lines up the introductions for us each day. 
 
Bob Cosman, the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, also 
needs to be recognized for his work with both government and 
opposition members. 
 
Finally I want to thank a group who are only with us for one 
year. They’re never back with us a second year  it’s the 
pages. We very much appreciate your work and we count each 
of you as friends, and when we see you in the years to come we 
hope to be able to meet and carry on reminiscences. 
 
I now want to take my place, Mr. Speaker, and if there are any 
other comments to be made we’ll make them, and then I will 
make a couple of motions with respect to the adjournment. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to add 
some comments and my voice to what the Government House 
Leader has already said. And to those people that he’s 
expressed his appreciation, I too, on behalf of the official 
opposition, express it sincerely as well. 
 
There are people in this building, and I can assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, I brag about. I brag about the quality of the people that 
inhabit this particular building during our tenure. I can’t say 
that sincerely enough, from the people in Hansard who work 
very hard, to the people in SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), and all the people that the 
Government House Leader has mentioned. 
 
I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise and fair rulings. 
We haven’t sometimes always agreed but they have been wise 
and fair. The staff, including the offices that the Government 
House Leader has mentioned, without a doubt have been a real 
support to us, particularly us nine new members here, and I’m 
sure the 10th member on this side of the House and the new 
members on the other side of the House; that the people in 
financial services and administrative services have just bent 
over backwards to make us feel comfortable and have helped 
us. The people in your office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to express my sincere appreciation to all colleagues 
on both sides of the House. We may be political adversaries, 
Mr. Speaker, but that does not mean that we can’t be friends. 
And I want to truly express appreciation for the fact that there’s 
a great deal of dignity that does exist. I appreciate that those 
comments that are made to one another as we stand facing one 
another across the floor of this House, that when we speak  



3182 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

through you, Mr. Speaker, or the chairman of committees, it is 
truly a role that we have on behalf of what we represent, and 
that there is no personal animosity that stems from that. And 
that’s one thing that I believe is very, very important for us as 
representatives of the people of Saskatchewan to never, ever 
forget. We may not always agree, but I’ve always heard that 
there are people, that when they are in discussions, once they 
leave a room, they should leave a room arm in arm, even though 
one of those arms may be broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the media. They’re not here but I 
appreciate their being present for as often as the third party has 
been in the House as well this past session. I very much 
appreciate that. 
 
I would like to wish the Minister of Labour once again the very 
best of luck in your future endeavours and remember, wherever 
you’ll go, there you’ll be, Mr. Minister, without a doubt. 
 
I would like to, and I’m sure my colleagues would like to join 
me, in wishing each and every one of you a very happy, a 
productive summer in your constituencies. And don’t forget 
that we’re here because of the people that rely on us and depend 
on us, and that’s who we’re responsible to and that’s who we 
work for. 
 
I want to thank everyone sincerely for their courtesy and 
generosity in this, my first term in this House, my term as 
interim leader, as Leader of the Opposition, and perhaps my last 
session as Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. It was 
truly an honour. I respect the support that I received from my 
colleagues and all members of this House, and in that role it 
was truly an honour to speak out for the people of my 
constituency and for the people of Saskatchewan, and I will 
cherish this time for ever. 
 
As Leader of the Opposition, I have not taken my 
responsibilities lightly. It’s been an honour and a privilege that 
I’ve taken seriously as a commitment that I made to my 
colleagues in this House and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have matured in my new life, and I promise you that I will 
return with the same amount of zealousness and perhaps more 
when the session happens to be recalled, and I can come back 
and be with all of my friends once again. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a pleasure 
for me to stand and to bring some thanks from the third party 
caucus. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think our caucus has shown 
over this past session that, while we may be a third party as far 
as numerical numbers in this Assembly, I think we’ve held our 
own. 
 
And I think as well, Mr. Speaker, many people outside of this 
Assembly would certainly acknowledge that we’ve more than 
held our own and maybe in some cases, as we’ve seen via the 
media, we’ve been elevated to opposition status. And we 
certainly want to inform people that we will continue to work 
on their behalf. 

(1845) 
 
While this Assembly may be proroguing for the summer and for 
the time being, Mr. Speaker, it certainly doesn’t mean that the 
job and the work of an MLA ceases. I think the government 
members are aware of that. I’m certainly sure they’re aware of 
the fact that there are many people gathering and holding 
meetings across the province right now regarding health care, 
which is an indication that there are a lot of concerns that 
continue to exist. 
 
We are certainly pleased as well to have had the opportunity to 
work with many organizations, and certainly the construction 
association in regards to their concerns regarding CCTA 
(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement). And we want to 
thank the government members, and in particular the Minister 
of Economic Development, for taking the time to listen. 
 
And after the fact that we had the opportunity of talking to the 
ministers responsible and other government leaders, that the 
government certainly was willing to acknowledge that there 
were some concerns out there, and we look forward to the 
appointment of a mediator to discuss this ongoing concern and 
indeed address the problems that are related so this province 
can indeed move ahead into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess one might be a little negligent if we didn’t 
mention the fact that while we did sit here and do our work, we 
certainly were willing to forgo the additional $4,400, and we 
acknowledge the fact that this is something that government 
members will continue to be reminded about. And I think I’ve 
heard the Liberal caucus is trying to determine whether it’s 40 
to 100 or whether it’s a little less. But most people in 
Saskatchewan acknowledge what it is and the fact that our 
caucus made a commitment, and we’ve lived up to that 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are certainly many other areas and issues that 
could be discussed, but I think, Mr. Speaker, we’ve reached the 
point after all the debate that we need to acknowledge the work 
of many people in this Assembly. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t 
acknowledge the work that you have done and your diligence in 
serving in this Chair, first, as an elected Speaker. And I think 
for the first time sitting in the Chair, I think, Mr. Speaker, we 
want to say thank you for the job you have done. We think 
you’ve done a commendable job. Coming from an opposition 
party, I think we would have to say that everything said, at the 
end of the day, we want to acknowledge the work you’ve done 
in this Assembly and we say thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to thank each and every one who 
has helped us; certainly through the office of the Clerk and the 
Clerks and the staff; to the pages in the Assembly who have 
worked so diligently; to the Legislative Law Clerk and his staff; 
and, Mr. Speaker, to the broadcast services; Hansard; financial 
services; and to the library staff in this Assembly. Certainly our 
job in this Assembly has been enhanced because of these 
individuals, and the support staff that we have in this building, 
and we say thank you to each and every one of them. And we’d  



June 25, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3183 

be remiss if we didn’t thank the cleaning and security staff. 
 
I would have to say that, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have to 
extend a thank you to our caucus staff. Our caucus staff have 
worked very diligently and very hard and put in a lot of time, 
and certainly kept us informed. And as a third party caucus, the 
reason we have done as well as we have, is because of the work 
of our caucus staff, and we say thank you to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a special thank you to each every one of the 
members in this Assembly. 
 
I think we’ve grown. While we do not always agree, as the 
Leader of the Official Opposition has mentioned, Mr. Speaker, 
we certainly do appreciate the role that each member has 
fulfilled in this Assembly in fulfilling the duties in representing 
their constituents. And so we say thank you. 
 
Let me end by saying this, Mr. Speaker, a thank you to one and 
all. May you all have a very enjoyable and a welcome summer 
break. 
 
Truly may this be a special time as you get together again with 
family and friends and enjoy and reminisce. And we look 
forward to seeing you again in the fall or in the spring, 
whenever the government sees fit to recall the session. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I ask for leave to move the following 
motion: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, of such date and time. 

 
If I have leave I shall move the motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before moving the motion, I have a 
couple of comments I want to make. One of my colleagues was 
kind enough to pass a note, whose signature I don’t recognize, 
but was kind enough to pass a note pointing out that we 
overlooked, in thanking the groups we overlooked three 
significant groups that I want to mention. 
 
One is the legislative staff who . . . one is the Legislative 
Library staff rather who were here often until relatively late at 
night, and I think we’d all want to join in thanking them. 
 
I did not thank the cafeteria staff who fed us, I suppose, 
occasionally had to collect accounts from us; and the cleaning 
staff and security staff without whom this building would not 
be usable. 
 
I want to add to the people we thanked earlier, our very heartfelt 
thanks to those three groups. 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I therefore move, seconded by the 
member from Watrous: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, of such date and time. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I wish everyone a good summer. We 
look forward to seeing you next year  same place, different 
time, and different date. But let me wish you all a good 
summer. And with that, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker:  Before adjourning the Assembly, if it is 
permissible by the hon. members, I would like to make some 
remarks, if that’s permitted. Would leave be granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker:  I promise they will be brief, as hon. members 
urge. At this conclusion of the first session of the twenty-third 
legislature I want to, on your behalf  and I realize some of it 
is repetition  but to repeat some thanks to some very 
important people who help us do our work around the calendar, 
but especially when we come together in session. 
 
To say thanks to those who provide, in a very well organized 
way for all of us, food for thought, those in the Legislative 
Library; as well as those who provide food for energy in the 
cafeteria; as part of taking your message out to the people of 
Saskatchewan, those providing service through journals, 
through broadcasting services. 
 
And I want to particularly acknowledge this evening the 
employees down in Hansard, who are continuing to work as we 
wrap up now. With the extended hours I’ve had opportunity to 
go down and visit, and it’s not been without in fact significant 
personal sacrifice that they have delivered, with a great deal of 
accuracy, the words that you have expressed on behalf of your 
constituents in these final hours and days of the Assembly. 
 
To visitor services for meeting those who are coming to our 
building, and for security services providing us the security of 
protection against unwanted forces, under the guidance of our 
Sergeant-at-Arms. 
 
For the drafting of legislation from the Office of the Legislative 
Law Clerk; and to facilitate the services that you provide to 
your constituents, from the employees in financial services and 
personnel administration. 
 
I want to thank the staff in my office for facilitating your access  



3184 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 1996 

to the Speaker, and to everyone in the Clerk’s office for 
assisting with your procedural needs as you’ve already 
acknowledged. 
 
I want to pay a special thank you to our pages  our pages who 
offered prompt, polite, positive, and particularly popular pages. 
And if I can say on behalf of all members to the pages, we send 
you our best wishes in your careers, and if I may acknowledge 
them as I did on the first day that we came together, to 
acknowledge the fine service that we’ve all received from our 
pages in the persons  and perhaps I could ask them to stand 
as I reintroduce them to you on this final day  Jocelyn Arthur, 
and Leanna Eaton, and Ken Dueck, and Mark Lloyd, and Leasa 
McDougall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  I want to say thank you as well to the two 
presiding officers, the Deputy Speaker, and Chair of 
Committees, and the Deputy Chair of Committees who worked 
together, in my opinion, in a very expeditious way to assist in 
the conduct of the affairs of the Assembly. 
 
And finally I want to say thank you to you, the members of the 
Assembly. You have extended to me just a wonderful honour to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan as the Chair of your 
decision-making activities in this Assembly, and to serve you as 
your Assembly representative. 
 
I commend the dignity with which you have represented your 
concerns and your constituents in this Chamber, and as well, I 
commend the respect you have shown to one another, and 
therefore our institution of parliamentary democracy. Thank 
you, hon. members. 
 
This House now stands adjourned until the call of the Chair. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6:56 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................3143 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................3144 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................3144 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3144 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................3144 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................3144 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 70th Anniversary of Baldwinton Wheat Pool Elevator 
  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................3144 
 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3145 
 Agriculture News 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3145 
 Better Roads Coalition 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3145 
 10th Anniversary of the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................3145 
 Liberal Party Leadership Process 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3146 
 Treaty 6 Powwow 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................3146 
 Frontier Days Regional Fair and Rodeo 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3146 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Political Donations 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................3147 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................3147 
 Health Care Reform 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3147 
  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................3147 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3148 
 Rural Health Care Funding 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3148 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3148 
 Highways Maintenance 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................3149 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................3149 
 Government Election Platform 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................3149 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3150 
 Health Facilities Closures 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3150 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3151 
 Education System Review 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3151 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................3151 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker .............................................................................................................................................................................3121 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3127 



 

  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................3127 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3129 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................3137 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................3144 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3152 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................3166 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3167 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3121 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3121 
  Julé .................................................................................................................................................................................3132, 3139 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3136 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................3138 
  Recorded divisions ........................................................................................................................................................3140, 3141 
 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
  McPherson ...........................................................................................................................................................3152, 3169, 3175 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................3152 
  Osika ....................................................................................................................................................................3163, 3166, 3174 
  McLane ..........................................................................................................................................................................3165, 3173 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3171 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3175 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3178 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3142 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................3142 
 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................3179 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................3179 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................3179 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................3183 
 


