













































June 17, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2717 

 June 17, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, these are the same officials 

that I had with me last Friday, and they’re well-known to the 

House, so I’ll dispense with that. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, once 

again welcome to your officials. Where we left off previously 

talking about Bill 92, where you and I left off on that occasion, 

we had talked about the opportunity for people that were 

displaced to be allowed to vote when they’re out of their 

constituencies. And given what’s happening in some northern 

parts of the province, it’s a typical example of how these 

situations can arise. The question I was going to follow up on 

prior to us finishing last year is . . . last year  pardon me; last 

session  is that, what security measures will there be in place 

to ensure that when this does happen, that the ballots or ballots 

marked in an emergency type of a situation, such as the 

situation to the evacuees last year, what measures will be in 

place to ensure that absolutely no tinkering can occur with any 

of those ballots? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 

member. The mobile polls will have in charge of them a deputy 

returning officer and there will be a deputy returning officer in 

respect of each such poll. The voting is conducted in the same 

manner as an ordinary poll, in the sense that the parties can 

appoint scrutineers, and to ensure for the satisfaction of the 

parties that the poll is properly conducted. 

 

The voting procedures are described in section 99 and there are 

safeguards there in the sense that the deputy returning officer 

shall request the voter to make a declaration, and the ballot 

paper is initialled in a manner so that . . . in essentially the same 

manner or a similar manner as ordinary polls. And the voter 

marks the ballot paper by inserting the name or political 

affiliation of the candidate for whom he or she intends to vote. 

 

The procedure after the closing of the polling place is covered 

by section 100. And the deputy returning officer follows the 

procedures there in so far as the counting of voters and the 

counting of unused ballot papers are concerned, as well as 

counting the number of spoiled ballots and dealing with those 

in the way described. And then, of course, counting the votes, 

or at least handling the votes in the way that is contemplated by 

section 100. 

 

It is as close to the procedure in effect in normal voting places 

as we are able to get, considering that these mobile polls are 

held out in the middle of a burning bush or in the middle of 

some other very unusual place. But I think, therefore, that the  

Assembly can be assured that it is as secure and regular as the 

circumstances will permit. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that particular 

section 100 does go to fairly great extent in elaborating on what 

procedures and process have to be followed. Earlier when we 

talked about that, it makes it a little more onerous as far as 

having people in place and moving people around to all these 

areas. 

 

My question along those lines is on the accessibility of these 

mobile polls. How would they be arranged for? How would 

people arrange for this service, and would they in fact be 

available to every small community that might feel that perhaps 

it would be more appropriate under the circumstances, or their 

circumstances, to have the mobile polls brought to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The returning officer that is in the 

constituency in which the problem occurs  let’s take 

Athabasca for an example because that’s where there was so 

much forest fire activity during the last election a year ago  

the returning officer may establish one or more mobile polls if, 

in the opinion of the returning officer, special or unusual 

circumstances require mobile polls. That’s the test. 

 

That can arise almost in any way at all in my opinion. That 

could be a process initiated by the returning officer or initiated 

by someone else for the consideration of the returning officer, 

but at the end of the day it is the returning officer that makes the 

judgement that a mobile poll should be established. And the 

criteria is the special or unusual circumstances requiring such. 

 

Now we’ve never done this before. You know, I think we’re 

going to learn a lot over the years, and it may be that some more 

refined criteria may find their way into the Act in the future. 

But for the time being, based on the experience of last summer, 

this would seem to cover the situation. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that leads me to 

the question about these unforeseen circumstances. The Chief 

Electoral Officer will make the final decision to determine 

under what circumstances the mobile polls will in fact be valid. 

And can I just ask you, will his word be final in these 

situations? Or will in fact, given the opportunity or if the time 

allows or permits, will there be a requirement to have the CEO 

(Chief Electoral Officer) talk to cabinet or bring it to cabinet? 

And I guess, is there any limit to these extraordinary 

decision-making powers with respect to the need for the mobile 

poll? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The establishment of the mobile polls is 

initially the returning officer’s decision. The member will have 

noticed that the Chief Electoral Officer approves the 

establishment of the mobile poll. This is all contained in section 

90. 

 

And that’s the end of it. There is . . . the cabinet never becomes 

involved. It’s never a political decision at all. It is the election 

machinery that establishes the mobile polls. 

 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Mr. Osika:  I thank you for that, Mr. Minister. The CEO’s 

powers have increased in this Bill when it comes to 

investigations of political parties or their candidates. I would 

just wonder if you might be able to explain for us the procedure 

that must be followed, particularly in terms of the CEO entering 

private buildings or residences to search for documentation. 

Will that then require him to seek the assistance of peace 

officers in those circumstances, follow that kind of a process? 

Or will he be guided in accordance with the Act and be given 

those authorities? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, it is not contemplated that 

the police would become involved because of the nature of the 

process here. After all, the Chief Electoral Officer is dealing 

with registered political parties with responsible, democratic 

organizations, and it is therefore expected that there will be a 

high degree of cooperation. The idea of the Chief Electoral 

Officer having these powers to inquire into irregularities is not 

new of course. It was in the Act, in the old Act, in a rather 

summary way. It has been fleshed out here, and in the fleshing 

out has, I think, regularized such inquiries and laid out for 

everyone to see and understand what are the ground rules. 

 

These are to be found in section 280 and 281 and it requires 

every political party, and every candidate, and every business 

manager, to open up the offices to inspection by the Chief 

Electoral Officer, and to open the books as it were, and the 

records, and cooperate. 

 

But then it makes the significant exception that: 

 

The Chief Electoral Officer shall not enter a private 

dwelling without a warrant . . . unless the occupant of the 

dwelling consents to the entry. 

 

If a warrant is necessary, then you go to section 281 which 

requires a justice of the peace or a judge of the provincial court 

to issue the warrant on being satisfied as to certain matters set 

out in section 280. All of which is a system that ought to work 

considering the nature of the process. Who’s involved and the 

fact that all of our parties would willingly cooperate with an 

inquiry by the Chief Electoral Officer under this Act. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate that. 

And I agree that that would be the process related to, in the 

event again, of unforeseen circumstances or extraordinary 

circumstances. But you’ve answered my question, and I thank 

you. 

 

In the draft copy of the Bill, public opinion polling was 

originally listed as an acceptable election expense. Mr. 

Minister, can you just explain a little bit why this was taken out 

of the final draft copy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I think 

we had discussions about this during the consultation process. 

But our thinking  I’ll still answer the question, of course  

our thinking was based on the fact that the public purse refunds 

certain election expenses or a portion of those expenses. And  

that’s an appropriate thing to do, I think, in the functioning of a 

democracy. But there ought to be certain limits to it. 

 

And we decided that the kind of polling that is done by political 

parties during elections did not really fall into the category of an 

expense that should be eligible for reimbursement; that political 

parties use polls for their own purposes and that’s the way it is. 

That’s appropriate. That’s how . . . it will be a feature of 

elections, I’m sure, for the future. But they’re not the kind of 

expense that we should expect the taxpayer to reimburse. And 

so it was taken out of the reimbursable category and exempted 

from such claims. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I thank you for myself, Mr. Minister, and I thank 

you on behalf of the taxpayers. They’ll be pleased to hear that 

one. Thank you. 

 

The Bill states that the CEO will provide guidelines for the 

parties and candidates, and I’ll appreciate that takes a little bit 

of time. And with new laws and new Bills, and particularly 

those that need to have guidelines to allow people to ensure that 

they follow them closely, I was wondering if you can anticipate 

how long into the future it will take to build these guidelines for 

parties and candidates as a result of some of these changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In our discussions internally with 

planning ahead as to regulations and guidelines, we have been 

planning that proclamation of the Act would take place as 

quickly as possible, but that would not happen before January 

1, 1997. There’s just simply too much ground to cover, too 

many regulations and forms to prepare and clear with the 

Department of Justice, to be ready to implement it before then. 

Anything’s possible, but that’s been our thinking up until now. 

 

The guidelines are perhaps not an event, in other words perhaps 

not just something that you publish once and for all, but the 

guidelines could be such that they would be produced over a 

period of time and cover different subjects. I don’t know what 

the Chief Electoral Officer may have in mind for that, but that 

could well be the way in which it is handled. 

 

The scheme of the Act, as the member will know from his work 

on it, is such that we wanted to set out in the statute what the 

rules were, to the greatest extent that we could, and that we 

would give some legal basis for these guidelines so that if our 

business managers saw it in the guidelines and complied with 

the guidelines, that would be compliance with the Act. 

 

And it would be subject to as little interpretation as possible but 

would be clearly spelled out so that our election campaigns and 

the processes after the campaign, the election, the returns that 

are filed and the claims for reimbursement that may follow are 

clearly spelled out also and not the subject of subsequent 

interpretation. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. With the changes relative to 

additional documentation that may be needed by parties and 

candidates, can you tell me how much more documentation, 

how much more paperwork, you might see as being involved in 

this wider scope of needs for reporting processes and 

procedures? 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In answer to the member’s question, 

Mr. Chair, I hope the answer is that there will be less red tape 

and that, in any event, it will be more clear as to what we have 

to . . . what documentation we have to accumulate as we go 

along, and what documentation has to be provided to the Chief 

Electoral Officer when the time comes to file returns. So we’re 

trying to make it crystal clear. 

 

So the documentation shouldn’t be any more complicated, and 

it will be much more clear what that documentation will be, and 

that will save us a lot of follow-up steps trying to obtain 

documentation and satisfy the CEO as to whether a particular 

expense is justified or the nature of it or what have you. I hope 

in the end we will have accomplished a simpler system. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you again. My reference to the next item, 

Mr. Minister, is one that you’ll be aware is near and dear to my 

heart, and we have had some discussions about it, and I 

wondered if I might just be able to ask you  as a result of our 

discussions regarding the Bill and the recommendation that 

election expenses on behalf of a candidate perhaps be expanded 

to cover some of those expenses incurred outside of the actual 

writ period . . . And we’ve talked about this, Mr. Minister. The 

point being that it would not in fact increase the cost because 

the spending limit would remain the same. In all fairness to all 

the candidates that would be new to the process, if you wish, 

the newly nominated candidates, I wonder if you might, for the 

benefit of the House, explain the objections to this kind of a 

proposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, this was one of the most 

interesting debates that we had during the consultation process 

because there is a fair amount of merit in the position that the 

official opposition took. 

 

The argument, if I can presume to make it for the member, is 

that people running for office for the first time are not known 

 very often are not known  to their constituents. And it is 

normal and natural that they would incur expenses in getting 

their name before the public with such things as brochures or 

business cards, candidate cards, the like. And that, what is hurt 

. . . if that is grossed up into the actual money being spent 

during the election period, so long as the total amount spent is 

not more than the amount which the Act allows. 

 

I think I’ve captured the member’s argument, and you’re 

nodding to indicate I have. And that is an interesting argument. 

And we, on this side of the House, spent a lot of time 

considering that. And in the end we did not accept the argument 

and opted for the formulation which is in the Act. And that is, 

that election expenses means the cost of goods and services 

used during an election. Which is to say, after the writ has been 

dropped, as we say, the election has been called, and the date of 

the voting. 

 

We took that position for this very simple reason. That the 

whole system it seemed to us worked better and more cleanly, 

and in the end in a more satisfactory way, if we could define 

with precision what expenses were covered and what weren’t. 

 

And the most . . . the cleanest way of describing that was to pin  

down the dates on which they were used. If they’re used during 

an election period, they have to be reported. By reporting them, 

they become part of the allowable expense, the allowable 

amount that a candidate may expend. 

 

And it is a clear definition of what’s allowed and what’s not 

allowed. 

 

That’s a system that we’re all familiar with because we’ve 

operated under it in past elections and know that it’s a workable 

idea. If a member, a candidate, buys 10,000 candidate cards and 

uses 2,000 of them during the election campaign, then 

two-tenths, or one-fifth, of the cost of those cards are an 

election expense and they’re reported as such, and they are a 

reimbursable expense to that extent. 

 

(1930) 

 

That’s a very convenient way of doing it. Now it doesn’t meet 

the member’s point entirely. We recognize that, which is why 

we had such long discussions about it and considered it so 

carefully. But in the end we opted for the tighter system and 

that is how come we’re where we’re at. 

 

Now I think the member will agree that it was the only one of 

the points raised by the official opposition that we were not 

responsive to. And we tried hard to be responsive to that, but in 

the end we felt that the system would work better if it were 

limited in the manner that I’ve indicated. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t mean to 

continue flogging this issue, but in terms of the expenses during 

an election  and again we get to the matter of interpretation 

 when does an election process begin? And one might argue 

that candidates are sought out. Candidates are nominated. There 

is a specific date when a formal nomination process takes place. 

The candidate is on record as being the representative of that 

party from that day forward. 

 

And you alluded to the costs of informing the constituents by 

way of introductions, whether it be business cards, letters, on a 

more appropriate basis, even some of the travel cost that that 

particular individual now has to assume in order to participate 

in our democratic process. And in all fairness to the voting 

public, the constituents, they should have every right and 

perhaps some expanded opportunities to get to know that 

candidate, whomever he or she may be, a lot better. And that is 

difficult to accomplish sometimes in that short period of time 

when the writ is issued. 

 

Our position was that the expenses would only be those that 

might be reasonable expenses within the total amount eligible 

for a person to expend in order to become elected. The travel 

costs, information brochures, biographies, any number of 

things, any amounts that are expended over and above that that 

may not be considered within the guidelines that will be 

prepared in the near future, as you indicated, could then outline 

specifically for example that the rental of an office would not 

be an eligible . . . or considered an eligible expense leading up 

to the issuance of the writ. 

 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Telephone costs may not be. However those items of 

introduction of a candidate, I believe, would be a lot fairer and 

give people in the constituency a better opportunity to get to 

know the person that’s representing whichever party. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know we’ve talked about this and I respect the 

position that’s been taken. However we will be hoping that 

perhaps with some second sober thoughts . . . and I’d like to 

serve, just pass over, the House amendment which we will be 

proposing when we arrive at the appropriate time, for you to 

consider once again perhaps. As I say, second sober thoughts 

sometimes do occur. And I would appreciate that. 

 

But those are strictly the points, that again it creates a lot more 

parity. The incumbents who are already in place in those 

constituencies do have that privilege, luxury, opportunity. They 

are known and they continue to be allowed the privilege of 

communicating with constituents because of their office, and 

rightly so. To allow nominated candidates, whether it’s 6 

months before or 12 months before, at least a portion of the 

same type of opportunity or privilege would not detract, I 

believe, from the intent of keeping a cap on, if you wish, 

election expenses and allowable expenses that now are 

reimbursed to some extent. Could you perhaps respond, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to respond. It’s 

an engaging argument that the member puts and we understand 

it. We have understood it from the first time that we met about 

this Bill, and the matter was then the subject of a written brief. 

The member may recall the argument was put out very clearly. 

And I will be happy to look at the House amendment, a copy of 

which you have just sent over to me, and consider that for the 

next time that the committee sits. 

 

The member was indicating it was uncertain what this election 

period meant, and I just refer the member to the definition in 

clause (o) of section 2(1); section 2(1)(o), where the term 

“during an election” is defined, as I had said earlier, 

commencing on the date the writ is issued and ending on the 

polling day. And it is to that limited period that the Bill now 

refers. 

 

But I just want to say again, I’d be glad to review this ground 

with my colleagues. And I appreciate how strongly the member 

and his colleagues feel about this, so we’ll be pleased to take 

another look at it and report back to the committee next time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I thank you very much, Mr. Minister. A question 

on the extent of cooperation with the federal elections officials 

as far as sharing of information. But when it comes to 

enumeration, do you foresee any problems that might be 

involved or entailed in this type of cooperative effort? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that there is going to be a very 

high level of cooperation between the federal officials and the 

Saskatchewan officials on this subject. We have reason to 

believe so. These officers meet regularly, and exchange 

information, and enjoy a very good relationship. And so at the 

level of the officials, I don’t think there’s any real problem at 

all, and at the political level there’s no difficulty standing in the 

way of this. 

It’s really quite exciting when you think about what is possible 

her  moving perhaps towards a permanent voters’ list that 

could be used in federal elections, and provincial elections, and 

even in municipal elections. Save everybody the cost of 

enumerating and re-enumerating people, checking it or, in one 

way or another, using databases that are appropriate. And I say 

that, “are appropriate” advisedly because there are 

confidentiality considerations and that sort of thing in many of 

the databases that may limit their use, but lots of things can be 

done. And I think that the cooperation between the federal and 

provincial governments is certainly one of them that looks very 

promising indeed. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I’d like to pursue the avenue that the Leader of the Opposition 

was taking on the idea of pre-election expenses being included 

as part of your election expense category and therefore are 

reimbursable. It seemed to me that what the Leader of the 

Opposition was saying was that this would give a new 

candidate an equal opportunity to a candidate who had been in 

the field before, whose name was known, whose policies . . . or 

whose party was well known. 

 

But I disagree, Mr. Minister, with that. As listening to what the 

Leader of the Opposition had to say about it, my understanding 

of it was that, in his terms, the pre-writ period would start at 

some point when a candidate was nominated or when he 

announced that he was seeking the nomination perhaps. 

Although I’m not sure how you could include election expenses 

from a nomination . . . the period leading up to a nomination 

meeting into the election writ period, because that’s actually not 

election as far as the general voter is concerned. 

 

So let’s say it starts at the nomination period. A new candidate 

who may get elected a year in advance of an election and who 

wants to put his name out there  his or her name  and get 

known, could spend, let’s say half of their election expense 

allowance, $35,000, so $17,000 roughly, in that period between 

the nominating meeting and the writ. 

 

An incumbent such as ourselves, any member of this House, 

generally doesn’t get nominated until just before the writ 

period, or in fact many times, during the writ period. 

 

So what happens in that case, using the Leader of the 

Opposition’s scenario, all of the monies that the incumbent 

might spend prior to his nomination would not be eligible for 

reimbursement. So that would mean that that candidate, the 

incumbent, would still have his entire election expense account 

available to him to spend during the writ period. 

 

So while the first candidate may have spent his $17,000 in the 

year leading up to the election, he would have $17,000 left to 

spend during the election. The incumbent could spend whatever 

he wanted until his nomination date prior to the writ period  

let’s say he’s nominated the first day of the writ  he would 

still remain with the $35,000 that he could spend during the 

writ period. I don’t see how that would work to the advantage at 

all, Mr. Minister, to the advantage of the new candidate. 

 

So I think the Leader of the Opposition’s premiss is wrong, Mr.  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

Minister, Mr. Chairman, in his suggestion that it would aid a 

new candidate. I don’t believe it would do so. 

 

What it would do is allow a candidate with limited funds to 

claim the entire amount that he might spend, both writ and 

pre-writ. I think it only benefits someone who has a limited 

amount of money to spend, not someone who is known or 

unknown. I don’t think that’s the criteria. It’s how much money 

do you have to spend and where do you want to spend it? And I 

think that’s all that that argument presents, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I think that the advantage is there. If the candidate wants to 

spend his money in advance of the writ, I think that’s his 

privilege today. If he wants to spend it during the writ, that’s 

also his privilege. So I see really very little, if any, advantage to 

making that change, Mr. Minister. 

 

One of the question though that I did want to ask, dealing with 

the mobile polls. Obviously in most cases political parties are 

not going to know very far in advance as to when or where a 

mobile poll will be. Even more than that, they’re not going to 

know who would be resident at that mobile poll. If you’re 

talking the fire line, they may move crews in and out on a daily 

basis. You won’t know today who is going to be on the fire line 

tomorrow. 

 

Political parties, under that circumstance, would have a great 

deal of difficulty organizing who is going to be their 

representative at that mobile polling station. If they don’t know 

who’s going to be on the site, it’s pretty hard to say, well Tom 

is our representative. 

 

So under the proposal for the mobile polls, Mr. Minister, what 

arrangements have been made for the political parties to have 

representatives there? And who would pay for the 

transportation of those representatives from some other site to 

the mobile polling station? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are some provisions contained in 

the Act in section 90 and section 92. The returning officer has 

to post a notice of the mobile polls in the returning officer’s 

office and has to provide each candidate with a written notice 

of the mobile polls. 

 

And then subsection 4 of section 92 says that: 

 

The returning officer shall supply means to transport the 

poll officials and any candidate’s representatives who wish 

to accompany the poll officials. 

 

So the election machinery will pay for the transportation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When it 

comes time to provide notice as to where the mobile poll will 

be, have you outlined any time frame, or is it sort of an 

overnight thing? A fire starts up at 4 o’clock in the afternoon 

the day before the election, or I’m not sure how fast fires go in 

that sense, but how big they get quickly, that you would need a 

crew out there, but what kind of a notification period would you  

have? Four hours, six hours, twenty-four hours, forty-eight? 

What do you envision happening in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are no such time lines set out in 

the Act. It’s intended to be flexible. It’s intended to be 

responsive to the real situation. So if, as the member says, a fire 

starts the day before the election, a crew is dispatched. 

 

I don’t think it impossible at all that the returning officer could 

mount a mobile poll to go in there on election day and have a 

poll set up for the people who are there. It’s a little tight, but 

written notices can be delivered and, you know, the Act can be 

complied with in practically no time at all. So it’s not beyond 

the realm of possibility that the situation the member describes 

could be responded to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  The notices for the mobile poll you say 

would be posted in the returning officer’s office. Would that 

include sending out notifications to all the candidates, 

campaign offices, or to the candidates themselves, so that they 

would be aware that the poll was actually going out at some 

point in time and even though it is on maybe short, eight-hour 

notice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It’s a mandatory provision in the Act 

that the returning officer will provide a written notice of each 

mobile poll to each candidate. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister responsible to introduce 

his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’re going to be 

assisted tonight in our deliberations by Mr. Mike Shaw, who is 

the Chair of the Public Service Commission, and Mr. Rick 

McKillop, who is the executive director of employee relations. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, 

officials, and minister, this evening. Minister, I wonder if you 

could start off please, by outlining the objectives, goals, overall 

direction of the commission, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, not to go on at length, 

perhaps what I could do is simply quote from the mandate of 

the Public Service Commission, which I think in a very 

capsulized way describes the totality of the commission’s work: 

 

The Public Service Commission provides leadership and 

policy direction for the human resource function in the 

public service. The commission either directly delivers or 

collaborates with the departments and agencies of 

government in the delivery of a wide range of human  



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

resource services for the public service. Essentially, the 

Public Service Commission provides the human resource 

service for the executive of government. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Are there any programs or services in the 

commission that are overlapping with other agencies or 

departments in government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there would not be any 

overlap. Some services are delivered directly by the Public 

Service Commission. Other human resource services are 

provided within departments under policy established by the 

PSC (Public Service Commission) but we do not see any 

overlap in that system. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  What are the relationship between the 

Public Service Commission and the human resources agencies 

or branches in other departments? How do you interface that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think it would be described best as a 

very collaborative and a cooperative operation where 

departments will have their own human resource sections. The 

Public Service Commission will set overall policies and work 

then very collaboratively with the separate departments in the 

work they do. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, how would you describe the 

relationship then that you have with the Public Service 

Commission and SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees 

Union) for example. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m appreciative that the 

member brought that up because I think there has been some 

real change and some real progress made in the relationship 

between the Public Service Commission and SGEU, which 

would be the largest bargaining unit representing employees of 

government. 

 

I think if one went back even three years ago, or four years ago, 

certainly you would see quite a different relationship than what 

exists today. Over the past three, two and a half, two years, 

there has been a new relationship develop with SGEU and the 

Public Service Commission where we are beginning more and 

more to see ourselves as partners in the provision of public 

service. We have moved to an interest-based bargaining model 

which in some ways is setting the pace for employee relations 

in the public sector. There is much work yet to be done, but we 

feel that we’ve come a great deal of distance in the last two and 

a half years. And I think the last round of contract negotiations 

was indicative of that. 

 

And if I may say, the process, the difficult process that we went 

through earlier as a result of some shrinking of the size of 

government, the last budget initiatives, where, in that process, 

both the PSC and SGEU worked very closely together and 

collaboratively. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, speaking of the reduction, I 

believe the Public Service cut-backs were something like 582 

full-time equivalents in this last budget, and you alluded to the 

fact that you worked collaboratively with SGEU in order to  

make that as smooth as possible. Was it the role of the Public 

Service Commission to initiate the whole retirement package 

that was put together in regard to these cut-backs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The establishment of the early retirement 

and other adjustments will be discussed and there will be a 

process of consultation working with SGEU. It becomes the 

Public Service Commission role then to bring that forward to 

government, to bring it forward to cabinet, and make 

recommendations to government. But the recommendation that 

the PSC will bring to government will be recommendations 

based on conversations and consultations with SGEU. And then 

certainly in the implementation of those programs, we worked 

very closely with SGEU particularly, and other public sector 

unions. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, have the details of that early 

retirement package been released and are they a matter of public 

information now, or would we be able to get that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Depending . . . I’m not sure if I 

understand the question entirely  you may want to go with a 

supplementary  but yes, I mean the details and the provisions 

of the plan were announced by way of news release and widely 

known. You may have some interest in knowing some of the 

follow-up, but clearly this is a matter of public knowledge. 

There’s nothing here that’s not in the public domain. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, one of the comments has been, is 

that there’s other areas of employment, of people employed, 

that as a result of government decisions are facing cut-backs  

and I think particularly of district health board employees  

quite often where there are reductions in the number of 

full-time equivalents, of front-line health care workers or school 

boards or things of this nature. And quite often the comment 

that is made by people affected by these kinds of decisions is 

that if the opportunity would be there for some employees to be 

able to access an early retirement package, that it may make that 

whole difficult adjustment much easier. 

 

Has the public . . . or does the Public Service Commission have 

any role in terms of thinking about proposing a more general 

early retirement package that not only the PSC people 

themselves or government employees themselves directly could 

access, but also that might be made available through the Public 

Service Commission, or what other function, for district health 

boards or school boards or things of that nature. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think we have to be clear, Mr. Chair, 

that the PSC serves to represent the employer, in the case of 

government, to the direct employees of government. In terms of 

our health care workers or workers in education  their 

employer  and the health care field, will be the district health 

boards represented provincially by SAHO (Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations). The employees in the 

education system equally are not employees of government per 

se, and so in each of those cases the employers or the employer 

groups, would be responsible to craft early retirement packages 

if that’s desired. 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

In our case this package is crafted by government for direct 

employees of government. This also separates from the Crown 

sector where the plan that was utilized here applies to the 

employees of government, not to employees of the Crowns. 

They’re employed by their employer, whichever Crown it 

would be. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I realize, Minister, the difference between 

the different jurisdictions. I guess the comment is that quite 

often district health boards, schools boards, and even perhaps to 

some extent Crowns, may not have the wherewithal to 

implement early retirement packages, because quite often 

there’s an initial capital outlay or cost associated with these 

packages in order to make them happen. And this then becomes 

a matter of government policy, because if government policy 

has resulted in district health boards having to terminate or face 

the prospect of decreasing full-time equivalents as a result of 

government policies on whatever level, then I’m wondering if 

government does not have a responsibility and a role to be able 

to craft some type of early retirement package that makes that 

downsizing much more attainable and much more positive for 

all these other entities, if you like, that are forced with almost 

the same situation as government employees were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member would, I think, 

by his comment  and a fair enough comment  but would 

move us into the broader discussion then of the budgeting of 

government generally. 

 

As you will know, we all live within budgets. Part of a 

provincial government’s responsibility will be to establish its 

own budget, and within that budget, budget the various 

departments. From the budget to various departments will come 

the budget to third parties. 

 

If one wants to argue that the budget should be larger for health 

districts to enable them to do that, I think that’s a fair argument 

and a good discussion. It’s not something that the Public 

Service Commission per se would do. This is part of that 

broader budget discussion. 

 

It’s a responsibility of the Public Service Commission, within 

government, to look at the kind of resources we’ll have 

available and determine if we should recommend to 

government, as the deciding body, whether an early retirement 

is the appropriate expenditure of public resources. And I think 

we all know that one can make, in some cases, a good, solid 

economic argument for an early retirement package, where 

there is an initial expense but by helping people exit the system, 

we know that in the long run there are greater savings. 

 

But this would be then I think a discussion for employers in 

every case, and if the argument is that there should be more 

money to the various departments, I think that’s a different 

point of debate than what we’re doing tonight. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Minister, then focusing on the package 

that was offered . . . and you indicated that parts of the package 

were public knowledge. As well, you indicated that some of the 

results of this package perhaps are not as public. And I’m 

thinking of how many employees accepted this package, how  

many of them were unionized, what was the cost of severance, 

how many people are on re-employment lists or how many 

people . . . and I’m trying to put this into sort of a global 

question instead of four or five individual questions that really 

address the outcome of the package that was offered. Is that 

information available for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We’d be more than happy to provide the 

information. We’re still moving through the process. Given 

bumping provisions within the contracts, we expect that the 

process will not be completed until the end of June, or perhaps 

into July. At that time we will be very pleased to provide the 

specific numbers to the areas that you raise. And I think that’s 

an important question. It’s something we may want to make 

very public so that the people of our province can see and 

understand what has happened to their public service through 

this exercise. 

 

We don’t have the . . . we’ll have some numbers to date, but 

they won’t be the total numbers, given that process continues 

for a few more weeks. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, moving away from that then  

and we’ll appreciate that information when it is available  

moving away from sort of the sad side of the tasks at hand, 

what I want to move towards is for you to describe the process 

and the categories for hiring. When someone comes to a job, 

where are the categories in terms of . . . that are open and fair 

and non-partisan kind of competitions? What categories involve 

more the partisan kind of hirings, and how does that break 

down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I want to reassure and relieve 

the member of a concern that he may have. 

 

All classified positions within government go through the 

competitive process, through the PSC. All classified positions. I 

believe the only unclassified positions in government will be 

the senior, the very senior, officials of the departments, deputy 

ministers, the like, and ministerial staff  the staff in ministers’ 

offices, the ministerial assistants and secretaries. I believe that 

would represent what we describe as the unclassified. And so 

by far the vast, vast, vast majority of government employees, 

people employed by the Government of Saskatchewan, are 

hired through the competitive basis through the PSC. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I guess that in this . . . I would like to know 

then what the criteria, the general criteria, are, the processes for 

these classified hirings, and how that process occurs. You 

know, if there was a position offered and it’s a clerk steno 1, or 

whatever it is, how does that process work to make sure that it 

is indeed done non-partisanly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I’ll just share with the member some of 

the arrangements that were crafted through the agreement with 

SGEU signed in May 1993. So they’ve been operative now for 

some time. 

 

But maybe I should just say as a caveat . . . I mean there is, 

you’ll understand, the process of application. If someone is 

coming to government for the first time, there’s a process of  



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

application. The application is submitted to the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

There is the process within government through, again through 

contractual arrangements, where positions will be posted and 

those who are currently at work in government will have 

opportunity to apply for those positions. 

 

But there is, by contractual arrangement with SGEU, 

recognition now that staffing decisions would be based on the 

knowledge, skills, and abilities required to function successfully 

in the particular position being staffed; two, appointment of the 

most senior qualified applicant who meets the knowledge, 

skills, and abilities required for a position; three, the setting of 

knowledge, skill, and ability requirements prior to a position 

being posted. And that process of determining the knowledge, 

skill, and ability will be in consultation with a rep from the 

union. And recognition also now of the union’s legitimate place 

in the staffing process by recognizing their participant, a 

participant of the union, as a representative in decision making, 

not merely as an observer, and a requirement that this union 

representative be from the department where the vacancy is so 

that they will bring their own greater knowledge to the 

participation process. 

 

So these provisions, new as of 1993, we think have even 

strengthened, strengthened our ability to ensure that we have a 

very professional public service, that those who are being hired 

and placed in positions are the very best for the position, based 

on fair hiring practices. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I believe the Estimates book 

shows there’s 9,603.7 full-time equivalents of people in all 

departments. Would you have the breakdown of how many of 

these people would be between classified and unclassified? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, if I could ask the member’s 

indulgence, we do not have the exact numbers here but we can 

get them for him. I can reassure him that the unclassified will 

be a very small percentage of that total of 9,600 people who 

work for government. The unclassified will be a very small 

percentage. We can get the exact number. We don’t have it here 

tonight. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. The unclassified, by 

being a small percentage, are we talking several hundred, any 

kind of a guess? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it would be less than . . . we 

think it would be less than 200 in total out of the 9,600 

government employees. So whatever that works out to  1 or 2 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. That’s all the 

questions that I have on this area tonight. Thank you to the 

officials as well. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 

Minister, to you and your officials. I was listening with some 

interest to the dialogue between yourself and the other 

members. And that dialogue brought to mind a few questions  

here that I’d like to sort of just get into for a minute. 

 

Now you talk about the fact that you hire people for all of the 

government necessities, and in that hiring process there would 

be a considerable amount of money that is spent for training 

and for re-education programs and that sort of thing. Now I 

guess that would come under staffing and development. 

 

And in that area of development, what sort of courses are 

provided for new applicants; and how many people are trained 

after they have been hired; and what type of training would they 

receive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, that’s a very broad question. I 

think the member will understand that departments individually 

will be doing training with their employees on an ongoing 

basis. There would be some training provided to some 

employees of the . . . or through the Public Service Commission 

to some employees of government. What we could do . . . we 

do not have sort of the statistics of the numbers of people 

who’ve been trained. 

 

We can provide for the member, if you give us a little time, an 

inventory of all the training opportunities that happen within 

government. But that too would be a fairly, I think, a fairly 

extensive project to find all those training programs. But if the 

member desires, we can produce that. 

 

(2015 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Minister. We will accept 

your offer to provide that information. I believe . . . probably it 

may not be as onerous as you would think because, after all, 

you must have records that probably somebody with a little 

knowledge would be able to tap into as to how much money 

you’re spending on training programs within the public service. 

After all, you had to come up with your estimates from 

somewhere and they should be based on some facts. And of 

course they are under one of the major headings and it does 

look like we’ve got probably something like $1.9 million being 

spent in that area. So somebody must know what’s going on 

over there, so we’ll presume that you can supply us with that 

type of information. 

 

Because it’s always possible that in doing this research you may 

actually help yourself, as minister of this department, to 

determine where there may be some overlapping. As you have 

mentioned yourself, some of the departments do their own 

training and of course that is funded through other areas. 

 

We may in fact find that we’re duplicating some training 

programs and have people studying the same thing twice. And 

of course I think your government has dedicated itself to the 

principle of cutting down on duplication of services and to 

streamline the cost of government. So maybe we can be helpful 

in that way, by allowing you a chance to find out if in fact that’s 

happening. 

 

I was wondering, how many openings do you presently have 

that you are looking for employment . . . people to fill? 

 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  On average, Mr. Chair, there would be 

about 400 vacancies in government generally  3 or 4 per cent 

of the total employees would be . . . positions would be vacant. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now suppose I’m a 

young fellow just coming out of university, or a young lady that 

I might know might be interested coming out of school, wants 

to follow a career in the public service direction and find a 

placement in the government somewhere to try to do some great 

and wonderful work. Where would that person apply or where 

would they get an application form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  For the most part, Mr. Chair, 

applications would be directed directly to the Public Service 

Commission. I know the member will be aware that the Public 

Service Commission, on behalf of departments or authorizing 

departments, will place advertisements for public sector 

positions. 

 

The application form  there is a sort of a standard application 

form available from the PSC. And whenever I’ve had the 

question put to me about how one does do this, I simply refer to 

the application process and I invite individuals to get an 

application on file and to watch both the career bulletin that’s 

produced by the PSC, advertising positions, and our local 

dailies and weeklies. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that 

there are a lot of young people . . . (inaudible) . . . in our 

province that don’t know that and we hope that this information 

can get into their hands as the school year winds down. And of 

course we know that there are several young people who have 

come out of the university system that this year unfortunately 

don’t have employment just yet, and of course that’s no secret 

to anybody in my constituency as well as others. And we’re 

following up every possibility for these young folks to find their 

niche in life some place, or any place as far as that goes. 

 

So we will pass this information on and along with all of the 

other information we’ve gathered on the job opportunities that 

are available within our province. After all, we don’t want to 

send everybody to Alberta. And if there are some openings, we 

might just as well have our own young people applying for 

them. 

 

I was wondering, as you talked about the SGEU and its 

involvement with the process, must a young person applying for 

a job become a member of the SGEU before they apply or 

would they apply after they got a job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No. One would become . . . In the 

organized workplaces in government, you would become a 

member after you’ve been employed. I don’t believe you could 

become a  well I’m not sure of this, but I don’t . . . It would 

be difficult to become a member before you even applied. Your 

membership would come with your employment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well I’ve had people tell me that you’ve got 

to become a member of the union in order to get . . . (inaudible) 

. . . jobs. So I thought we’d just clear the air as to exactly how 

the process works. And if it’s going to give you an easy chance  

to get the job, well why not join up ahead of time? I mean 

you’re going to have to anyway. So may as well find out where 

it’s at. 

 

We want to talk to you, Mr. Minister, about the . . . under  

what page is that?  110 here; I’m on that section no. 2 there. 

And it says you’ve got some renovation services here. And the 

obvious question is, for what? What do you renovate that falls 

under the jurisdiction of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I want to reassure the member 

that, you know, be careful because  note the words  that 

we’ve only budgeted here for minor renovation services. We 

want to be open. You know we want to let people know what’s 

going on here. 

 

But it’s minor renovation services. If you want to move a wall 

or if you change a rug around or something; that’s all we’re 

talking about here. We’re not talking about buildings or 

anything like that. So it’s very minor renovation. In fact we 

don’t have here exactly what we do with this. It would be a 

pretty small amount of money. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, thank you. But I didn’t 

really hear an answer there. 

 

I got to say though that, in quite frankness, I have seen a United 

Church minister that thought a minor renovation meant 

replacing the church, and that’s exactly what happened. 

 

So now what is minor to you may be a pretty big project to me. 

So I wonder, Minister, if you could be a little more specific 

about these minor renovations. Because after all, it says this 

whole million dollars here is being targeted to go for Property 

Management Corporation office accommodation. It goes to 

them. 

 

You’re paying another government branch for your 

accommodation or your offices. You must have some pretty 

swank offices or sure a big pile of people some place because I 

only find two and a half pages in this whole section . . . this 

whole department doesn’t even take up two pages in the book, 

and yet we’ve got accommodations for the people that run it 

that take up a million dollars worth of costs. 

 

And so if there’s no renovations, and they’re very minor  and 

don’t cost much, I presume, if they’re minor  then you must 

be paying that money all for rent to the Property Management 

Corporation. Maybe you’re renting offices you don’t even need, 

you see. We’ve got to have you take a look at this. 

 

So maybe you can check with your officials and find out how 

much space you’re providing and how many people you’ve got 

in those spaces, where they’re at  which parts of the cities or 

which cities  are you spread out through the province? 

 

Now you also talked about mail services and records 

management. Well of course that’s important stuff, but I can’t 

really see where you could spend a million dollars unless you’re 

doing an awful lot of more work, you know, in your  



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

department here than would be obvious on the surface. It just 

doesn’t look like a real high, record-requiring function of 

government here. But maybe I’m wrong. So I’d like you to 

explain to us just how all this money manages to get spent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think the member understands that  

since I believe it was when his party was in office that this was 

established  that we now have something called the Property 

Management Corporation which handles all of the government 

properties. And we simply pay our accommodation fee to 

Property Management, who make the arrangement for the space 

that we occupy. 

 

In the budget of the million fifteen, $976,000 is the budget for 

accommodation rental, the amount of money that we are 

obliged to pay to Property Management for the space that we 

have here in Regina and in Saskatoon; $34,500 is the budget for 

postage, and records management, $4,500. And our projections 

right now is we don’t even have any money budgeted in here 

for minor renovations. Now if we have to move a rug, I guess 

we’ll absorb that somewhere in the other budgeted amounts. 

 

But the bulk of that money is payment to Property Management 

for the space here in Regina and the space in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m glad you’re not doing 

a lot of renovation, but then that does present another problem 

for us because here we are with you paying Saskatchewan 

Property Management an awful lot of money. 

 

Now who determines what’s fair market value or what’s fair 

property value to be paying to them? How much space are you 

leasing from Property Management and how do you know that 

you’re paying a reasonable fee for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we rent three floors of the 

Bank of Montreal Building here in Regina, and office space in 

the Sturdy Stone Building in Saskatoon. 

 

The member, I think, has a fair question, probably best 

addressed to the Property Management Corporation who goes 

about the process of leasing this space or maintaining leases 

which they inherited. I know that Property Management has 

done some very thorough review of leasing costs for the 

government. And I do believe they’re working as hard as they 

possibly can to get the very best deal for the taxpayer that they 

can get in the markets in which we must lease accommodation. 

 

I would trust that the $900,000, the $976,000, would represent 

fair market value for leased property in downtown Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, maybe I can make 

another point for you. If it’s going to cost you $900,000 to rent 

space in downtown Regina and Saskatoon, and I’m going to 

presume you must have about equal space in both places, and if 

monies like this is going to be going out, like that’s about 

$400,000 going to the Bank of Montreal, maybe, in 

Saskatchewan  you’ll correct these figures I know, to get 

them more accurate  but it seems to me a horrendous amount 

of money to be paying for space. So I’m suggesting to you one  

very simple solution. Why don’t you move out of downtown 

Regina and get to the outskirts where you can rent something a 

lot cheaper? Any chance that you could review these leases and 

get more reasonable accommodation and save the taxpayers 

some money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I hope the member had an 

opportunity to discuss these matters with the minister 

responsible for SPMC. Some of us might take that very same 

point of view. Oh, I should just say at the outset that the bulk of 

the space is here in Regina, that the three floors at the Bank of 

Montreal represent the vast majority of the space the PSC uses. 

I think it’s much smaller office space in Saskatoon, the Sturdy 

Stone. 

 

But I again would say that I may very well share the point of 

view of the member, hoping that we might escape some of these 

leases. But you’ll understand some of these leases have been 

signed and exist for many years, and the cost of exiting the 

lease I think would be disadvantageous to the taxpayer. 

 

I know that Property Management has worked very hard to 

secure the very best, the very best, accommodation for the very 

best price on behalf of the taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, you just never know 

about these leasing arrangements. Now it didn’t take the 

government more than a few minutes to figure out how to break 

60,000 contracts with farmers in the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program retroactively, deeming them never 

to have existed. So I don’t suppose leases with a few banks 

really would hold you back a whole bunch if you really 

seriously wanted to get out of them. And of course you can 

legitimately and legally buy your way out of leases as well. 

 

So I think probably what we have to do is talk to you a little bit 

about how these leases become effective, and why you accept 

that kind of accommodation. As minister of the Public Service 

Commission I think you must have something to say about 

whether or not you would stay in that accommodation. You 

might simply say to Saskatchewan Property Management, we 

don’t think this accommodation is suitable because it’s far too 

elaborate, far too fancy, and far too expensive for our 

department. Move us to something cheaper. 

 

I have a suspicion that they would have to comply with your 

wishes as the minister. Is that not so, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member might be 

interested to know that in the late ‘80s . . . I can’t give him 

perhaps the exact year or month, but in the late ‘80s under the 

former administration, in fact, we had occupied publicly owned 

space. And under the direction of the former government, the 

whole Public Service Commission was moved into this 

privately owned space, and lease arrangements struck. 

 

Now there would be many of us who think some of those 

arrangements made at that time have not served the taxpayer 

well. However, we’ve done I think our best, since coming to 

government, to straighten out some of these arrangements and 

achieve for the taxpayer the best deal possible. But that’s what  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

got us into some of these leases, and it’ll be a while, I think, 

before we’re going to renegotiate or get out of them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  So, Mr. Minister, this intrigues me because I 

wasn’t here in the 1980s, so maybe you’ll enlighten me a little 

bit about this process. 

 

Now what possible gain could there have been for the past 

administration to want to go this route? Perhaps you’ll explain 

to me what motivated them to do this dastardly deed that you 

discuss. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I can neither, nor will I, speak 

for the former administration. I think the member who puts the 

questions would have a little better access to some of those 

answers from some of his current and former colleagues. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well now, Minister, in all honesty by 

association and implication, you have suggested that something 

of a rather shady deal went on here. And I’d like you to tell the 

world and me what that was all about. I mean did they lease 

property that they shouldn’t have? Did they overpay for it? 

Were they paying somebody kick-backs or something? I mean 

there’s all kind of things that come to mind. Would that be 

possible? 

 

What are you suggesting, Minister, that went wrong in the ‘80s 

that tied you to this leasing program that you don’t like so 

much? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m sure the member doesn’t 

want my speech on what went wrong in the ‘80s. 

 

Mr. Chair, the member began his line of questions by 

suggesting that we should get ourselves out of some of this 

privately owned, bank-held properties. I’m explaining to the 

member how we got into those properties. Now if he wants to 

know why that decision was made, I tell you, this is not the 

place to ask that question. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Sure it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well I could give you my speculation, 

but I won’t do that. He can go directly to the horse’s mouth and 

find out for himself how this happened. 

 

I just want to reassure the member that the Property 

Management Corporation, which is not under estimate tonight, 

but that the Property Management Corporation, I know, has 

been very diligent about seeking the best possible deal for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan in the rental accommodation that 

government must have. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think you really should 

take a few minutes to explain what your suggestions and 

speculations were. Because to suggest wrongdoing may have 

happened and then not to be willing to discuss it leaves the 

people with the impression that there may in fact be something 

that you know about the process that should be corrected, or  

should have been corrected. 

 

And I think it’s only fair that you tell the taxpayers of this 

province what you think was done that was perhaps immoral or 

illegal or unacceptable in the process of these leases. I mean 

come on now. You made a vague kind of in the grey area 

suggestion that there’s something here that is amiss. So let’s get 

it out in the open. Let’s talk about it and straighten it out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, to use the member’s train of 

logic here . . . Please get this, Mr. Chair. A few moments ago he 

suggested the United Church ministers call small renovations 

tearing down the church and building a new one. Now I’d like 

the member to get up and explain how he can justify to the 

United Church of Canada that ministers go around knocking 

down churches and calling it minor renovations. 

 

Now if I want to find out something about the processes or the 

behaviours of United Church ministers, I think I should go and 

talk to my colleagues in the United Church. If the member 

wants to know why decisions were made in the 1980s to go 

from publicly funded and owned accommodation into leased 

accommodation in bank buildings and other places, I think the 

place he should go is to his political colleagues and friends. 

 

I make no accusation here; I simply state the fact. He complains 

about this fact that we’re into this private accommodation. I 

explained the fact to the member that we weren’t until the late 

1980s, when those decisions were made that moved us into 

those accommodations on a long-term lease. And if he wants to 

know all about this, I know where he should go to find out. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, you suggest that, by the 

very tone of your conversation and the way you’ve delivered 

your answer, that you know the reasons. And you say I should 

go some place else to find out. Well if you know the answers, 

why don’t we find out from you? After all, I honestly don’t 

know who else would know the answers. 

 

Unlike you, I’m not privy to a lot of people that have a lot of 

information about what went on in the ‘80s. And as you 

discussed this issue, you suggested to me that when I said the 

accommodation seemed awfully expensive, you said . . . 

basically I think you said you agreed  you think they’re too 

expensive. But you more or less said then, but it’s not our fault; 

it was the former administration. They got stuck into a bad deal 

of some kind. 

 

Well tell us what that bad deal was. Why would you say it was a 

bad deal? How come you think it was too much money? And 

how much too much do you think your accommodations is 

really costing you? If you had the chance to do the lease over 

today, how much would you pay? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m trying to reassure the 

member that I sincerely believe that the Property Management 

Corporation has done an excellent job, given some of the 

circumstances, in securing as good a deal for the taxpayers as 

can be done. If the member wants to pursue the activities of the 

Property Management Corporation, I think he had lots of 

opportunity in the estimates to do that. 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

He will know that every department of government is working 

with the Property Management Corporation, who does the 

accommodation for government. If he wants to know about 

arrangements that were made in the 1980s, I suggest he talk to 

those who made those arrangements. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think I’m 

starting to clear the fog of a greyness here now because it seems 

to me now you’re saying that I should talk to Saskatchewan 

Property Management about this because they would know 

more about it. But of course, you see, when we talk to them 

they say, well you should talk to the minister of the Public 

Service Commission to find out why he needs such big amount 

of space, and why he needs such big accommodation; because 

he comes to us and says we need such a space, and such an 

amount of accommodation, and we need it centrally located in 

downtown Regina, or downtown, and then our job is to go out 

and find that. 

 

It’s not our job to question why the minister has asked for it, 

it’s our job to go out and get what he asked for. So obviously 

now, we’ve got a chicken and an egg situation again where both 

sides are telling us we have to ask the other side why we got 

this accommodation. 

 

But I am happy about the way that you are addressing the issue 

of the ‘80s because I really wouldn’t want to have to see you 

apologizing in the House, as some members earlier today did, 

for making false accusations about things that were done wrong 

in the past. Because we know very well that an awful lot of the 

political rhetoric that we hear to get elected in election time 

really is just that. And when we put people on the spot to decide 

exactly in real terms to tell us how these things were illegal, or 

improper, even immoral, they are hard-pressed to do that 

because it was political rhetoric that was determined to be used 

in order to win an election. 

 

And that’s fair ball if you’re doing that. But the suggestion to 

keep on saying that there were some serious, dark, sinister plot 

in the past that caused you all to have these leases stuck to you 

and that there must have been somebody that got a whole bunch 

of money for nothing, I mean I’ve been hearing these stories 

like forever since I got into politics. And I’ve yet to hear 

anybody point out one specific case that you could prove that 

somebody got extra money they shouldn’t have had, or that 

there was actually any basis in fact for these sinister kind of 

suggestions that are made by all of the people in the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) benches. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I take it that most probably this was nothing 

but political rhetoric intended to try to sway the vote in the 

general public, because this is your opportunity to come right 

out and tell the folks what you know, and what you believe, and 

we will quite gladly join with you in finding some kind of an 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) member that might 

want to go into digging up this whole mess and dredging it up, 

and maybe we can even get to the facts of finding out if 

somebody was guilty of doing something wrong, for a change. 

 

And if not of course, maybe we can bury this and get on with 

life and talk about how we can get out of these accommodations  

in downtown Regina that are costing you really a fortune for 

office space. Not that they’re probably not good offices because 

I have never been in them as far as I know. Maybe I went 

through and wasn’t aware of where I was. But if you have a 

picture of me down there some day, don’t hold it against me 

because I really didn’t know that I was in the building doing 

that particular thing for that reason or looking for those offices 

that you occupy. 

 

But really, Minister, what you need to do is try to save the 

people some money here. And I think that if you were to put 

these offices, say in Swift Current in the ACS (Agricultural 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) office that has just been 

announced is going to be closed down, there’d be nothing 

wrong with having that out and to fill up that office. I bet you 

could rent that for 25 per cent of the cost that you’re presently 

spending, maybe even less. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think I should allow you to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, if there were a question in the 

member’s comments, I missed it. Perhaps he could repeat the 

question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, how long are your leases 

for; when can you get out of them; and do you think you could 

possibly negotiate to get some cheaper accommodation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I tell you what. Perhaps the 

member’s confused. This is not the estimates of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. We do not 

bring here tonight information about all the leases being held by 

government. This would be the estimates of the Public Service 

Commission tonight. 

 

Now if the member is interested in this particular lease, I’m 

sure I can contact the minister responsible for SPMC and the 

minister in SPMC will provide for the member the exact terms 

of this lease, its duration, and how it compares with other 

properties in Regina. 

 

I want to say to the member though, he needs to be clear about 

how property is assigned. SPMC, Property Management 

Corporation, establishes standards for the departments of 

government. These standards are based on the number of 

employees and the kind of work they do. Under that standard 

we will be allotted a certain amount of space. It’s not up to the 

PSC or any other department of government to go out and 

provide for itself lavish office accommodation or excessive 

office accommodations. We all work within a standard that’s 

established by SPMC. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  But, Minister, you’ve made my point. It 

doesn’t matter if that standard is matched in downtown Regina 

or on the outskirts of Regina or in Swift Current, as long as 

those standards are matched. And you’ve said by your own 

admission I think, here, that you really have no lease. SPMC 

has a lease and they simply let you move in and use it and you 

pay them some money, whatever they tell you to pay. But you 

don’t have a lease You’re not responsible for the lease. 

Obviously if you don’t have a lease, then you’re bound to  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

nothing. You signed nothing. You don’t have to stay. So pack 

up your bags and let’s get out of town. We can go somewhere 

else and get a smaller office and a better location where the 

prices are cheaper, either Swift Current, Yorkton  take your 

pick. I mean all around the town. I mean around the province, 

any place. I mean . . . 

 

Downtown Regina has got to be the highest priced 

accommodation you could possibly be getting, and they tell me 

that there’s scads of offices up for grabs around Regina. I mean 

that’s what the real estate folks have been telling us  all kind 

of space is available. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, don’t you think that you have now the right to 

move if you choose to? Just in case you missed that question, 

Mr. Minister, I’m asking you if you think you have a right to 

move now that you don’t have a lease and that you haven’t 

signed anything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Chair, the member will know 

that decisions of securing accommodation for any function of 

government are not simply based on where you can get the 

cheapest rate. I mean obviously one has to take into account the 

work that’s being done in a department or a service of 

government. You wouldn’t likely lease in Wood Mountain a 

centre for northern forest fighting even if the space was a 

give-away. You have to match your needs, both in terms of your 

budget but also in terms of the service you provide. 

 

Now obviously Regina, being the capital city and the centre of 

government, the PSC has a fundamental work to do here. That 

may not be true of other services or departments of government, 

but I would argue that the PSC has a natural home in the capital 

city. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, you made my point again. 

Then tell me why do we have an office in Saskatoon? Why are 

they important? They’re not the capital of the province. They’re 

not the centre of your universe then, not the centre of 

government. Why do we have one in Saskatoon? And if we can 

justify one in Saskatoon, how come we can’t justify one in 

Swift Current or Yorkton? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, as I said initially tonight, that 

one of the responsibilities of the Public Service Commission is 

to serve the departments of government. That’s its fundamental 

role: to serve the departments of government. The departments 

of government are essentially headquartered in the capital city. 

That would come as no surprise. There is a small, as I said 

before, small office in Saskatoon, being our other major centre 

and serving essentially the north of the province. 

 

But the bulk of the work of the Public Service Commission is to 

direct human resources to the departments of government, and 

naturally that happens in the capital city. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, the first question of 

course is how small is small now? We talked about minor 

renovations a while ago, but how small is small? How big is 

your office in Saskatoon? And you just said now that the reason 

you have these offices is to serve the needs of the government.  

And in this case your need that you are serving is to provide 

employees. 

 

Now because the government is centred in Regina you need to 

supply those employees through the Regina office. Okay. Then 

what have you got an office in Saskatoon for? What 

government departments are you specifically serving with 

employees out of that office that couldn’t be done in Regina? 

Why wouldn’t you just fold your operation in Saskatoon? Or is 

that just politically expedient, to have an office in Saskatoon so 

that they feel a part of the province, seeing as how they’ve got 

the next biggest centre for votes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, again, to go back to some of 

your earlier comments. The PSC provides the policy framework 

and the staffing processes. Departments themselves will do 

hiring. The bulk of the PSC’s work in advising departments and 

setting up the staffing processes, and then managing the various 

issues that face employees of government, essentially happens 

in the capital city. There are of course regional operations of 

government around the province, and so there is some sense 

that you have some employees in Saskatoon, the other major 

centre in our province. But this is a function essentially internal 

to government, advising departments of government. 

 

And if I may say, as we compare the record in Saskatchewan, 

the Public Service Commission is a commission that had its 

roots in the 1940s, that has maintained a Public Service 

Commission that we can all  a public service in 

Saskatchewan that we can all  be very proud of; has done that 

work through successive changes of governments over these 

years. 

 

The PSC I believe has served the population of, the people of, 

Saskatchewan very well, and it’s something I think we should 

be very proud of. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. Well let’s share this 

pride by finding out exactly what it is we should be proud of. 

 

Now I’m of the opinion that some of the services that you talk 

about must be things like pension plans and benefit plans. Are 

we on the right track there, and if so, could you tell us what 

kind of pension plans and benefit plans you are administrating, 

or how you help the people that you are serving with those 

processes? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the pension plans for 

government employees are administered by PEBA (Public 

Employees Benefits Agency), and that’s through the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  So, Minister, now I’m let down again, 

because one of the things I almost thought you might be doing 

that was constructive, you no longer take care of that either. So 

I’m having really a problem finding out why this department 

even exists at all now, after we’ve discussed this matter with 

you for some time. 

 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

We not only have offices that we can’t justify, we can’t figure 

out what the people there are doing because they don’t really 

have any direct input into anything, and they don’t have any 

direct responsibility over anything. Each department sort of says 

what they want and gets it, but you don’t know quite for sure 

how you fit into the scheme of things. And the rest of us are 

becoming quite confused as to why you’re spending $1 million 

in this department. 

 

You can’t figure out why you can’t have office space some 

place cheaper. You suggest all kinds of rhetoric about how the 

past is biting you at the heels, and you can’t shed it. But then 

when we question you harder on it, we find out that no, you 

don’t even have a lease. You’re not compelled to pay anybody 

anything. But yet you suggest in the next line of conversation 

that, well you just can’t get out of it. It’s sort of your 

responsibility. Well maybe you ought to just say, enough. We 

don’t want any more of this. We’ll move everybody out of those 

offices and shut the program down because you realistically 

haven’t been able to show that you’re doing very much. 

 

At first you claimed that you had some employees that you had 

to hire. Now we can’t find out for sure if you’re training them 

or if you’re hiring them or if the departments do it on their own 

and only use you as a vehicle, as a rubber stamp. We’re trying 

to find out, Minister, seriously how do you justify having your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, let me say again that 

Saskatchewan has been well, well served through a succession 

of governments since the 1940s by the Public Service 

Commission to ensure that we have a professional, qualified 

public service that serves the people of our province. 

 

The member wants to know what the Public Service 

Commission does. Well let me just reference him to the annual 

report. It’s public. It’s public. It’s delivered to the member at 

his request. It’ll be delivered to his desk in the House at his 

request if he should want it. If he would just read the annual 

report, I’m sure he would gain a better understanding of the 

work of the Public Service Commission. 

 

And perhaps for the member’s benefit, I won’t at length read 

from the report, but let me just highlight functions of the Public 

Service Commission. They fall under three general categories: 

the categories of staffing and development; administration and 

information services; and the third category, employee relations. 

 

Under staffing and development, these are the staffing services 

for the departments of government. We handle, through the 

Public Service Commission, all of the student employment and 

hiring across the province. We, under staffing and development, 

administer the employee assistance program. We have the 

Saskatoon regional office of which we spoke. We continue to 

staff development process here, and we have human resource 

planning. Under administrative and information services, these 

are the administrative services: the information services, the 

record management which is a huge job, the human resource 

services, the financial services, and  

communications. 

 

Under employee relations  and note this list  responsible 

for collective bargaining, grievance and arbitration, contract 

interpretation, compensation and benefits, classification 

services, classification appeals, and organizational design. Mr. 

Chair, this is a major undertaking which has been done by the 

Public Service Commission for the last 40 and 50 years with a 

degree of professionalism. And in terms of its hiring practices, 

when audited by the Provincial Auditor, the Provincial Auditor 

in his report says that the staffing process used by the PSC 

staffing development division meets “a high professional 

standard of service and is in general compliance with legislative 

requirements of collective agreements.” 

 

So everyone in the province gives very high marks to the Public 

Service Commission. I think it should be something we should 

be very proud of. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 

Minister, I want to thank you for finally taking the time to get 

serious about your department and showing us that it actually 

does have a good, realistic purpose for existing. And I’m glad 

that I was able to hear you put into words something that we 

can tangibly hang onto, that we can understand that this 

department does. And it does seem like you do do a reasonably 

good service, so I take back my suggestion that you should 

disband the whole department. 

 

But I do believe you should look at some cheaper 

accommodation for your offices. I think you could do better. I 

know in fact that in Swift Current, they’ve got office space 

that’s available that . . . I guarantee you that we could work day 

and night to find you at least half-price accommodation that 

would save probably 2 or $300,000. 

 

You could likely hire another 25 to 50 students in the province 

so that they could get an education next year and have some 

employment doing something constructive around our province. 

There are so many jobs to be done if we just had a little money 

to pay them, and they could feel good about themselves. And I 

know that you will want to work on that because I know that 

your past life’s experiences have put you in a position where 

you want to help people. So I would suggest to you, Minister, 

there’s a way that you can save some money in your department 

and hire some more of these students so that they can have jobs 

this summer, and we’d all feel a lot better about it. 

 

But my colleagues say they have some other important 

questions, so I will thank you for your time and let them carry 

on. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome this evening, 

Mr. Minister, and to your officials. Mr. Minister, the Public 

Service Commission is the central human resource agency for 

executive government, and it’s tasked with the responsibility of 

coordinating recruitment and employment equity programs for 

the Government of Saskatchewan, from what I understand. 

 

There is one group, Mr. Minister, that has a particular interest in  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

the employment equity program, and it is the Regina People 

First association, whose president is Don Thibault. They’re 

particularly interested with inclusion of people with intellectual 

disabilities in the equity employment program. 

 

They have, however, run into a great deal of difficulty, they 

claim, when they submit a request to any department that 

they’ve gone through in government for assistance with 

employment. They are told to submit applications for work to 

the Department of Labour and the Public Service Commission, 

and they say that that just has not worked for them. 

 

They are particularly frustrated with what’s happening here. 

And so they asked me to question on whether or not your 

government is going to follow the advice of the Human Rights 

Commission that stated that the goal of 9.7 per cent of the 

workforce should include people with disabilities and that can 

be done through the employment equity program. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you think that this percentage will ever be 

attainable or achievable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I thank the member for her 

question and the concern that she brings. In the equity program 

we are seeking to reach targets within the public service, and 

this would represent targets for women in management and 

non-traditional positions, targets for persons of aboriginal 

ancestry, targets for persons with disabilities, and targets for 

members of visible minority groups. 

 

I can report to the member that we’ve made progress. We’ve 

not yet reached the targets. In terms of disabilities, for instance, 

we do have a target of over 9 per cent, reflecting, I would say, 

generally the percentage of the population. So we do see that as 

our target. We have not met that target. We began in March of 

‘91. At that point in time, 2.3 per cent of the public service 

would fall under the category of persons with disabilities. We 

have made slow but steady progress, so that in March of this 

year 3.3 per cent of the public service are now persons with 

disabilities, in that targeted group. So we’ve only, in this group, 

achieved a 1 per cent increase and we have a fair ways to go. 

 

We have achieved greater increases in other areas of equity 

targeting. For instance, in persons of aboriginal ancestry, in 

March of ’91, we began at 2.9 per cent of the total public 

service. That now is up to 6.5 per cent, so we’ve had some more 

success there. In terms of women in management, we started at 

26.1 per cent; we’re now up to 32.7 per cent. In terms of 

women in government, total, we’re about the same percentage. 

So we’re making progress. In terms of persons with disabilities, 

the progress has been steady but it’s not as fast as I think you, 

or I, or others, would like us to see. 

 

If I may say, a recent development that encourages me is that 

the disabled community generally in the province, have come 

together now under a provincial organization or an umbrella 

group, PIND (provincial interagency network of the disabled). 

And I’m looking forward, and I think that we as government are 

looking forward, to working with this provincial interagency 

network on this issue and many issues that face the disabled. 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when 

people with intellectual disabilities, some of them severe, some 

of them not so severe  and I can understand some difficulty 

that your departments may have in placing these people  but 

when they come in asking for opportunities for employment, do 

you still refer them to the Disabilities Directorate? They claim, 

when they talk to me, that they are being advised to register 

with the Disabilities Directorate. And they said that they have 

done that for years. And they say that they feel that government 

is really not serious about helping them or they would issue a 

directive requiring the departments to hire a certain percentage 

of people with cognitive disabilities in places where they can 

function. 

 

They further say that it is obvious that some of the training 

programs have not resulted in permanent employment or even 

part-time employment, so they make some suggestions and 

recommendations that they have asked me to pass on to you. 

 

They would like you to do a follow-up of the success of some 

of these training programs. They feel that the government must 

lead the way for the private sector employers by changing 

possibly government’s own discriminatory attitude. They say, 

actions speak louder than words. They claim that just having a 

Disabilities Directorate who say pious words about encouraging 

employers to hire them has never really worked, nor is it going 

to change things unless a directive by the government makes the 

percentage of 9.7 per cent, the goal that’s stated by the Human 

Rights Commission, mandatory, especially in your own 

administrative departments. 

 

So could you comment for me, please, Mr. Minister, on that, on 

those comments by the people from Regina People First 

association. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Very specifically we have not, Mr. 

Chair, taken the position that we would issue directives to 

departments to insist that each department hire a certain number 

of specific individuals. We’ve taken the approach that we set 

targets, we set goals, and we work towards those targets and 

goals. 

 

The member, I think, will understand, knowing that as a result 

of a number of tough budgets over the last few years, that in 

fact the size of the public service is not expanding  in fact it 

has shrunk; it is a smaller public service today than some years 

ago. And when you’re in the process of shrinking the public 

service, it becomes that much more challenging to find success 

as you move towards your equity goals. 

 

All of that said, you ask some important questions, and the 

People First group asked some important questions about the 

effectiveness of training programs  do they in fact result in 

long-term employment, whether it be in the public or the private 

sector. They ask an important question around the leadership 

that the public sector can or should play in the market-place 

towards equity programs. They would ask the important 

questions about the disability directory to the inventory that has 

been kept in government. 

 

Perhaps it would be more than appropriate, and something I  



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

have not had the opportunity to do, but would be perhaps more 

than appropriate if I were to meet with the People First group 

here, either/or its provincial umbrella organization. I know 

some members of People First in Moose Jaw where we could 

have a more thorough conversation about this and get their 

ideas on how in some of these circumstances we can better 

achieve our goals. 

 

I’m also again encouraged by the establishment of PIND, who 

will be representing the wider disabled community, because 

many of the issues, while different, are similar as we look at 

these equity issues. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would be 

very pleased to give you the name and address of the president 

of People First. I have it with me and I would appreciate you 

giving them a call because I know that they are a concerned and 

frustrated people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to your officials for 

assisting tonight. 

 

(2100) 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 33 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I just want to take this 

opportunity to extend our thanks to the officials that have been 

in the House tonight and assisted us in our discussions, but also 

through them, to thank all of the staff over at the Public Service 

Commission for the work they do for government and for the 

people of our province. And if I may say, they’ve had some 

very, very challenging times in these last years and this year too, 

and they have served us very, very well. So our thanks to them. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We’re joined again, Mr. Chair, by . . . 

from our last point in time we’re joined tonight by the deputy 

minister, Mr. Con Hnatiuk. Tonight we have with us Neil 

Yeates, who is associate deputy minister; Bob Wihlidal, 

director of the budget bureau; and Phil Walsh, executive 

director of income security. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to your 

officials this evening, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just wanted to ask a few questions about the 

treatment program that will be transferred from the Whitespruce  

Centre to the Calder Centre in Saskatoon as I understand is the 

plan. Will the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I should go with 

that to Health? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Yes, it’s a health program. They fund it, 

move it. I mean if you have something that applies, we’ll try 

and answer it, but it is Health. 

 

Ms. Julé:  All right. Okay, I shall comply with that. Mr. 

Minister, I’ve had some concerns from employers that are 

concerned that the training program through New Careers has 

done I guess a pretty fair job, but they say that there has been 

some omissions possibly in the training. Because they find  

this is a particular hair salon  they find that they have people 

coming in to work who have been trained through New Careers, 

and they have been trained well in techniques, but after a few 

days of just showing up for work for a couple of days, they 

don’t seem to have the skills to be able to stay at work. They 

don’t seem to want to stay at work, and they quit after a few 

days, and then it is heard that these people have reapplied for 

social assistance. 

 

Now do you have any understanding of what the New Careers 

program offers? Does it offer anything where people are trained 

to be responsible to their employers and their clients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the New Careers, while we 

certainly have much . . . we retain much interest in New Careers 

as a functioning program, responsibility now for New Careers is 

with the Minister and Department of Post-Secondary Education 

and the New Career officials will be serving him. I do 

appreciate the member’s concern. And certainly the questions, 

we’ll be sure that gets passed on to officials and the minister. 

 

New Careers has served us very, very well and, I think the 

member agrees, continues to. There may be room for need to 

encourage those who have been through New Careers training 

to not just learn the skills of employment, but to learn the skills 

of sort of ongoing commitment to the employer where you 

begin. 

 

I had the happy experience this morning of being in downtown 

Regina to participate in the grand opening of the new office 

space for the Mobile Crisis Services and they are located in 

Regina’s old fire hall. And the renovations to allow this to 

happen was renovations provided through New Careers. 

 

And one of the happiest stories we heard down there this 

morning was the project was a little delayed in getting 

completed because not one, but six, of the New Careers 

individuals working on that project were lifted from that project 

into active employment by the carpenters’ union. So even 

before their training was finished, even before that job was 

done, they were lifted out and put into employment. 

 

It’s six  there’s lots more to do, but that’s six very happy 

stories. But I hear the member’s concern about it’s not just the 

training we may need, the actual job skills, but also sort of some 

of the life skill issues and commitment to employment, and 

we’ll be sure that gets on to the minister of the department. 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, maybe I 

should reword the question that I’m going to give you. It is 

claimed that these people reapply for social assistance, so my 

questions to you is. when they come for social assistance and it 

is . . . is there any follow-up or is there any looking into the fact 

that they may have quit their job after a few days? And if they 

do quit their job, are you allowing them to have social 

assistance again or is there some kind of insistence on the 

government’s department here that these people have to in fact 

go back and stay with their job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, under the regulations for 

social assistance, SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan), we 

require that you make every, every effort to find or to keep 

employment. If you voluntarily leave employment without 

cause, then you will be denied benefits, and it has been the 

practice of our appeal boards, when these cases are brought 

forward to appeal boards, they’ve been fairly consistent in 

maintaining that policy. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just 

another line of thought here. I have heard and I reinstate that  

it’s just heard  that there are some social service recipients 

that have been in a particular city in this province, have been 

not able to cash their cheques in specific banks or any other 

place because they don’t have any credentials and so it’s very 

difficult for them to cash their cheques, and that there are 

pawnshops in Saskatoon and Regina that in fact take these 

cheques, take a certain percentage off of these cheques, and 

leave the social service recipients with considerably less than 

what the cheque was issued for in the first place. Has there been 

any effort on your government’s part to have some sort of a 

card or whatever that would grant these people a passage into 

banks to have cheques cashed so that they wouldn’t have to 

have such a deduction from their cheques by passing them 

through pawnshops, etc.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  What we’ve really been trying to do, Mr. 

Chair, is encourage many of our clients to establish a direct 

deposit system so that their cheque is directly deposited in their 

account. What that means is they would have to have the 

identification to go and establish the direct deposit, but once 

that’s in place, then it’s complete and all of that hassle is just 

wiped out. 

 

We really try and discourage any of our clients from going to 

the cheque-cashing operations, the pawn operations, those who 

will charge a fee to cash a cheque. We don’t . . . I mean the 

benefits are not large, and we sure don’t want to see any of 

those benefits being used up in some of these circumstances. So 

we’ve tried to encourage as best we can  with some success, I 

think  the utilization of direct deposit. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, have you any documentation or 

anything at all like that that would indicate what the percentage 

is of people that are getting their cheques deposited directly 

right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think, Mr. Chair, we’re up to between 

10 and 15 per cent. Now this will not . . . we will also have, as 

the member will know, those others who have trusteeship,  

where their funds will be handled by a trustee. But this will be 

clients . . . so it’s now up to 10 to 15 per cent. So the number is 

significant already. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there’s 

one other area of concern that has been brought to me that I’d 

like to just question you a bit on. This is in regards to, I think, 

parents who are trying to take care of their own disabled 

children in their home, the mentally disabled. 

 

They claim that . . . some of them have started approved group 

homes. They have up to four young adults in them and they get 

very little support from Social Services, whereas they say that 

Social Services says that they just don’t have the money to 

really support them that well, but they seem to be able to give it 

to places like Elmwood home for the mentally disabled. 

 

Now this lady’s point of contention is that these places, places 

like Elmwood and so on, seem to be bigger, larger institutional 

organizations and they seem to have a monopoly on the funds. 

Could you comment on that for me, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, in fact, while I suppose it 

could be argued that there are never enough resources  and I 

know we often feel that way  we have been able, in this 

budget year, in addition to the last budget year, in fact providing 

some new funding for the group homes. In this budget year 

we’re talking about 500,000 new dollars to try and assist in this 

regard. 

 

We’ve had a long-established process now in the province of 

moving towards deinstitutionalization, believing that for many 

of our brothers, sisters, friends, neighbours, the smaller group 

home, community living, is better than the large institution. Not 

to say that we still don’t have need for the large institution, but 

we’ve had a long history of moving towards community-based. 

 

(2115) 

 

We will work with the Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living to establish these circumstances. And again, 

to repeat, we’ve directed some new resources in this budget to 

that end. 

 

Again, I had a happy experience not long ago of participating in 

the opening of a new group home for three autistic young men. 

They will be living in this home with, of course, with 

appropriate supervision in a neighbourhood. This opportunity 

comes as a gift, just as a gift, to their parents. They’re so 

thrilled to see this happening for their sons. And so there is 

progress. Sometimes we wish we could go further faster. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’ll pass the 

questioning on to my colleague. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  With permission, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To you and through you 

to all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce three 

women who are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. One is here to 

watch to see whether her husband knows how to shepherd his 

minister through the estimates properly, and I’m referring of 

course to Glenda Yeates. As well we have Mrs. Rae Yeates 

from Ontario and her sister, Margaret MacLean, also from 

Ontario. Glenda of course is from Regina, and I think that she’s 

well known to members in her role as a senior official with the 

Department of Health. 

 

I would like all members to welcome these three people to this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 

coming back to some of the questions that you were answering 

regarding clients and how they handle their funds as well as the 

abuses within the system. 

 

And now you’re quite well aware, Mr. Minister . . . I believe 

you were, even on the opposition side of the House were . . . 

raised the question about an investigation unit that used to exist 

in this province where there was a unit that was specifically 

there to follow up and make sure that clients weren’t abusing 

the social assistance program. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I raise it again because even just most 

recently I had a constituent call from my constituency. And 

certainly it’s something that I hear on an ongoing basis from 

individuals  the feeling that there are people who as we even 

discussed the other day, when it comes to even the use of food 

banks, there are individuals who may be taking advantage of a 

program that’s in place to help a person in a time of need. 

 

And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, what do you have in 

place today to address that concern? Do we still have a 

semblance of the investigative unit that was there? And as well, 

Mr. Minister, maybe I would like to also ask you if you can 

kind of give us a rough idea of the type of dollars that have 

been saved just through scrutiny of social service assistance 

files and claimants to make sure that the funds are indeed going 

to those in need? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we share, I’m sure, the desire 

that the funding that is available for those in need in our 

province truly meet those who are in need. And to that end, the 

department has in place, I believe, a very significant range of 

controls within the system to ensure that the funds are well 

spent and go to those who are in need. 

 

Now there . . . and there have been changes. There have been 

changes. Over the period of time that we now have served in 

government, we have changed the unit that was within the 

department into some other mechanisms. That unit, if memory 

serves me correctly, was costing about $600,000 a year to 

operate and was achieving only a return of $280,000. So we felt 

there were more effective ways to achieve the controls that we 

all desire. 

 

I perhaps can just run through, without dwelling at length on 

the number of controls that are now in place. We conduct an 

annual program audit that will be a sampling, an auditing of a 

sample, of the social assistance case-load to look for any 

financial errors or mistakes. 

 

We have worker accountability, and so each worker is 

responsible and accountable for his or her clients with a variety 

of tools to assist workers in maintaining accountability. We 

have verification workers whose tasks it will be to verify client 

identification, to confirm living arrangements  whether it be 

through rent receipts or landlord verifications  to require 

wage stubs to confirm income. We’d have the verification 

workers checking utility bills and those costs. And our estimate 

there is that for each dollar invested, that has returned a $3 

return to the department. 

 

There are a whole number of automated system controls now. 

We have a do-not-forward mail service implemented. We are 

using enhanced case review with clients. We are using the 

technology, the computer technologies, to interface our 

computer programs with other income programs, for instance 

with unemployment, with student loans. We’ve just recently 

finalized a deal now with Revenue Canada, we have it with the 

Canada Pension Plan, with fire-fighting income. And so we’re 

linking the computers. 

 

We’re working on maintenance enforcement, financial service 

workers, to assist with maintenance enforcement. The list goes 

on. I won’t read it all. There are 17 different programs, projects, 

and policies which we now have in place that we believe has 

made our system very, very palatable. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, can you give me any kind of an 

idea of what figure of actual dollar savings that would have 

occurred because of these, if you will, safety valves or features 

you have put in place for the years, say ’91 right through ’96? 

It’d be an indication of how well your program is working. I 

would appreciate that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we only have with us the 

numbers for ‘95-96. We could go back and find those. But the 

member may be interested for ‘95-96 and these are rather 

dramatic figures in some cases. 

 

Through case verifications, the net overpayments, if discovered, 

were in the order of $3 million. Through interprovincial 

matching of computer systems and so on, $86,000 . . . 87,000 

essentially. Through matching with the Canada Pension Plan, 

again through the computer links, $636,000. Through the 

assignment of unemployment insurance benefits, 88,088.7. 

Through fraud referrals, 891,000. Through following up on  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

fire-fighting income, 467,000. And for cheques cashed out of 

province, a net overpayment of 17,000. 

 

And so these controls, they are stringent, and they have I think 

produced some real benefit. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, when you talk about fire-fighting, 

what are you talking about there? Are you talking about 

individuals who are on welfare and then have gone to work in 

fighting fires and haven’t reported that and therefore have 

collected welfare plus a wage in fighting fires. Is that what 

you’re referring to there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Essentially yes, Mr. Chair. We see Social 

Services as the last resort, and other incomes should always be 

reported and considered income to the family. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Wouldn’t you consider fire-fighting as maybe 

something that New Careers would be working through, or even 

your department, if there was a need for individuals on the fire 

lines, that they could certainly contact social assistance and 

individuals on social assistance who might prefer to be out 

working, and in that way, Mr. Minister, would save you the 

problem of indeed having someone go and you’re not being 

aware? 

 

If you’re working through the department, coordinating that, 

you’re assisting both the Department of the Environment, as 

well as your department doesn’t have to really go investigating 

because you’re already aware of it. Have you got anything in 

place to address that right now, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, I’m very happy, Mr. Chair. In fact 

what the member suggests is exactly what is happening. 

 

There is very good coordination between SERM (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management)  the Department of 

the Environment  Department of Social Services, and New 

Careers, in the event of fires, that we can encourage and 

provide opportunity for clients of Social Services in fighting the 

forest fires or providing the training and then fighting the fires. 

 

So that’s happening and we think it’s a great idea and it’s 

working. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Was that just recently . . . that program recently 

worked on? Because when I look at a figure of $667,000, that’s 

a significant chunk of change. And I’m wondering, are you 

foreseeing that in the year upcoming that that figure should 

drop substantially as this program is put in place, or are you still 

finding that there is this overpayment even though this may 

have been worked on for the last two, three years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member is exactly right. 

And we’re hoping to get our systems so in tune that we can just 

eliminate this overpayment or bring it down to a very low level. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, another 

figure that caught my attention was $891,000 I believe it is. I 

think you use the term, funds collected in fraudulent ways. Has 

the department . . . or does the department actively pursue  

through legal matters recovery of these funds? Or what’s the 

process of recovery? Or is it an investigative measure that you 

involve, say, police forces in? Or exactly what are we talking of 

here and how do you recoup the funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair. The figure that I 

reported are fraud referrals to the police. This in fact are 

referrals to the police where charges may be laid and 

prosecutions can happen. And not regularly but on occasion 

those charges proceed through the courts, and we’ll see the 

outcome in the public record. So it does happen. 

 

Mr. Toth:  How many cases would you have had, say, in the 

last year? And maybe give a bit of an example of what we’ve 

had, say, in ’92-93, ‘93-94, ‘94-95, ‘5 and ‘6, if you would, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I’m sorry, to the member. We don’t have 

back as far as the member asks. We do have tonight with us 

‘95-96, ‘94-95. In ‘94-95 there were 242; in ‘95-96, 103, so a 

decline but I’m not sure if that’s a trend. But over those two 

years, a decline. 

 

Mr. Toth:  If you will, Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate those 

figures for the ’91 through ’96 period just much as before, if 

you don’t have it tonight. For the money collected, maybe 

present those figures as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, another concern that certainly comes to our 

attention  it’s something that I believe your department has 

been quite well informed of and we’ve heard a fair bit about, 

especially when it comes to the landlords of this province and 

rental of facilities. And I think the big concern over the past has 

been the fact that have landlords been getting their payments or 

getting the money that’s been coming to them that Social 

Services or assistance has made available to recipients. 

 

And I believe what is being done, a lot of that money is being 

sent direct to the landlord. And I’m just wondering, Mr. 

Minister, if you can confirm if all payments are made direct or 

if just part of the payments are made direct. How many 

complaints do you get from landlords, and how much money 

would there be, roughly, outstanding that landlords are still 

waiting for as a result of clients not passing on the rental 

payment to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, in totally 75 per cent of cases, 

the rent cheques are signed . . . they’re joint signature, so they 

must be signed by the client and by the landlord. And then there 

will be on top of that those who are under trusteeship where the 

trustee in fact will be making the payment directly to the 

landlord. So we’ve found that the joint signature has gone a 

long ways in assisting in this problem. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So basically what you’re saying then, Mr. 

Minister, is fully 100 per cent are in some way tied in almost a 

direct form to the landlord so that the landlord has to sign, or a 

trustee has to sign. And that money is basically accounted for. It 

goes direct to make sure that the rental payments are covered. 

 

(2130) 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I don’t want to mislead the 

member. It won’t reach the total 100 per cent. There will be a 

number of people who, over the years, have shown themselves 

to be very responsible  there just isn’t a problem  and/or 

where their entitlement under welfare won’t equal their rent. 

They have some other sources of income and so on, and theirs 

is a supplement, so it won’t entitle the rent. So it wouldn’t come 

to 100 per cent but fully 75 per cent now are on the co-sign 

basis. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, one of the major concerns the 

landlords have brought to this Assembly is the deposit  the 

deposit on a rental unit. And of course the landlords have been 

lobbying for the longest time to have an increase in that. 

 

Now I’m not exactly sure how your department views it, 

because a deposit, I’m sure, would be a major concern 

especially if you were to offer, or consideration was given to, 

the one-month deposit in order to cover the problems of having 

to redo suites. And I guess one of the concerns we get are from 

landowners who call us, and number one, the minimum 125 

that they get for deposit doesn’t even hardly buy a good quality 

gallon of paint or four litres of paint any more. 

 

And the thing is, Mr. Minister, what is your department doing 

to address this concern? And in view of the fact that there’s a 

reluctance on the government to even move to . . . in giving the 

landlords more of a down payment, of allowing them to charge 

more of a down payment, many of the landlords have been 

pulling some of their rental units off the market which may 

have a problem even for your department and for individuals 

finding rental units. 

 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what the department is doing to 

deal with this, how they’re addressing the situation, and 

whether or not there is a view towards taking a serious look at 

some of the concerns being raised by the landlords rather than 

expecting them to carry the whole tab and be left with . . . And I 

certainly caught it even in my own communities where 

individuals, renters, have left and one of the greatest complaints 

actually comes from SAP clients who have left premises and 

basically haven’t given notice. They’ve just gone and moved, 

and the premises has been left in very poor shape, and the 

landlord is left to fix up. And they’ve not only . . . don’t even 

have much of a deposit to give back because it’s eaten up 

before they hardly start. As well as they’ve lost that month or 

two. Generally speaking, you usually give a 30-day notice. 

 

So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department is doing 

to address the concern of the landlords and how does this 

concern affect clients and recipients that you are working with 

on an annual basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member will know that 

both the Minister of Justice, who has some legislative 

responsibility here, and myself have been . . . have met with 

landlords on this issue. I’ve had the opportunity to meet with 

individual landlords and to meet with, in fact, the landlords’ 

association in my own community of Moose Jaw. We recognize 

that this has been an issue for landlords for some period of 

time. 

Equally, there are many issues here. It’s not by any means a 

single issue. If for instance we would simply raise the damage 

deposit a significant amount, that would have, you’ll 

understand, some real implications for the budget of the 

Department of Social Services. As we secure rental 

accommodation on behalf of people on social assistance, that 

then has budget implications for the department. 

 

But equally any change, or significant change in the damage 

deposit, has budget implications for individuals not on social 

assistance. Other low income individuals, students, seniors, 

would all be faced, in some cases, for them, significant new 

cost in securing rental properties. 

 

Equally, we understand the difficulties that landlords have, 

particularly in circumstances where there has been, we can 

describe it, a bad tenant. Clearly not all bad tenants are on 

social assistance, and not all social assistance people are good 

tenants. We’ll find, I think, the same mix in Social Services 

primarily as you’ll find in the general public. Sometimes 

students will leave a place in a mess. Sometimes folks that you 

would be surprised, with good incomes, will leave a rented 

accommodation in a mess. So that is a difficulty for the 

landlords. 

 

The other side of that coin is that we’ve seen some examples of 

landlords who have not provided appropriate accommodation 

for those to whom they rent. So there’s a lot of issues here. 

 

It also takes us then into the broader housing questions that face 

us as a province. What I can report to the member is that there 

has been considerable work being done through both the 

Department of Justice and the Department of Social Services, 

conversations internal to the government. We’ve not yet 

resolved, internal to government, to offer as policy to the public 

the solution that we seek, but we’ve been working actively on 

this and hopefully can come to some conclusions in a 

foreseeable future. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, it would appear to me that the 

landlords certainly have a legitimate case and a legitimate 

concern to bring forward. 

 

And I also think, Mr. Minister, that even if you did up the rates, 

the hardship would be that first deposit. And the other thing I 

think that comes forward is that anyone who’s been left with 

carrying the cost, and the responsibility is placed on them to 

leave, if you will, to rent and to leave that rental facility the 

same way they found it, if they don’t have much of an 

obligation as far as a deposit, it’s quite easy to just walk away 

without even making any effort to clean up. Whereas if the 

deposit was higher, there would be every effort to make sure 

that property was looked after and that there was some value in 

it. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that deposit 

really doesn’t become a burden. It’s a burden the first time, but 

if you’ve become a good tenant and as you move from one 

property to the other, and you leave that facility in the condition 

it was when you moved in, that deposit then is available to you 

to go to the next rental unit and rent it. 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

And while I can appreciate your comments about the 

implications it has to the budget for SAP to all of a sudden have 

to, say put out a month’s rent, it would seem to me that maybe 

an alternative is to look at a staged payment of a larger amount 

and that would also address the concern of the low income 

individual who may not be on SAP and the rental problems they 

may face, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I’m bringing that forward as a suggestion to take a serious 

look at that, and I trust that between yourself and the Minister 

of Justice, and certainly your government, that some 

consideration will be given to this. 

 

I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, are there cases in this 

province where individuals have been put up in hotels because 

they haven’t had facilities available or just a short keep. And if 

so, how many individuals may that be? Is it on a monthly basis 

or is it just on an evening until a proper facility is located? And 

how many recipients would have received lodging in hotels as a 

result of this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I appreciate the member’s 

comments about the damage deposit, the security deposit issue. 

I want to reassure him again that we are looking at all the 

options. I’m including a phased-in option  that would be one 

 or a trust fund. I think one of the Maritime provinces have 

established a trust fund for the damage deposits, so we’re 

looking at all the options. And I appreciate his comments. 

 

In terms of hotel accommodation, only the rarest of 

circumstance in an emergency situation would we put a client 

into a hotel circumstance and only for a short period of time. 

However this caveat: there will be clients of ours who will 

choose  this happens more often I think in smaller 

communities  to make their residence within a hotel. And that 

becomes the individual’s right to choose. So that does occur, 

but putting up in hotels would only occur on a rare, rare basis, 

and hopefully only for a short period of time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  What kind of costs would be associated with a 

hotel? You mentioned about the odd client that may choose, 

and I would almost take that that may be a single person that 

would look at it, maybe someone who doesn’t really have 

family around that may look at a hotel as being a viable home 

option for them. 

 

And the reason I’m wondering is, because the department does 

actually have a limit I believe, as far as the maximum they go 

for rental payment. Would most of the hotel units here where 

clients are involved fall within that rental arrangement? Or what 

arrangements are made if the hotel happens to be . . . the rent 

for that room is more than what your maximum is? What does 

the department do in those cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, our clients, not unlike all of us, have 

to budget with their dollars. We provide the dollars on the basis 

of a schedule  there’ll be so much for rent, so much for food, 

so much for clothing, and the clients will manage their budget 

like we try and manage ours. 

 

In fact the rent schedules are set, and so there’s no chance that  

our clients will be living in any kind of a luxurious hotel 

accommodation, that’s for sure. And many of those who will 

choose that, choose it freely, will often be single and often male 

and often older, in choosing that kind of accommodation. 

 

The one example I can think of where we may have to use hotel 

accommodation on an emergency basis, I think we had one or 

two families in Saskatoon had to vacate their properties because 

the city of Saskatoon had come in and condemned the property. 

And so they are immediately put out and so, in the interim, as 

new accommodation is sought, we would accommodate in a 

hotel. But again, a moderately priced situation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have to 

come back to one question, back regarding the investigations 

unit and some of the problems you may run into. 

 

A concern that certainly in my area has been raised on an 

ongoing basis is this problem with common law relationships 

and individuals maybe renting . . . You talk about some of the 

dubious rental accommodation out there. Well some of it is just 

almost, if you will, appears to be just a face, if you will, a face, 

a showcase — like an indication that that person’s living there 

when they actually aren’t. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what the department does to 

try and make sure that people aren’t circumventing the program 

by appearing to live singly and yet really living in a relationship 

and just having a beat, run-down abode and paying rent there to 

draw the full SAP assistance that may be available to two 

individuals with a couple of children each, rather than a couple 

with four children. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We do have this entire area of common 

law relationship and living together under review and some 

consideration being given to that right now. 

 

I do want to say to the member that sometimes there can be 

perceptions in the community, in our communities, and not all 

of those perceptions are accurate. We receive gladly inquiries to 

our regional offices, to our Social Services offices. We receive 

gladly from the public any concerns they may have. And they 

do on a regular basis come to our regional offices, and I can 

assure the member and the public that each of those concerns 

are followed up. We do have, as I described earlier, verification 

officers. 

 

But if I may also say to the member, many of the accusations 

that do come, upon investigation, are proven not to be true. 

Folks may think that somebody is on welfare or report that, and 

they may not have been receiving social assistance for many, 

many years. I heard of one just the other week. 

 

So some of our perceptions, we always have to check against 

reality. We do — the workers — and each time a concern is 

raised, it’s followed up. And the result is some of the numbers 

that we talked about earlier tonight. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another series of 

questions. Mr. Minister, are SAP recipients given the 

opportunity to act as foster parents? Is that program available to  



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

SAP assistance; and if so, can you tell me about roughly how 

many families would be operating as foster parents, and what 

kind of dollars we’re looking at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The answer is yes, Mr. Chair, that 

recipients of social assistance have every right to apply to 

become foster parents. We believe that parenting, while it needs 

certain financial resources, is not just a matter of money, that 

there’s nothing to prevent someone with limited income from 

being a very good parent. 

 

So yes, the answer is yes, that foster parents can be recipients of 

social assistance. We do not have a breakdown or a number. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, what kind of screening program is 

adopted when . . . or utilized? Is your department responsible 

for this as far as an individual who would be considered for 

foster . . . being a foster parent? I’m wondering as well, is this 

considered a job? And who gets preference  couples or single 

mothers or who really does get the preference? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I thank the member for his question and 

his interest in the whole question of fostering. Before someone 

applies to be a foster parent, we encourage them to be a part of 

an information and educational kind of seminar or components 

so they have what we hope is a good understanding of what 

fostering is going to mean before they would even apply. 

 

Once individuals have applied, we review their applications and 

their circumstances to see if they will meet the needs of the 

child or the children. Remember here, we’re talking about 

children who are coming into care, who are coming into 

fostering, and very many of these children have some very high 

needs and come from some very difficult circumstances, and in 

some cases are pretty difficult young boys and girls, young men 

and women, to look after. 

 

We also now, and this happens more and more, encourage and 

want our foster parents to be working with the natural parent, or 

parents, in this circle. And so these are some very specific 

demands on people who will offer themselves to foster. We’re 

trying to develop foster parenting, reviewing the applications, 

with the desire to meet the needs of the child, and in some cases 

the child’s extended family. 

 

The foster parents will receive compensation  it’s not 

payment  it’s compensation for caring for the children. We 

don’t particularly look for single parents or married couples as 

opposed to one another. We’re looking for sort of stable homes 

with good parenting skills that can meet the needs of the 

children. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I would trust that 

indeed as you look for individuals or homes where people 

might be certainly looking at providing a good home 

atmosphere . . . and I guess I’ll use the word loving atmosphere, 

because you’re right, many of these children I think are leaving 

or have been taken from situations where there had been abuse, 

and they haven’t been looked after, they haven’t really been  

even probably . . . even felt any kind of love because the parent 

might be under stress or it’s a single parent trying to make it. 

And so to be a foster parent I think, takes a very special kind of 

individual. 

 

And it really doesn’t  whether they’re on . . . under social 

assistance or whether they have an income of their own  it 

really doesn’t make any difference. If they can provide that 

home atmosphere, I think it’s certainly laudable, or certainly 

good, to give them the opportunity if they can provide a good 

home atmosphere for individuals. 

 

And in your opinion, your department’s opinion, has there been 

any major money-saving in including SAP individuals in this 

foster program? And how successful has the program been 

through the years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, whether the family, the 

parents, the foster parents, were on social assistance or whether 

they were corporate executives with a large banking institution, 

the payment for the foster child is the same. And the payment is 

a matter of compensation for expenses. It’s just compensation 

for expenses. We’re having some real challenge within the 

budgeting of our department, recognizing that this 

compensation has not changed significantly for some years, and 

this too is another challenge in doing budget and providing 

resources to needs. 

 

But just to be clear, it’s a matter of compensation, and 

everybody, no matter what your other economic circumstances, 

would receive the same compensation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think I missed that 

comment because I remembered you mentioning about 

compensation. So basically it’s assistance to help look after this 

individual that’s in the home, over and above what you would 

normally get just for your own family to exist. 

 

The other day we talked about child hunger, Mr. Minister, and 

there were some questions that I didn’t quite get to as far as any 

specifics. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, and I’m going to 

give you about three questions here, so maybe if you want to 

just listen for a minute, rather than go through them all 

individually. 

 

Are there any child feeding programs in the province that the 

department is funding? If so, can you give us the names and the 

level of funding that may be received? And do you have an idea 

or any statistics of how many children are being assisted by 

these programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we have now province-wide a 

total of 118 various projects related to child nutrition and these 

will be across the province. I have a sheet here that lists the 

umbrella organizations that provide these programs. Some of 

these umbrella organizations will be providing a number of 

programs within their community. It ranges from the Saskatoon 

Child Hunger and Education Program, the Battlefords Concern 

for Youth, Nipawin Nutrition for Kids, the Yorkton Friendship 

Centre, Lestock’s Women’s Centre . . . I would very happily 

provide this list to the member if he desired it. 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

The total amount of money being spent now on these 8 specific 

child nutrition projects is approximately $1 million, plus or 

minus a little bit, approximately $1 million. And interestingly 

enough, we estimate now that approximately 1 million meals 

are being provided to children across the province. We do not 

have a calculation on how many children that will represent, but 

in the course of a year this would represent 1 million meals. 

And even I can do that arithmetic, a million dollars, a million 

meals  that’s about a dollar a meal, which is pretty good use 

of the public purse I think, for helping out the children of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, how would this compare to say last 

year’s funding for feeding hungry children? And as well, Mr. 

Minister, does the department provide any kind of training to 

individuals or families regarding preparing meals and helping 

people to find ways of maybe providing meals or stretching the 

dollar so that they can provide adequate food to their families? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, to the member’s question. 

This area at 1991-92, we were able to find approximately 

$575,000. We were able in 1993-94 budget to give that about a 

35 per cent boost . . . No, check that, a higher boost than that, 

almost a 50 per cent boost to get it up to the $1 million mark 

that’s remained about constant since. It went a little over in 

‘94-95 and a little bit under last year. So the expansion in that 

programing really came in ‘93-94, but it has essentially doubled 

since ‘91-92. 

 

Many of these organizations  I know from my own 

experience and travels around the province now  many of 

these organizations are doing just what the member suggests 

should be done. And that’s to provide not simply meals but 

other experiences in food preparation, in training, in family 

counselling. 

 

Over here for instance, the Regina Food Bank, they’re doing 

some great work in a community kitchen setting where people 

come in. I met a group in Saskatoon, again working on a 

community kitchen project where a number of people come 

together and prepare bulk meals and food for their families, and 

so on. 

 

So much of this is happening all across the province. I’m sure if 

you went to any of these, you would find not only the public 

dollars, the tax dollars, but you would find volunteers from the 

community and you would find, very likely, community 

financial contributions. Because I think across the province we 

recognize that the issue of hunger is there; that child hunger is 

there and we as Saskatchewan people want to take that very 

seriously. And so you’ll not just find the public dollars, you’ll 

find lots of private dollars too, and lots of personal commitment 

and volunteerism. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When I think of child 

hunger and child feeding programs, I think of the Chili for 

Children and Theresa Stevenson. And certainly just chatting 

with them at the Saskatchewan Volunteer Awards medal 

presentation, it’s interesting to note the fact her interest in 

gardening still hasn’t waned whatsoever. And that’s a kind of a 

pastime even though she’s retired from the program in the city. 

And I know that many individuals over the years have actually 

gone above and beyond, if you will, to assist those within their 

own, if you will . . . our aboriginal people for their own kind 

and other individuals. I guess there are times too where people 

get a little annoyed when they see individuals on assistance, and 

I look just outside of the city . . . well actually on the outskirts 

of the city of Regina we do have a kind of a gardening program 

where people can get together, kind of a community gardening 

program. 

 

And I think there certainly are ways, if we just encourage 

people a little bit, where they can do a lot to help themselves 

and, if you will, stretch their resources so that they can provide 

adequate meals. And so I think anything that we do to help 

people, I think also builds up a feeling that . . . the individuals 

feel good about themselves if they are able to do something to 

help themselves out. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we look at the stats  and we’re looking at 

some of the numbers as far as the individuals on assistance  

how many of these individuals would be single parent 

situations, and specifically teenage mothers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the single parents would 

represent 31 per cent of the case-load, and that represents 

12,699 people. This is as of May 1996, the most recent figures. 

Virtually all of these single parents are female. I suppose there 

would be the rare case of a dad who’s on social assistance, but 

the vast majority will be female. Of that number, approximately 

half, we believe, would be fully employable, the other half not 

fully employable. We do not break these numbers down into 

age of teenagers. So I’m sorry; I can’t provide that information. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, is there any attempt whatsoever 

made by your department to make fathers responsible for some 

of the maintenance and upkeep of their siblings? Certainly I 

think it’s not just a woman’s responsibility, I don’t believe. I 

think the only way a child arrives in this world if there was a 

man and a woman involved, and I think there is responsibility 

there. And many men across our province have shown their 

willingness to accept that responsibility. And I think this is one 

of the other concerns that’s raised, even with regards to SAP, 

people on SAP assistance. 

 

And I’m wondering what efforts your department makes . . . 

I’m sure you’d have to deal with the Department of Justice in 

some ways, but what efforts are you doing to address this 

concern? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The member is absolutely right that this 

is something we’re determined to pursue. Where there are 

fathers who have responsibilities for their children, we believe 

those fathers should meet those obligations  for the most part, 

fathers. We have, government-wide, a number of initiatives 

through Justice, through maintenance enforcement, through 

some changes we’ve recently made through Legal Aid. We have 

our workers that try and assist individuals in terms of 

maintenance payments. 

 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

One of the changes that we’re proposing to make, as we 

redesign social assistance, is to in fact encourage outside 

income, whether it be from employment, or in this case from 

maintenance enforcement, through a change we’re describing as 

a working income supplement; so that in fact we would 

supplement outside income, as opposed to the current system 

where in fact when any outside income comes into the home on 

social assistance, we only allow a certain amount. And then we 

start cutting the social assistance. That includes monies coming 

in from maintenance. And so sometimes the current system 

serves as a disincentive to go out and seek those maintenance 

dollars. We want to turn that around because we think that 

fathers who have responsibilities should meet those obligations. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A couple of questions 

I’d like to deal with regarding child care in this province — and 

it’s certainly something that’s been brought to my attention. 

Just a recent headline in the Moosomin World Spectator about a 

child care program that finally came to fruition after, I think it’s 

about three years or better that we’ve been working . . . a group 

of individuals working to get some support for the program out 

there. And I believe they do have some support from the 

department. 

 

I’m wondering . . . and here again I’ll give you maybe about 

four questions. They’re shorter questions. And rather than up 

and down, I’ll give them to you, and you can respond. What is 

the current level of subsidy for child care, and based on what 

income, and if you would provide the details. How many child 

care spaces have been created since the NDP took office in ’91? 

And how many spaces were there as of September ’91, and how 

many are there to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m wondering if the member 

would accept . . . In terms of the level of subsidy and income, 

it’s a rather complicated set of numbers. I wonder, if the 

member would agree, if we could just provide him the 

information in print on that question. 

 

On the question of actual number of spaces back to ’91, we 

again don’t have the numbers back to ’91. I think we could 

endeavour to try and get them. But I can tell the member that 

over the past four years we’ve added $1.5 million and created 

1,100 new spaces province-wide. So that would be 1,100 new 

spaces over the past four years, and that’s on a budget increase 

of $1.5 million. 

 

Now what we’ve tried to do is focus where we felt the need 

again is greatest, and that’s looking at teen infant spaces, 

looking at some preschool support programs, looking at infant 

and toddler centres, because the demand is very high there, and 

some innovative and I think important pilot projects in rural 

Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In this year we were able to again find some new dollars for 

wage enhancement grants, a $500,000 wage enhancement 

package for child care workers, recognizing that their work is so 

important. They’re looking after our children. And we wanted 

to begin again to try and recognize what they’re doing. It’s a 

small enhancement and I think appreciated in the field. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, when it comes to child care . . . and 

we certainly recognize that there are many families who find 

that it’s almost impossible to make it on a single income any 

more, especially if you happen to be a single, low income 

family, and so therefore you’ve got the spouse out working as 

well to try and supplement the income. However, if there’s one 

concern that comes to my attention on an annual basis with 

regards to child care, is what the criteria is for the level of 

support. 

 

Let’s say you’ve got a family coming where both individuals 

are on a minimum wage, a job and just drawing a minimum 

wage. Mr. Minister, is there a level where child care support 

would cut in, where you would receive a subsidy or could, say, 

put your child in a child care program, and then a level above 

whereby you would then have . . . pay for some of this support? 

 

Because if I hear it . . . and I remember specifically the debate I 

had with a constituent whose husband happens to be a teacher. 

She chose to stay at home when some very good friends of 

theirs who both are in the teaching profession, were taking their 

child to a child care program. And it annoyed her to no end to 

think that . . . and whether or not they were getting assistance 

. . . I mean whether or not they were putting their child into a 

program that was totally covered by the government. Their 

feeling was they should have been paying someone else to . . . 

paying a babysitter. 

 

So what I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, is what’s the criteria? Is 

there a level whereby if a person uses, say, a child care program 

or a day care program in the community that they would pay for 

that program versus receiving any help from the government, 

from . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, the . . . again I’ll say to the member, 

if we can, we will provide the total breakdown of the income 

levels and the subsidies attached because it is income sensitive. 

I mean there is a point which you do not receive any subsidies. 

We’ll send you that. It’s rather complicated. 

 

And I might just say that  and here I’m talking then about the 

maximum subsidy  if your income is low enough to receive 

the maximum subsidy, this is what you would get. Prior to 

‘95-96, it was a single subsidy level, $235 for all age groups. 

That was the maximum, $235, no matter how old your child. 

 

Now we’ve not only made it income sensitive but age sensitive. 

And so in ‘95-96, a $220,000 budget increase was able to raise 

the subsidies for infants and toddlers from the 235 to 265, 

recognizing that there could be higher costs for the infant care. 

That would be in a family care home, 235 to 265, so the max 

now is 265 in a family care home. And 285 and 245 

respectively in centres. 

 

We will just send to the member all of this information. But 

you’re right; it is income sensitive. For those who may choose 

not to utilize child care and receive that subsidy, there are of 

course the tax provisions that can compensate individuals and 

families through the tax provision in that case. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’ll look forward to  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

receiving that information. Mr. Minister, I have some questions 

here related to some letters we received from individuals about 

some of the concerns that they have about different aspects of 

the department. And so I’d like to bring them to your attention. 

We’re waiting to raise them with you before we responded. We 

responded that we would be certainly raising the concern. 

 

And one of them has to do with family counselling, and we’ve 

received a number of complaints that social workers in your 

department seem to be too quick to counsel women to seek 

divorce or separation before going on welfare. And I’ve had my 

assistant go through this because I had a hard time reading the 

letter myself. And I’m sure that your workers certainly have all 

kinds of cases that come before them and have to deal with 

difficult situations and sometimes the demands that are being 

put on them. 

 

I’m wondering though if . . . I wonder if you could tell us if 

your department has a particular policy about counselling for 

family break-ups and could you have your department to 

undertake to look into how often your department advises 

people to seek divorce and whether this is appropriate in all 

cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair, there are no policies in 

that regard. The policies, I think generally speaking, we would 

follow would be number one . . . and these policies, I think, are 

followed by many counsellors, either through social services or 

in family service bureaus or in churches or in rectories and so 

on — that number one, there is confidentiality above all else, 

and that counselling is really a process of bringing people to 

self-determination, to making their own decisions. 

 

And so there is no policy going into a counselling or a family 

situation that would recommend one thing or another thing. It 

has to be done sensitive to the family circumstances and 

hopefully, to help the individuals or the families or the couple 

resolve what will be best for their lives through their own 

decision-making process. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, is it possible that some counsellors 

may, through their counselling, leave the impression that . . . 

because the concern, certainly the concern . . . I was reading 

through one letter specifically where an individual felt that there 

was more of an effort given to advising a person to separate 

rather than advising the couple to try and work out their 

differences. And that’s a very legitimate concern. 

 

And a feeling that while it may not be a general policy in the 

department, is it possible that some counsellors may in some 

ways, because of the pressures they face when they’re 

counselling, may give information that may lead people to 

believe that they’re actually counselling individuals to look at 

separating versus trying to work out their differences? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think, having at least some 

limited experience in the field of counselling both individuals 

and families, that through the counselling relationship with a 

counsellor, the individuals or families may leave with certain 

perceptions. That would be true of any counsellor in any 

circumstance. If the member has any very specific concerns or  

reported concerns, if he wants, you know, we’ll sure try and 

follow them up. 

 

But the policy, again I would repeat, I think of the department is 

that, one, confidentiality is supreme, that we seek 

self-determination. I as minister and I know that we as 

government and I think we as legislators, support the concept of 

stable home environments, a stable family environment, and 

also respect the needs of individuals. 

 

I think we all recognize that in some cases the home 

environment is not going to survive and that the stability is just 

not there. We would hope that through the process of 

counselling, family relationships can be strengthened. But also 

we recognize that in some cases we’re going to have to support 

the individual where that family relationship just isn’t going to 

make it. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have a 

question here and I have a feeling it maybe should be in the 

Department of Health, but just to make sure I’m not out of the 

wrong area. The facts of life line? Does that involve Health? I 

kind of thought that’s where it was, but I know it ended up in 

the folder here and in the question. I just wanted to make sure 

that I wasn’t going to have the Minister of Health saying well, 

you should have asked when you had the Minister of Social 

Services here in front of you. 

 

I talked for a minute a moment ago about day care services and 

one other question has come up by looking over the different 

questions that have come up from, specifically from 

individuals, is the fact that even though you talk about 

increasing the number of spaces and increasing the level of 

funding, there are still individuals who have no other alternative 

but to go . . . or utilize unfunded but licensed day care centres. 

And the question is, given the critical shortage of day care 

spaces, many of these low income parents have no choice but to 

use an unfunded facility. Why does your department exclude 

unfunded day care users from any grants or is that a legitimate 

question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Okay, I’m not sure I quite understand the 

question. We have, of course, some limits. We have limits on 

our budget and so the funded day care spaces are limited by, 

well the need for those spaces in our community and our ability 

through budgetary measures to provide them. 

 

We are, I think the member will recognize, at least disappointed 

in the activity of the federal government in this regard, where in 

the month just leading up to Christmas they suggested to 

Canadians they were going to have $620 million available for 

day care and creation of new spaces or other important child 

care programs. And then we wake up in the new year and find 

out that in fact they weren’t really serious about that money. 

 

We’re still negotiating with the federal government. We’re 

hoping that we can utilize some federal funding, whether it goes 

directly into child care or it might be available for other 

programs that would enable us to move some other resources 

into child care. 

 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

We do want to partner with the federal government, but I think 

Canadians generally have been disappointed by the 

announcement of the red book commitment and then the 

seeming withdrawal. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, one further question regarding child 

care. And the fact, is the child care program funded up until the 

supper hour? We get the concern raised about individuals 

looking for some help, some support, low income families 

where their children, young children specifically, and there are 

no older siblings at home, where at 3:30 there’s no place to go 

but possibly home, but there’s no one there to look after them. 

And individuals have been asking me and certainly asking our 

caucus  and no doubt maybe some of your colleagues have 

had the same request  for a program that would recognize 

this, that would, say, offer the child care services up until a 

person is off work after the school hours. Is that a major 

problem right now and is there any funding for it? If there is, 

where would a person get it? 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I wouldn’t be able to document for the 

member tonight, but there are a number of those kinds of 

programs around the province, perhaps not where  if an 

individual has approached you  in their community or in their 

neighbourhood, but certainly those programs are around. 

 

The need that seems to be identified most often, at least to me, 

is the need for infant day care spaces for the very young. 

Because we do have young moms, mothers and dads and 

families, who have to be back into the workforce as soon as 

possible or don’t enjoy contractual protection where they have 

maternity leaves and so on; so there seems to be a real demand 

for infant day care. But I accept that the member points out 

another need, and that’s the need for after school, and in some 

cases because of shift work, evening and so on. Now there are 

cases where that is available. It won’t be available in every 

community or in every neighbourhood. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. Mr. 

Minister, we passed over a set of questions to your House 

Leader last week. These are supplementary questions to the 

global questions that had been presented earlier. I wonder if you 

have received those questions and if you’ll be responding to 

them all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  There’s no question, and the member’s 

been reassured by the House Leader, we will be responding. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s good to 

know that you can take direction. I do have one question that I 

would like to ask specifically. Your deputy minister or any of 

your officials that are entitled to a CVA (Central Vehicle 

Agency) vehicle, if you could indicate to me who they might be 

and whether or not they are utilizing the CVA vehicle or 

whether they’re on a personal mileage circumstance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the deputy of Social Services 

uses an assigned CVA vehicle. Our social workers around the  

province will use CVA vehicles out of the pool, and there’d be 

a fair number of those who are travelling all over the province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was 

particularly interested in your . . . either the deputy or your 

department heads. But I gather it’s just the deputy that has a 

CVA vehicle. Okay, thank you very much. 

 

I’d like to go on to another issue. It came to my attention from a 

lady in Kenosee that she believes she was having a bit of a 

problem with some of the youth that are at the youth treatment 

centre in Kenosee. I wonder if you could indicate the treatment 

centres that you have for youth around the province, where 

they’re located at, and how many youth they service. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the deputy is assisting us as 

usual. And I’m writing down from memory, is listing all the 

spaces and I’m writing it down and we have it printed on a 

piece of paper. 

 

Mr. Chair, the secure custody facilities for young offenders are 

located at Kilburn Hall in Saskatoon, the Orcadia Youth 

Residence in Yorkton, the Paul Dojack Youth Centre in Regina, 

the Echo Valley youth centre at Echo Lake down in the valley, 

the North Battleford Youth Centre, and the Nisbet Youth 

Centre in Prince Albert. 

 

Open custody facilities will include the Yarrow Youth Farm in 

Saskatoon, the Kenosee Youth Camp, which you mentioned, 

the Prince Albert Youth Residence, the Battleford Youth 

Cottage. 

 

We have custody redirection at Dale’s House. And there will be 

some facilities provided through Salvation Army, Concord. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. In a 

facility such as Kenosee or the open custody situations around 

the province, what kind of supervision is being provided for the 

youth while they’re at that centre? And are they allowed off of 

the premises, and if they are, under what circumstances and 

how does that procedure work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, in the open custody 

circumstances there is still constant supervision, 24-hour 

staffing, constant supervision. There may be experiences where 

the young people are actually out of the facility. For instance in 

Kenosee, I think, they work in the park. And so they’ll be 

working with park staff, but again under supervision. 

 

There may be  towards the ends of the sentence, if things 

have gone very well  there may be a temporary leave to visit 

family which would again take them out. But even in open 

custody there is pretty intensive supervision. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So at Kenosee, Mr. Minister, when they’re out 

with the park staff, are they under supervision of Social 

Services staff or are they under the supervision of the park 

staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it in fact could be either. It 

would depend a little I guess, on the actual youth or youths who  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

are out to do a job, knowing their characteristics. If there was 

any risk at all, our staff would be there. If they’re at a stage 

where people are feeling confident that they can go out and do a 

job with the supervision of the parks people, in fact they may be 

just supervised by the parks people. So it’s a bit of a . . . and I 

guess it would depend a little bit on the job. So it’s a mix and 

match of the individual youth and the job. But if there were any 

risk, our staff would be there. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to relate to you 

the circumstances that led to these questions. Last summer 

some time, this lady at Kenosee found a youth on her deck. 

Supposedly this youth was under the supervision of park staff. 

The park staff were checking a creek that runs past her location. 

They were down at the creek doing whatever it was they were 

doing there; this youth supposedly was up on her deck. So 

initially that’s where her concern started. 

 

Later, she has been twice broken into over the last eight 

months. Now how she has come to the determination it’s 

somebody related to the youth camp, I don’t know. She has no 

proof of that that I know of. But nevertheless, she has a concern 

that it somehow relates back to the incident of the youth that 

was on her deck. 

 

So she was concerned as to what type of supervision is 

provided to the clientele at the youth centre while they are 

resident there; whether or not they have 24-hour supervision in 

a manner such that a youth couldn’t slip out of the window in 

the middle of the night or whatever the case may be. Can you 

give some information as to how close a scrutiny  since you 

say this is open custody . . . are they monitored during the night, 

are they . . . is there a bed check made or some sort of 

supervision provided to indicate whether or not no one could be 

leaving and then returning so that they would be there for 

breakfast in the morning sort of thing, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, in reference to the 

circumstance that the member describes, and I think we would 

all, if we were that individual and found a young offender or 

anyone else on our deck, that causes us to be somewhat nervous 

and maybe concerned about future events. My officials tonight 

believe that the director of the Kenosee Youth Camp has in fact 

met with that individual. If there is some more follow-up that 

should be done, I’d sure appreciate it if the member would just 

let us know, and we would pursue that. 

 

We do understand that these are open custody circumstances 

where the security, while stringent, is not like the closed 

custody with the bars and the locks on the doors and that. There 

are, I’m told, regular checks 24 hours a day, night checks and so 

on. 

 

But I guess, in these circumstances, where there’s a will there 

will be sometimes a way. And some of the young people . . . 

mercifully it’s a rare occasion when it happens, but some of 

these young people will run away, and very often I think they’re 

apprehended in relatively short order, but can create some 

concern. But there are, I would want to reassure the member, 

there are certainly relatively stringent security. And my tours of 

these facilities tell me that there are relatively  

stringent security. But in the open custody, we’re not here 

talking about barbed wire and bars. So the potential does exist, 

and once in a while the potential gets realized. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Around the 

province, has there been any number of incidents related to the 

open custody where there have been complaints brought 

forward to the department that some of the clientele have been 

acting inappropriately, have been perhaps reoffending or 

causing some disturbances or problems in their areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just a short polling of the 

officials that are with us tonight, say that it likely has happened. 

We can’t deny that it hasn’t happened, there haven’t been some 

concern; but in their experience, it’s relatively rare  relatively 

rare. 

 

And I think that speaks pretty highly of the dedicated managers 

and staff and so on, in our centres who I think really work at 

trying to build community relationships. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lorje .........................................................................................................................................................................................2734 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................2717 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2717 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2720 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Public Service Commission  Vote 33 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2721 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2721 

  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2724 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2730 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Social Services  Vote 36 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2732 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2732 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2734 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2742 

 

 


