


















































May 2, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1313 
 May 2, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of many 
concerned citizens from the province of Saskatchewan, with 
respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre, I present a 
petition which reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition are primarily from the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, and I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
mainly from southern rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present names of petitions of people regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Togo, Saskatchewan, and all of the others are from Roblin, 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the impending 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition are all from the city of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
petitions of names of people from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 
Swift Current, Kincaid, Chaplin, Wymark, all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
today to present a petition of names from people throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by many concerned citizens 
from the cities of Regina as well as from Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people across Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Moose Jaw, Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina, Weyburn, Sedley, 
Broadview. We also have Sintaluta on here, Rockglen, Lisieux, 
Strasbourg, just to name some of many. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed a petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina here. They’re from Melville. They’re from Yorkton. 
They’re from Herbert, Swift Current, and all throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I so present. 



1314  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the former minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Computer Utility Corporation: what is the total dollar 
value of the sale of the corporation’s assets and liabilities 
to the Information Systems Management Corporation in 
February, 1988? 

 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water regarding the 
Sask Water audit document: (1) how many copies of the 
document were produced; (2) what was the total cost of 
production; (3) what was the total cost of distribution; (4) 
what was their production design work; was it done 
in-house or contracted out. If it was contracted out, who 
produced it; (5) who was the printer; where was the 
contract tendered; and (6) how employees were involved in 
producing the document? 

 
I have similar questions for the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan growth fund and for the document regarding 
Partnership for Growth. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice regarding independent 
prosecutor Chris Evans’s report on the SaskTrust/Dean 
Mattison investigation: (1) on what date did the Justice 
department refer the Dean Mattison issue to the 
independent prosecutor; (2) on what date did the deputy 
minister of Justice receive independent prosecutor’s report; 
(3) what was the total amount paid to the independent 
prosecutor to conduct this investigation and report; (4) 
what specific mandate and/or guidelines were given to the 
Justice department to the independent prosecutor regarding 
this case; (5) was the independent prosecutor given all 
documentation regarding the SaskTrust issue, including 
information about each lawyer involved and how many 
transactions they handled individually; (6) please provide 
the opposition with a copy of the completed report. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the  

Assembly, 25 men and women who are seated in the west 
gallery. They are attending adult basic education classes at 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), the Wascana Institute. And they’re here today 
accompanied by their teacher, Jim Scarfe. 
 
They’ll be here for some of question period, and I’ll be meeting 
with them after their tour to have a visit and answer some of the 
questions that they’ll have. 
 
I’d ask all members to be on good behaviour so it’ll lessen the 
number of in-depth questions I’ll have to answer later on in the 
day, and ask you all to join me in giving them a warm welcome 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
introduce to you and through to you to the rest of the members 
of the Assembly, 23 students from the beautiful south-west 
community of Eastend, Saskatchewan. 
 
They share the home of Scotty, the Tyrannosaurus rex. And 
they all came to town knowing exactly what rubber boots are 
for, finally, as they had the big flood of 1996 this year, the first 
time they’ve seen a whole lot of water in a whole long time. But 
they’ve survived all of those things and they’re looking 
forward, I think, to finding out how the Assembly works and 
how the laws of Saskatchewan are really, truly made and where 
it all happens. 
 
I’m going to be happy to meet with them a little later on and to 
share a few things, as the other member has pointed out, about 
how the process works. And we’ll be happy to do that. 
 
And I would ask you all to please join with me in welcoming 
this wonderful group of 23 to the Assembly along with their 
teachers, Shelley Morvik, Marie Hanson; and Randy Morris, 
their bus driver. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 
gallery I’d like to introduce some special guests to the members 
through you, sir. They are representatives of the Grey Nuns and 
I’ll ask these folks to stand. They’re here regarding two private 
members’ Bills. 
 
First of all Sister Faye Wylie of the Grey Nuns; Ted Nieman, 
the Vice-Chair of St. Paul’s Hospital Board of Management in 
Saskatoon; and Darlene Wingerak, the legal counsel for the two 
Bills that they took before the committee this morning. 
 
I appreciate the special guests being here, and on behalf of all 
the members I want to thank the Grey Nuns and the St. Paul’s 
Hospital in Saskatoon, and of course the group home in Biggar 
run by the Grey Nuns, for the wonderful care that they’ve 
provided over the years, and wish them luck in the future and 
know that they will continue to provide a leadership role as 
they’ve done in the past. 
 



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

So I would ask that all members give a warm welcome to our 
special guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Liberal caucus I’d like to also welcome Sister Faye Wylie and 
her friends. It’s nice to see her. She’s an old friend of mine. 
 
I’ll ask the Assembly to also welcome her to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, two groups of people that are here today. Well 
actually one is my sister, that I’m very pleased is here from 
Alberta and is visiting Saskatchewan  Bonnie McMillan, and 
she’s sitting in the west gallery. 
 
We’ve had maybe at some points in our life some sibling rivalry 
and so on, but I’m very, very pleased that my sister is here to 
observe today our proceedings here in the legislature. Welcome, 
Bonnie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley:  And I’d also like to at the same time introduce 
some other guests that are here from Weyburn, from my 
constituency. Vikki Keturakis is one of my constituency 
assistants so she does a lot of good work in my constituency 
office. And along with Vikki is Opal Keturakis, her mother, and 
Olivia Dammann and Arvilla Carlton. 
 
And I’m very, very pleased that they’ve all come today to watch 
the proceedings in the legislature. And this is their first time 
here, so I’d like everyone to join me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce a friend 
of ours from Lumsden, Alice Miazja, who ran for us in the last 
provincial election. I would ask everyone in the Assembly to 
welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

First Nations Forum 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome 
all the people who are attending a first nations forum in the city 
this week. The first nations forum is focusing on sovereignty 
and treaties. 
 
The forum is open to Indians and non-Indians including legal, 
academic, political, religious, and business communities. I’ve 
had the pleasure of meeting some of these people at these  

workshops. 
 
Because treaty and the sovereignty issues are so very complex, 
it’s important to participate in forums such as these. We all 
should become better educated on the issues facing first nations 
and Metis people and how they relate to the various levels of 
government. 
 
I am pleased to see so many people participating in these 
discussions. I would ask other members of the Assembly to join 
me in welcoming the participants to the city and also wish them 
luck in continuing these type of forums for the next five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Trends in Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains spoke about the impact the tourism industry has 
in Saskatchewan. Today I would like to point out a few more 
economic statistics about tourism. 
 
Hotel occupancy rates for Saskatoon and Regina were up 3.1 
per cent in 1995. In fact the occupancy rate has improve 
annually since 1993. The statistics for Saskatoon and Regina 
were among the highest of major cities in Canada and well 
above the national average. 
 
In 1994 it is estimated that visitors to our province spent almost 
$46 million in Saskatchewan. This means a return on 
investment of $25.52 for every dollar spent on advertising and 
fulfilment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the top 10 events in 1995 based on attendance, 
the city of Saskatoon had a strong presence with popular events 
such as the Saskatoon exhibition, Saskatoon Folkfest, and the 
Saskatchewan Jazz Festival. And if the weather cooperates this 
year, the Fringe Festival will be a top draw in 1996. 
 
Congratulations to all the people who worked so hard to make 
our Saskatchewan tourism industry a huge success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bruno Woman Receives Parenting Award 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize a constituent of mine, Wallis Serblowski of 
Bruno. 
 
Mrs. Serblowski, a mother of 10 children, was awarded the 
distinguished parent award at the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living’s 40th annual general meeting held in 
Regina. She has been a very active member of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Community Living and was 
recognized for her work with and dedication to the organization 
and her family. 
 
Congratulations, Wallis Serblowski. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1316  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

Ag Biotech Conference 1996 
 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A science and 
technology expertise in Saskatoon is responsible for another 
first in Canada  the first international agricultural 
biotechnology conference in Canada. 
 
Ag Biotech Conference ’96 will be held in Saskatoon this June. 
 
Biotechnology is a key catalyst for agriculture as we head 
toward the new century, and a major part of that is centred in 
Saskatoon. This conference will help increase awareness about 
our Saskatchewan capabilities and agricultural biotechnology. 
More than 500 people from over 25 countries are expected to 
attend this conference. There will be an opportunity for 
Saskatchewan researchers, producers, and the business 
community to hear speakers from 15 different countries. 
 
Sessions will be divided into five topics: crop development, 
animal science, microbials, technology transfer, and business. 
One of the keynote speakers will be Dr. Janet Sprent, professor 
of plant biotech from the Department of Biological Sciences at 
the University of Dundee, Scotland. 
 
I’m sure this conference will provide insight into how this 
industry is developing and contributing to the future of 
Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drama Awards for Wadena Students 
 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, Wadena high school recently 
won several drama awards for its production of Laundry and 
Bourbon at the regional Saskatchewan Drama Association 
competition in Yorkton. The festival featured entries from 11 
schools in the region. 
 
Crystal Anderson and Alayne Lennox won merit awards for 
outstanding performances at the festival. Erin Pitstick won the 
best characterization award for her performance. The Laundry 
and Bourbon crew also won the award for best stage and 
technical crew. The overall production placed third among 11 
entries. 
 
The adjudicator said he was very impressed with the actresses 
and noted the professionalism and cooperation of the crew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating the director, cast, and stage crew of 
Wadena high school on their achievements at the regional 
Saskatchewan drama competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Entrepreneurs in Neilburg 
 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are two young 
entrepreneurs in my riding who are getting an early start in the 
business world. 
 

Thirteen-year-old Lanelle Freeston and her 10-year-old sister 
Chandra, of Neilburg, are making devil sticks, which are used 
as a game. It consists of two small sticks and one larger stick 
that are wrapped with tape and string and more tape. The two 
smaller sticks are used on either side of the larger stick, keeping 
it balanced by tossing it back and forth. 
 
These girls saw the potential in making and selling this game. 
They developed a pattern on their own, and with some help 
from their parents, they caught on quickly. Lanelle and Chandra 
have sold a number of them for between 17 and $20, and they’ll 
keep producing them as long as there is a demand. After some 
financial assistance from their parents, the girls’ business has 
become self-sufficient and they have paid off their loan. It 
seems the demand increases as people see these sticks and the 
challenge they provide for entertainment. 
 
I would like to congratulate Lanelle and Chandra for their 
initiative in pursuing an idea and turning it into a business. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Banner Year for Lucky Lake Bantam Lakers Hockey Team 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the 1995-96 hockey season 
for the Lucky Lake Bantam Lakers was indeed a banner year for 
this team from my constituency. The Lakers had to overcome 
many hurdles to make it to the provincial final, but once they 
got there they trounced the team from Turtleford for the 
championship. 
 
In the next round there were a few more obstacles to face in 
what turns out to be something of a Cinderella story. The team 
was placed on a waiting-list to compete at the Kamloops 
international AAA bantam ice hockey tournament, the largest of 
its kind in North America. A few days later, they received a 
phone call telling them that the Lakers had been accepted into 
the tournament. Of course the competition was fierce, because 
players who have participated in this tournament in the past 
included names such as Mario Lemieux, Joe Sakic, and Jari 
Kurri. 
 
A team from Detroit ended up winning the tournament, but the 
Lakers, through sheer determination and two overtime goals 
from Mike Facca, took home the C event championship trophy. 
The Lucky Lake Bantam Lakers represented the smallest centre 
in the history of the tournament to capture a championship. 
 
The former home of NHL (National Hockey League) player 
Darin Kimble is turning out first-rate hockey players. I would 
like to congratulate coach Doug Barker, all of the players, and 
the community of Lucky Lake for supporting this team. It 
definitely was a community effort. 
 
Thanks should also go to Sask Ida Farms, our potato plant down 
there, which was the team sponsor, and the Lucky Lake 
Kinsmen for their support of minor sports. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
Deputy Premier and his counterpart in British Columbia appear 
to have very different views about what is fact and what is 
fiction. 
 
Two different accounts have been provided, amid allegations 
that this government provided a $5 million loan to 
Intercontinental Packers to, in part, finance the planned closure 
of the firm’s meat packing plant in British Columbia. 
 
Will the Minister of Economic Development give this house his 
latest version of the controversy and table in the House all 
related documents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I can confirm what I told her last day in 
the House when we talked about this issue, that in fact a loan 
was arranged between the Government of Saskatchewan and 
Intercon. The amount of the loan was $5 million. The 
arrangement was that as new jobs were created, the loan would 
be forgivable at a rate of 12,500 per job over a five-year period, 
if the jobs were maintained for three years. That’s the 
agreement. 
 
The contract and arrangement has been made public. The order 
in council has been made public, and I don’t know what more it 
is that you’re looking for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the 
attention of this House an article in the April 29 edition of 
Maclean’s magazine. This article indicates that Intercontinental 
Packers records an estimated $350 million in sales every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister constantly criticizes the previous 
Conservative government for its addiction to megaprojects. 
Will he then justify providing this firm a $5 million forgivable 
loan when many other Saskatchewan businesses, walking a 
financial tight-rope, have no access to this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) generosity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, that member opposite, 
coming from rural Saskatchewan where a large number of the 
hog production and increased hog production is occurring, it 
amazes me that she doesn’t understand the need to have a meat 
packing industry in the province. 
 
And competing with our neighbours to the west and east in 
Manitoba and Alberta who are putting hundreds of millions of 
dollars of subsidy in the meat packing industry, why you would 
not understand a $5 million loan to a meat packing industry 
which is crucial not only to the thousand or so people who work 
in that plant, but also the farmers who use it, and if it weren’t 
there, would have to haul their cattle and pigs to  

another province. Coming from rural Saskatchewan, you should 
understand that. 
 
But more than that, I don’t understand why you would argue 
when in 1969 the Liberal government of that day put in the first 
$5 million loan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Collective Agreement 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
this House is aware, SaskTel employees returned to work today 
after voting in favour of a tentative agreement. Both union and 
SaskTel say the agreement is fair; however there seems to be 
some confusion about the level of wage and benefit increase. 
The union is indicating today that the package amounts to 7 per 
cent increase, while management spokesmen say the wages and 
benefit total 3 per cent. 
 
Will the minister explain what the true wage and benefit 
package amount to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government, and I want to tell the 
House and the member opposite that the settlement with respect 
to SaskTel is  with respect to wage and benefits  within the 
guidelines and the common mandate of the government as 
negotiated in the past, and as it will negotiate in the future. 
 
We all understand the difficult circumstances  and nobody 
understands it better then the public sector employees  that 
we’ve been placed into in this province of Saskatchewan as a 
result of nine years of Conservative rule, and thankfully the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan are pulling together. 
 
Any other aspects of the contract which have been negotiated 
are essentially at a no-cost aspect to the government and they’re 
within the mandate, and everybody is negotiating within the 
mandate. And it’s a resolve of this government that we stick 
with that, as we will now and in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Premier, I still don’t know the answer 
to the question I asked. A number of other public sector unions 
have been watching the negotiations involving SaskTel very 
closely. Obviously whatever settlement is arrived at in this 
dispute will impact future negotiations. Given the fact that the 
total wage and benefit package for SaskTel employees is  and 
I presume it’s 7 per cent  will the minister tell this House if 
this will now serve as a basis for future bargaining with other 
union organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I am sorry to 
highlight the fact that with the Liberal questions in this House 
there seems to be a large discrepancy with some of the factual 
numbers, as is indicated by the previous questioner on the 
Intercontinental loan, and this one on 7 per cent. It is nowhere  



1318  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

near 7 per cent. It is within guidelines. The guidelines are 3 per 
cent. That is the position the government has taken. 
 
Every contractual settlement has to take into account the special 
circumstances which may pertain to the public sector unit with 
which you’re bargaining. But what we’ve done in the past, and 
what we’ve done in this case, and what we’re going to do with 
respect to the future negotiations  because of the terrible 
position which the province is put in by the Conservative 
administration  is to call on our people, in order to protect 
and save jobs, to settle within mandate. And we settled within 
mandate, as it was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Well, Mr. Premier, if my numbers weren’t 
right, that is why I was asking the question. I really wanted to 
know, and I still don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Manitoba announced this morning 
that his government is proceeding with plans to sell Manitoba 
Tel System. This decision will leave Saskatchewan as the only 
province with a Crown-owned telephone company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the coming years competition now seen in long 
distance and mobile telephone markets will likely be extended 
to the entire range of communication services. Given these 
growing pressures, will the minister in charge of SaskTel 
indicate if privatization of SaskTel is on the agenda of the NDP 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to answer this 
question on behalf of the government as well. The members 
will know that the Government of Saskatchewan has announced 
a thorough Crown review to make sure that the Crown 
corporations which we have in the province of Saskatchewan 
are going to remain solid, strong Crown corporations in the 21st 
century. It’s a check-up. 
 
The Manitoba Telephone sale is an understandable one from 
Manitoba’s point of view. Perhaps it’s done for philosophic 
reasons, perhaps it isn’t, but they are in a debt/equity 
relationship which has virtually put that company in a very 
perilous state. 
 
That is not the case with respect to SaskTel. SaskTel is a very 
healthy, very efficient, technologically modern, very capable 
company, which has helped out in the Chunnel project; which 
has projects internationally including LCL (Leicester 
Communications Limited) London which they recently just 
vacated by way of a sale; and continues to be one of the 
leading-edge companies for call centres and other technological 
matters. 
 
Simply put, it may be the Liberals’ and the Conservatives’ 
agenda to privatize, privatize, privatize, privatize, privatize, by 
ideology; it is not our agenda. Our agenda is to do the best for 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan as we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Taxation 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this afternoon is for the Minister of Finance. Madam 
Minister, your negotiations over native taxation are going 
nowhere. In fact the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) is now planning on taking you to court over the issue. 
They’ve set aside a $175,000 war chest to fight against the 
province charging fuel and tobacco tax on reserve purchases. 
 
Madam Minister, your approach to this issue is clearly failing. 
The FSIN is taking a very hard-line approach. Your casino 
partners are now taking you to court. It’s time to say enough is 
enough, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, how do you intend 
to respond to this type of threat? Will you immediately begin 
collecting the PST (provincial sales tax) from status Indians on 
purchases made off reserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, thank you for that question. Our commitment is to a 
fair taxation system in the province  one that is fair to Indians 
— first nations people — but also one that is fair to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. We have been prepared to discuss this 
matter with the first nations people on the understanding that 
there had to be trade-offs. And as they’ve said publicly, this 
particular leadership is having trouble looking at the issue of 
trade-offs. 
 
I have heard reports that they want to take this issue to court, 
and I think the position of the government on this has been very 
clear as well. We certainly reserve the option, if the Indians 
choose the courts as the route  it’s not our first choice  to 
take the whole Indian taxation regime to the courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Collective Agreement 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is for the minister for SaskTel or the Premier if he chooses. Mr. 
Premier, the new SaskTel contract is now public, and it’s clear 
that you got taken to the cleaners. Union leader Ron Carlson 
has confirmed that the total package will cost 7 per cent — 
close to it — now more than double your stated guidelines of 3 
per cent for the public sector employees. 
 
Wage hikes, medical benefits, and eight days off and free 
RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan) are a part of the 
package, and they count, Mr. Premier. And it’s a pretty sweet 
deal, except for the people that have to pay. 
 
Mr. Premier, how much is your 7 per cent solution going to cost 
the people of Saskatchewan; why have you exceeded your 3 per 
cent guidelines that you yourself set; and doesn’t this set a 
dangerous precedence for future public negotiations; and are 
you now saying that Ron Carlson’s figures are not accurate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the answer that I’ve 
given already to the Liberal questioner, I have to repeat with 
respect to the Conservative questioner: the mandate of the 
government is that there should be a 3 per cent increase over 3 
years, and that is essentially what the situation is with respect to 
wages and the benefits indicated with respect to SaskTel. 
 
What the hon. member there is attempting to do is to compute 
an aspect of the arrangement which concerns with the surplus 
of the pension plan, which in one form or another has to be 
returned and redistributed, likely in substance to the employees. 
It’s a no-cost benefit  no cost charged essentially to the 
company  and therefore is in the mandate. 
 
Now Mr. Carlson may put his spin on it. He can do whatever he 
wants to do and explain it however he wants it. That is the 
position of the government because of the unique circumstances 
which are available to SaskTel. The government remains 
committed to the common mandate as it has in the past and as it 
will in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental for the Premier. Mr. Premier, I challenge you to 
extend the so-called no-cost benefits to every other worker in 
Saskatchewan and maybe to the rest of us here as well. I think 
you’ll find out it’s pretty expensive. 
 
We really have to question who’s running the show over there. 
You set strict guidelines and say that you’re going to stick with 
your 3 per cent increase, and of course you didn’t stick with 
that in this case. And then Don Ching takes over and the 
guidelines go out the window. Now it’s pretty clear to see 
who’s running things at SaskTel, and it ain’t you, Mr. Premier. 
 
Now your old buddy and your old room-mate has come right 
into this situation and we want to know why, as soon as he did, 
why did SaskTel’s bargaining position suddenly break down; 
why, as soon as Don Ching took over, everything went out the 
window; and why can’t you rein this man in, instead of letting 
him cut these kind of sweetheart deals that are going to cost the 
people of Saskatchewan millions of dollars in benefits and in 
future settlements with other unions? Why did you do this, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  It’s a very . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Ching’s a very difficult man to rein in. He’s about as physically 
large as the hon. member from Cypress Hills, so difficult to rein 
in. 
 
But the answer is simply this, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel’s pension 
fund is in a surplus position, has been in a surplus position. By 
federal provisions, federal laws, and this now being a federally 
regulated company in 1998 under the CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission), and 
federal pension, federal income tax laws, the surplus has to be 
disposed of. 
 

It’s got to be disposed of in a way, since it’s essentially the 
money of the employees  not in all instances  back to the 
employees. The money sits there, and that’s exactly where the 
solution was found. 
 
I’ve said that we have to find solutions within the mandate 
which are specific to the sector-by-sector area. 
 
The surpluses do not exist in any substantial numbers in any of 
the other areas. It did in this case, and what happened was the 
negotiators of SaskTel and the CEP (Communications, Energy 
and Paperworkers Union of Canada) looked around 
constructively to come to a proper and fair settlement to the 
mutual benefit of everybody, and above all, the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it wouldn’t have to have done that if it hadn’t been you 
people bankrupting this province for nine years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Districts Funding 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, while 
your NDP government gives SaskTel workers a sweetheart deal, 
including extended medical coverage, hospitals continue to 
close and health services continue to be cut all over the 
province. 
 
Yesterday the South Central Health District announced the 
closure of the Pangman Hospital. The Bengough Health Centre 
will have its hours cut by more than 50 per cent, the Souris 
Valley extended care facility has been cut by 20 beds, the 
Weyburn mental health centre has lost two beds, and 46 jobs 
have been cut. 
 
That’s just one health district, Mr. Minister. We probably can 
expect to see similar cuts all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think it’s fair that your government has 
money to give a 7 per cent raise to SaskTel workers while vital 
health care services are being cut? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t accept the premiss 
behind the member’s question. I believe that the settlement with 
SaskTel workers was within the government’s mandate, but I 
also don’t accept the member’s premiss that we’re 
underfunding the health system. 
 
I would remind the member that for every dollar that was taken 
out of health by the federal Liberals, this government, in their 
recent budget, put a dollar back in, which is a far cry from the 
province of Alberta, which has cut health care spending by 15 
per cent, and a far cry from the Conservatives also in Manitoba, 
Mr. Speaker, which recently cut their spending on health care 
by 37 million in their recent budget. 
 
Unlike the Conservatives and the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, we’re  



1320  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

continuing to fund the health care system at a reasonable and 
appropriate level to meet the health care needs of the people of 
the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, the South Central Health District 
had to make these cuts due to an offload, not from the federal 
government, but an offload of $1.4 million from their budget, 
cut by your government. Your $500 RRSP give-away to 3,600 
SaskTel employees will cost $1.8 million a year. 
 
These are your priorities, Mr. Minister  more money for the 
SaskTel union, less money for health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, last night CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) news reported that 31 more rural hospitals are 
being considered for closure. Will you confirm that, Mr. 
Minister? And will you table a list of 31 hospitals your 
government is about to close? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  There is no such list to be tabled, Mr. 
Speaker. The member is referring to the fact that the media 
reported that there were 31 hospitals that treat fewer than 10 
patients per day. That’s what the media was referring to. 
 
The member wants to get people worked up and to say that 
there’s some secret list of 31 hospitals that are about to close. 
That’s what the member says, Mr. Speaker; that’s not what the 
government says. 
 
We’re going to help the health districts do some proper 
planning to meet the needs of the people in their communities. 
And that certainly includes the South Central Health District, 
Mr. Speaker, which is being funded on the basis of its 
population and the needs of the community, and has come up 
with a plan to deal with the finances that are available in that 
district to deal with any potential deficit. 
 
And I might say that if that member’s party had done likewise 
when it was in government we wouldn’t face the kinds of 
problems and pressures that we face today in health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Medical Treatment in United States 
 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
questions, too, are for the Minister of Health this afternoon. Mr. 
Minister, you’re well aware of the fact that Janet Lommer is in 
the fourth stage of multiple chemical sensitivity syndrome 
which means that she has numerous tumours and is unable to 
eat any food of any kind. 
 
She cannot be treated in Canada but your department refuses to 
pay for her to receive help in the United States, and my question 
to you is why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I do . . . I am concerned about 
the situation that Janet Lommer finds herself in, but I want to  

say to the member that her facts are not correct. 
 
Notwithstanding the fact that we have not had any referral to a 
medical committee that normally looks into these matters, I’ve 
asked the officials at the Department of Health to look into this 
matter. They have communicated with the medical people at the 
National Jewish Center in Denver, who are some of the leading 
people to treat this kind of illness. 
 
Those medical people have confirmed with our officials that it 
is not necessary that Janet Lommer be treated there or in Dallas, 
as she has reported, or indeed in the United States, and they feel 
that she can be returned to Canada for treatment. That is the 
advice I have from the officials in the department who have 
communicated with the medical people in the United States. 
 
We will make medical care available to Janet Lommer in 
accordance with the medical advice we receive. 
 
I want to say to the member that it is not the system that any 
individual can go to a foreign country, run up medical bills and 
send them back to Saskatchewan for payment. If we adopt that 
kind of system, we won’t be taking care of people right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, well I too 
spoke with people in Denver yesterday, but I spoke with Janet 
Lommer’s specialist. And he made it clear that there is only one 
place  one place — that can treat four-stage MCS (multiple 
chemical sensitivity syndrome) patients, and that is in Dallas. 
 
Now your compassionate government, sir, has cut off Ms 
Lommer’s welfare because she went to the United States 
without permission from your department, which is permission, 
by the way, which she has desperately been seeking since her 
condition has continued to deteriorate. 
 
Now what are you prepared to do to save her life? Because this 
is now life-threatening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I am going to do what I 
should properly do in the interests of Ms. Lommer, and that is 
to take the appropriate advice from the medical officials. That’s 
what I’m going to do. 
 
The advice I have received from the medical officials in the 
department, and they advised me they have communicated with 
the people at the National Jewish Center in Denver, is that 
appropriate treatment is available for Ms. Lommer in Canada. 
And until I receive advice to the contrary I’m going to invite 
Ms. Lommer to come back to Canada and to be appropriately 
treated. 
 
But it’s not for the member or for myself, Mr. Speaker, to make 
a medical judgement in this issue. All we can properly do is 
take appropriate advice from the medical people as to what 
should appropriately be done. That’s what I feel it is my duty to 
do, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what I’m going to do. 
 



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I’m asking you 
this one thing today. Will you produce written evidence that 
proves unequivocally that treatment is available in Canada for 
four-stage MCS, and expedite Ms. Lommer’s admission there 
immediately. And if you cannot do that by 5 o’clock today, will 
you approve that she receive treatment in Dallas Tri-City 
Hospital? If your officials have this information, sir, you should 
be able to provide it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, my officials have information 
about this case. But what I want to say to the member is that I 
am not going to get into the personal aspects of Ms. Lommer’s 
medical condition in the House or in public. That also would be 
a violation of my duty and responsibility. 
 
I want to say to the member that I am going to make sure, as I 
have been making sure, that this matter is appropriately looked 
into, is appropriately investigated, and that we get the 
appropriate advice. 
 
If the member is saying that I should be revealing in public, 
particulars of Janet Lommer’s medical condition that officials 
may be aware of in the Department of Health in assessing this 
matter, and that this is the place to debate her personal 
circumstances, I can only say to the member, I just don’t agree 
with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you know full 
well I did not ask you to disclose anything about Janet 
Lommer’s case. What I’ve asked you for is to simply get your 
officials, who you have informed today, this very House, that 
they already have the information that states where she can go 
in this country and receive treatment for four-stage MCS . . .  
 
I am telling you that there is no place in Canada. You are 
stating there is. Would you please provide the members of this 
House with that information. And if there is a place available 
and my information is false, will you ensure that she can be 
expedited there immediately in order to save her life? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What I am saying to the member and to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, is that I have had this matter looked into. 
The advice I have received, Mr. Speaker, is that treatment for 
Ms. Lommer’s condition is available in Canada. I have received 
that advice from officials of the department. They have received 
that advice, they tell me, from the people in Denver. 
 
For me to say to the member exactly where Ms. Lommer should 
be treated or what treatment she would receive, would 
necessarily involve me discussing personal medical 
characteristics with respect to Ms. Lommer. That is something I 
am not going to do in this case, or in any case. But I want to 
assure the member and the House, Mr. Speaker, that the matter 
is going to be appropriately dealt with. It has been investigated 
and we will continue to appropriately deal with it. And we will 
provide Ms. Lommer with the medical care that Ms. Lommer 
requires. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Poverty 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier, the father image of our province. 
Mr. Premier, hungry children across the province must be 
shocked and saddened by the Premier’s comments yesterday 
concerning their impoverished conditions. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Premier, you sloughed off your 1991 campaign 
promise to end child poverty in your first term of office. In a 
media interview you stated: 
 

No party can campaign in these times without promising to 
end child poverty, because that’s what people want. 

 
You also stated in that media scrum with Saskatchewan 
reporters yesterday, that your 1991 election promise to 
eliminate child poverty is a promise that has to be made and it’s 
a promise that has to be kept. 
 
Mr. Premier, a man of your stature must hold himself 
accountable for his promises. This issue of child poverty is a 
serious issue and our children are precious. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The member has been quite 
lengthy in her preamble and I’ll ask her to put her question 
directly. 
 
Ms. Julé:  How will you show the impoverished children of 
this province that you will keep your promise, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the first point that I want 
to make is that  and I want to say this with mixed emotions; 
some pride and also some regret  but I want to point out to 
the House that it is only this party and this government that has 
made such a promise in Saskatchewan. It’s silence from the 
Liberals and the Conservatives, who seemingly have indicated 
no concern or, if any concern, very little concern. 
 
Time does not permit me to outline a number of important facts, 
such as the children’s action plan and the range of activities that 
the children’s action plan implements. And the fact that in 
every successive budget that we’ve had introduced  in 
fighting the deficit imposed upon us by the federal Liberals and 
their budgets and the offload on block transfers, and fighting 
the nine years of the Conservatives  in every budget I’m 
proud to say the amount of money for social services and those 
who are kids in need and families in need has never been cut; it 
has always been increased  has always been increased. 
 
We are going to continue working at this thing steadily and 
continually. We have not achieved it, that is for sure, but it’s a 
promise that we’re going to continue to work steadily away at. 
And I can say we’re proud to say that, and I’m ashamed that 
neither of the opposition parties are committed to that task. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1322  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, with leave, to move a couple of motions with respect to the 
Regulations Committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, it is traditional at this 
time in the session to establish a Regulations Committee. For 
reasons that aren’t entirely clear to me, it is not a standing 
committee, rather it is a special committee which requires a 
resolution at each session. The resolution is a couple of pages in 
length. I will read it: 
 

That members Belanger, Draude, Heppner, Jess, Koenker, 
Murrell, Sonntag, Ward, and Whitmore be constituted a 
special committee to consider every regulation filed with 
the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly pursuant to the 
provisions of The Regulations Act, 1989, with a view to 
determining whether the special attention of the Assembly 
should be drawn to any of the said regulations on any of 
the following grounds: 

 
(1) that it imposes a charge on the public revenues or 
prescribes a payment to be made to any public authority 
not specifically provided for by statute; 
 
(2) that it is excluded from challenge in the court; 
 
(3) that it makes unusual or unexpected use of powers 
conferred by statute; 
 
(4) that it purports to have a retrospective effect where the 
parent statute confers no express authority so to provide; 
 
(5) that it has been insufficiently promulgated; 
 
(6) that it is not clear in meaning; 

 
that the committee have the assistance of the Legislative 
Counsel and Clerk in reviewing the said regulations, and 
that it be required prior to the reporting that the special 
attention of the Assembly be drawn to any regulation, to 
inform the government department or authority concerned 
of its intention so to report; and 

 
that the committee be empowered to invite any 
regulation-making authority to submit a memorandum 
explaining any regulation which may be under 
consideration by the committee, or to invite any 
regulation-making authority to appear before the 
committee as a witness for the purpose of explaining any 
such regulation; and 

 
that the committee be empowered to review the by-laws of 
professional associations and amendments thereto to  

determine whether or not they are in any way prejudicial to 
the public interest. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Bylaws of the Professional Associations and 
Amendments to the Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you. This one’s much shorter, 
mercifully. I move, seconded by the member from Humboldt 
. . . I’m sorry, the member from Watrous: 
 

That the by-laws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto tabled during previous legislatures 
and not ratified by the committee, and the by-laws and 
amendments as tabled in the present session be referred to 
the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Watrous. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In keeping with our attempts to be an 
open, accessible government, I table the answer to question 81. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 81 is tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, Mr. Speaker, in keeping 
with our reputation, our growing reputation, as an open and 
accessible government, I table the answer to question no. 82. 
 
The Speaker:  The question to no. 82 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 70  An Act 
to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to address this House on the subject 
of Bill 70, entitled The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 
1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a large and complex Bill which changes the 
law regarding urban municipalities in a great many ways. It 
comes after what the government claims was a lengthy and  



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

comprehensive series of consultations with the urban 
municipalities of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it may have been a lengthy and 
comprehensive series of consultations, but the government does 
not seem to have heard what the people said  either that, or 
the government has conveniently chosen to forget what the 
people said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look back through the consultative process 
and look through the details of this Bill, I am profoundly 
disappointed by the end results. Although many of the 
recommendations of the cities and towns were considered, it is 
quite evident by reading this legislation that the government 
could not risk the temptation to ignore these recommendations, 
and instead, create a vast new regulatory scheme over and 
above the already plentiful supply of municipal government 
legislation that we already have in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the broad purpose of this new assessment 
legislation — and here I’m referring to Bill 70, 71, the 
amendments to The Urban Municipality Act, The Rural 
Municipality Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act — the 
broad purpose of these Acts was to move toward a simple, 
easy-to-understand, market-value approach for the assessment 
of land and buildings. 
 
This was an admirable purpose, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately this 
admirable purpose was not achieved. What we have instead is a 
complex regulatory scheme whereby the provincial government 
will have the power to define classes of property and set 
percentages of value to be applied to property assessment in 
these classes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, in its position paper delivered to the former 
minister of Municipal Government in October 1995, made it 
clear that the urban municipalities favoured using 100 per cent 
assessment values for all property classes as the starting point 
for local tax decision making. Mr. Speaker, the government has 
completely ignored that position. 
 
The government has decided to give itself the power to create 
different classes of property, possibly dozens or even hundreds 
of different classes of property, each with a different percentage 
of assessment value to be used as a starting point for the 
calculation of property tax. This, Mr. Speaker, is a confusing 
and complicated new element to be considered in the field of 
municipal tax planning. 
 
Another representation with which the government heard from 
far and wide in its consultative process was an earnest plea that 
if different classes of property were going to be created, each 
with different percentages of assessed value to be used as a 
basis of tax calculation, then they should be created by statute 
and not by regulation. This would allow for stability in 
long-range planning on the part of the municipalities. Here 
again the government simply chose to ignore the plea. They 
have thrown the consultative process out the window. The 
different classes of property will be set by regulation, Mr. 
Speaker. 

This is a disturbing trend that we have seen in many of the 
important pieces of legislation that have been before this House 
during this session. It’s a disturbing trend that we see in a lot of 
NDP legislation. Instead of allowing elected representatives of 
the people to hear the proposals for the classification system for 
different types of property and debate it, the government has 
decided to use the power to create these different classes behind 
closed doors, by regulation. The same is true with the different 
ways of other assessments. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t the government bring its proposed 
system of classification of different types of property before this 
House? Why not let us see it and comment about it? Why not 
let us have a debate about it? Who knows? The government 
might even be persuaded to change its classification system 
after listening to the comments of members in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the classification system is the heart and soul of 
this Bill, the meat and potatoes, the real substance. And where 
is it, Mr. Speaker? It’s going to be published sometime in the 
future in the regulations. I don’t think that’s satisfactory, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think that that’s open government. I don’t think 
that that’s consultative government. I think that’s another 
instance of government by regulation, government by executive 
fiat, government by executive decree. 
 
On top of this power to create and determine classes of property 
by regulation, the provincial government will also have the 
power to set the percentages of value to be applied to property 
assessment in these deregulated classes. This power has also 
been set forth in the regulations. In other words, the provincial 
government will have the authority to tell municipalities how to 
classify property within their boundaries, but also what 
percentage of the assessed value to use when levying municipal 
property tax on these properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an enormous power grab on the part of this 
provincial government. Why not simply use 100 per cent of the 
assessed value as a starting point and then decide on mill rates, 
either one mill rate across the board or several mill rates if 
that’s what the councillors in an urban municipality decide, if 
they want more than one mill rate. The power of the provincial 
government to set percentages of assessed value for the 
determination of municipal property tax, based on varying 
classes of property which are supposed to apply province-wide, 
is an unprecedented use of the power of the Legislative 
Assembly to intervene in local affairs. 
 
But the power grab does not stop here, Mr. Speaker, nor does 
the complexity of the new system. Under this Bill, the 
municipalities will be able to adjust the amount of property tax 
each taxpayer may be required to pay by using variable mill rate 
factors. This is supposed to give the municipalities some 
flexibility to make the transition from the present outdated 
municipal assessment system to the new assessment process 
easier on the individual taxpayer. 
 
It is supposed to achieve that purpose, Mr. Speaker, but for the 
reasons that follow, it is not at all clear if that purpose will be  



1324  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

achieved. The new, flexible mill rate factors will give the 
municipalities the ability to adjust the property tax amount . . . 
specific property classes. The mill rate will be set, and then it 
will be multiplied by factors for the different property classes. 
This sounds at first like an admirable idea. It sounds like the 
government is finally recognizing the need to give the 
municipalities some degree of responsibility in the adjustment 
process from the old assessment values to the new ones, which 
are tentatively scheduled to come into force on January 1, ’97. 
 
But let’s look more closely, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look behind the 
rhetoric and the hoop-la. When we examine the text of the 
legislation closely, Mr. Speaker, we see that the provincially 
defined property classes must be used by the municipalities 
when they set their mill rate factors. They cannot create classes 
of property that the bureaucracy in Regina may not have 
thought of; classes of property that might make more sense in 
North Battleford or Swift Current than the classes designated in 
the regulations by the officials in Regina. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, this is a one-size-fits-all approach that is 
being offered by this government. We’re still, even when the 
municipality uses a centrally designated classification system 
and sets mill rate factors using that system . . . the provincial 
government can intervene again and essentially override the 
municipal decision again by regulation. 
 
So let’s get this straight. The government is telling us that the 
new system is flexible and that the municipalities can ease the 
burden of transition from the old assessment to the new 
assessment in ways that make sense locally. But the government 
has given itself the following powers: the power to create and 
define and change the various classes of property; the power to 
set and determine and change from time to time the percentage 
of assessed values that the municipality must use for each and 
every class of property following assessment, to use as a 
starting point in the calculation of the amount of property tax 
that is to be charged on these properties; and the power to 
intervene again if it doesn’t like the mill rate factors that a 
particular urban municipality has decided to impose on the 
various classes of properties within the municipal boundaries 
and force the effective rates of taxation either up or down 
towards the desired rate at the whim of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the responsibility in this package? Where 
is the spirit of cooperation in this legislative agenda? This is a 
top-down approach, not a consultative approach. All power and 
authority is kept close to the vest. Mr. Speaker, this is just not a 
matter of politeness or forthrightness. The lack of any real plan 
or commitment has real and genuine monetary consequences 
for urban municipalities. There’s no indication of a plan or a 
commitment to set up fixed percentages of value. These 
percentages could change one year, and then change again the 
next year and again the next, and so on and so on. There’s no 
schedule, or plan to introduce a schedule, to gradually eliminate 
the differences. The government can simply tinker with the 
values at their own pace. 
 
What is the result? The result is that the municipalities cannot 
plan. They cannot give meaningful revenue projections for their 
future needs. They must always keep in mind that the provincial  

government may decide to change the rules regarding 
classification of properties and the percentage of assessed value 
that apply to them. Mr. Speaker, this effectively takes away the 
legitimate rights of local urban municipalities to set their own 
taxation policies within reasonable limits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government had done its homework before 
introducing this legislation, it would have been able to 
announce fixed or at least flexible percentage which they had 
planned to use and then put them in the legislation. 
 
Another major disappointment with this Act is the area dealing 
with vacancy adjustment where there is no business tax. The 
new rules will alter sections 240, subsections (3) to (12) of the 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal administrators tell us that this is an 
incredibly complex area to manage, but the best government 
can do is promise that we will deal with this again by 
regulation. It is the municipalities who will have to manage this 
matter, and yet all the government can promise at this point is 
more regulations to come sometime in the future. 
 
Remember, when there is no separate business tax and multiple 
tenants in a building, the property tax is paid by the owner of 
the building. The owner presumably recovers this tax from his 
tenants in the form of increased lease payments or rent 
payments. If a business closes part way through a year, 
someone is going to get stuck with a shortage of revenue. We 
ask: is it going to be the building owner, the municipality, or the 
provincial government who instituted the system in the first 
place? At this point, all we can tell our constituents is that we 
just don’t know because we still don’t have any of the 
regulations. 
 
Another serious deficiency in the Act is the way it tries to deal 
with the local option as to whether to impose a business tax. We 
are happy to see that the local option to retain a business tax 
remains, but the Bill is designed to cause municipalities, school 
boards, and health districts to fight among themselves. 
 
If we look carefully at the new version, section 243(1), we see 
that it is almost impossible for municipalities to enter into 
meaningful discussions with other taxing authorities until the 
regulations are put forward and the detailed assessment figures 
are known. 
 
It’s quite evident that a municipality is not going to be able to 
reach a just and fair agreement with the other taxing authorities 
until the reassessments are complete, which is not expected to 
be done until October or November of this year. This has to be 
completed along with the publication of the complex 
regulations that I spoke about earlier and the costing out of the 
options of a business tax versus a variable mill rate before the 
minister can really expect the towns and cities of this province 
to try to reach agreements with the other taxing authorities that 
will be in the interest of all taxpayers in the vicinity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is just simply not reasonable to ask the 
municipalities to enter into these negotiations with the other 
taxing authorities when they do not have all the important,  



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

necessary information. It’s just like asking a bridge player to 
play a hand of bridge when you don’t let him see the cards in 
his own hand. Or it’s like starting a hockey game and 
announcing that the referee fully intends to make up new rules 
part way through the second period but only one team will 
know what the rule changes are going to be. It’s just not fair, 
and further, Mr. Speaker, it’s wasteful. 
 
Under this Bill, there are provisions for what is supposed to 
happen if the attempt to reach an agreement between the 
municipality and the other taxing authorities fail. A whole 
further new set of calculations and computations must be used 
in order to satisfy what may be only in the interest of one of the 
participants. 
 
Some further points need to be mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 
Although the local option to retain a business tax remains, the 
failure is that the two existing methods disappear and a new 
business tax method is imposed which may impose serious 
shifts in the business tax burden. There has been no structured 
model created to show what these shifts will be, even though 
the urban municipalities have been asking for this type of model 
for more than five years. 
 
I am happy to see that the government has finally agreed to the 
creation of additional local assessment appeal panels. This is a 
reform long overdue, but I am glad to see that it has finally been 
enacted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw your attention to section 239.01. 
This section prohibits the use of the income approach in 
assessment until information can be gathered. This may sound 
like a good idea but it begs the question: when will the income 
approach be used in the future? Wouldn’t it be a good idea for 
the government to commit itself to a sunset clause on section 
239.01 sometime in the future? 
 
Another question must be asked in relation to oil and gas 
production equipment. Mr. Speaker, this is not the time or the 
place for a detailed discussion on oil and gas taxation, but I 
have to ask the question: why is the Bill giving a break for 
assessment of oil well casings and business assessment on 
resource production equipment which will adversely affect 
municipal income, when the government continues to charge 
royalties considerably in excess of those charged in Alberta? 
The government takes from the oil and gas industry for its own 
coffers but punishes the municipality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these and other questions we will ask when we 
move to committee, and we have no further general comments 
at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 72  An Act 
to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a 
consequential amendment to another Act be now read a  

second time. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today to discuss the proposed amendments to 
The Northern Municipalities Act. As many of us here today are 
probably well aware, any issue that has any impacts, be they 
direct or indirect, on the people of northern Saskatchewan 
interest me a great deal. 
 
I not only find great interest in these pieces of legislation, but 
I’m usually quite concerned about the reasons for the 
amendments proposed  the impact that they’ll have on the 
people that I represent and the consequences that will surely 
arise some years down the road. It is for this reason and many 
others that I cannot just stand here and watch this piece of 
legislation move through the House today without raising some 
issues and concerns that the people of my constituency have 
brought to my attention. 
 
It is good to see the government finally seeing and realizing the 
importance of the people in municipalities of northern 
Saskatchewan with respect to make-up, development, and 
culture. The Northern Municipalities Act outlines the duties, 
powers, and responsibilities of northern municipal 
governments. 
 
Amendments to this Bill are similar to the amendments to the 
urban and rural municipalities Act, an Act we will discuss later. 
However, changes of all three of these Acts may give 
municipalities the ability to manage the effect of property 
assessments. Many of these amendments are done to bring this 
Act into conformity with other pieces of legislation that deal 
with land assessment, appeal provisions, and the authority to 
manage the tax incidence. 
 
(1445) 
 
This Bill intends to expand the municipal authority and 
autonomy in making tax policy decisions. It also gives the 
provincial government the authority to define property classes 
and set values to be applied to property assessment. Property 
class would be defined province-wide and property assessments 
are to stimulate economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is in drastic need of 
economic development, and the question that we have is, will 
property assessment be enough to get the northern economy on 
an upswing? 
 
Some of the changes to the definitions are simply for 
housekeeping reasons, Mr. Speaker, and to ensure the 
consistencies of definitions throughout the Act. Some 
definitions are changed to make them consistent with terms 
used by the natural gas industry, and sections dealing with 
petitions are repealed and replaced by similar sections further 
on in this Bill. 
 
Small business is very concerned about these Bills that deal 
with municipal reassessment legislation, as they are concerned 
about the excessive use of tax tools given to local governments 
without a consistent and firm leadership by the provincial  



1326  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

government to safeguard economic development and local job 
creations. The Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
would like to see more provincial leadership and order. 
 
This same association would like to see the provincial 
government avoid massive variation in commercial tax levels 
amongst municipalities. Municipalities can adjust the amount of 
property tax paid by having the option to use variable mill rate 
factors. There’s also a new subsection that deals with the 
variable mill rates and how they differ from the property taxes. 
 
Northern municipalities would also be given the option of 
removing the separate business assessment and tax. The 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business was supportive 
of efforts to modernize the province’s assessment system 
because, over the past 30 years, the Saskatchewan business 
community has accrued one of the highest local tax rates 
amongst all provinces in Canada. As well, municipal tax 
reassessment could be a chance to restore local tax fairness and 
to stimulate economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the North need policies and 
programs that will assist and make them competitive, not only 
with the rest of the province but also with the rest of the 
country. 
 
The government has also made some changes that should make 
the oil and gas industry happy. This new Act allows machinery 
and equipment, including well casings, to be exempt from 
assessment and to no longer be taxed. This can help improve 
Saskatchewan’s competitiveness with other provinces and 
countries. 
 
Independent business is concerned that local governments have 
been given an unrestricted array of tax tools to mitigate sudden 
tax shifts. The concern on the part of the small business is that 
local government may be able to use these tax tools to provide 
even more inequitable tax shift onto business in an attempt to 
appease the voting general public. 
 
There are a number of reasons for these concerns by business. 
Number one, business and home-owners may no longer unite in 
sharing a common mill rate, may become a tempting target for 
excessive revenue generation by local governments. 
 
Legislation also allows some municipalities to eliminate a 
supplementary local business tax, but this benefit may be offset 
by a new variable mill rate system for the reason that it is not 
restricted or capped. 
 
Environmental and ecological concerns are being met. Ways to 
deal with the disposal of junk material, this is probably good in 
this new Act, but at what cost will the municipalities face? 
 
Assessment appeals and those who can file them are clearly laid 
out in this Bill and this could only be positive. The process 
provides an avenue for people to challenge assessment values if 
they believe that errors have been made. Again this is also 
positive. 
 
District boards of revision may be appointed by northern  

municipalities to hear and decide appeals from within that 
municipality. Changes to the assessment appeal processes made 
in the Bill are done in order to streamline and improve the 
process. This is also good. 
 
Business or property owners, assessors, SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency), taxing authorities, may all 
be parties through an appeal at the local board of revision level. 
 
Business or property owners, assessors, and SAMA are 
probably pretty positive in reference to the appeal process. 
However there’s some concern as in reference to the minister in 
terms of authorization, who could authorize the levies set by a 
northern hamlet. They could also set the mill rate and to look at 
the whole district at a uniform rate. This may pose some 
problems. 
 
Council may provide for a minimum amount of taxes to be 
levied with respect to any land improvements or business. Mr. 
Speaker, this will take more than an amendment to a Bill to 
improve and enhance the development of municipalities in the 
northern part of this province. 
 
We need job creation in the North. We need economic 
development. We need adequate health care and social services. 
We need roads that connect the communities in the far North to 
the rest of this province. And people in the North say things 
have to be improved substantially. 
 
What they do is, they bring in a forestry Bill that will do 
nothing but discourage mining and lumber companies in 
northern communities from shutting up shop in this province 
and participating in this economy. 
 
I must also question why the government’s giving oil industries 
a break with regards to assessment of oil well casings and 
business assessment on resource production equipment, which 
will also reduce municipal income with nothing to fill in its 
place. This government continues to charge royalties greatly in 
excess of those charged in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge this government to work with the people of 
the North, come up with some workable solutions for the 
problems that are plaguing the northern communities in this 
province. 
 
Some of the questions we have is how much consultation really 
went into the formulation of this Bill, who did they consult 
with, and is it like the forestry Act where they formulate the 
piece of legislation, then went north to talk to the people 
affected by the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to stakeholders and gained some legal 
insight into the ramifications of this Bill should it be passed 
into law. I have more concerns and more questions and more 
research needed on this particular Bill and I’ll deal with that in 
detail in the Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

Bill No. 71 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 71  An Act to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
adjourned this Bill, but I’ve had time now to check into it a 
little more closely and at this time we would be willing to have 
it passed on to committee. We can ask our questions there. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting 
Highways and Vehicles 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
pleased this afternoon to introduce my officials from SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Seated to my right is 
Mr. John Wright, who is the president of SGI. Seated just 
behind him is Anna Young, who is the manager of the traffic 
safety program at SGI. And seated directly behind me, Mr. 
Chairman, is Mr. Bill McCallum, who’s the manager of driver 
licensing. Those are my officials, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to 
the Assembly. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to welcome you and your officials . . . to allow us an 
opportunity to perhaps clarify certain issues within this 
particular Bill. And I ask for your indulgence in perhaps not 
specifically following the sections in order, that I may just kind 
of jump around a little bit. And I know my colleagues will have 
some of the questions to ask as well for clarification purposes. 
 
I would like to start off, first of all, with reference to the school 
buses. Again just to have you underline the specific reasons for 
buses . . . they’re now to stop in the middle of the highways. Is 
there some assurances that that will not increase the dangers to 
the children that are loading and unloading from the buses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 
to the member from Melville, first to say that I’d be pleased that 
we look at various parts of the Act without having to follow any 
sequence and certainly more than pleased to do that. 
 
I think this question that you asked today, Mr. Member, is very 
similar to the issue that you raised yesterday in your second 
reading speech. And the response to this of course is that what 
you see in the Act is basically just a correction, a variance to the 
Act. Under the existing Act  and I might just read this 
because I’d made a note of it  a school bus approaching from  

the opposite direction would have to stop at least 30 metres 
from a parked bus. This would require children to walk 30 
metres to change buses, while another section of the Act allows 
vehicles approaching from the rear of a parked school bus to 
stop 5 metres from the bus. So really what this is, Mr. Member, 
is just a correction in a variance in the Act. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. So just to clarify, it now allows the 
bus to stop more on the highway rather than pull all the way 
over to the right-hand side, extreme right-hand side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  What this does, Mr. Member, is it just 
reduces the distance between the buses that are in fact stopped. 
But they still must stop on the right-hand side of the highway. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Is this, and perhaps some of the 
other changes to this particular Bill  and we will touch on 
them and probably ask the questions at that time  is this law 
similar to what’s in existence in other provinces? And I expect 
that people throughout are as concerned about our young 
people, our school children, as we are here. So is that much 
along the same lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, to the member, this would 
be consistent. This piece of legislation would be consistent with 
what we’re finding in other parts of the country. That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Osika:  On another topic, and that’s dealing with 
headlights on vehicles, or the use of, how does this in fact 
compare to what was in place prior to this Bill now being 
proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well with the new vehicles that we have 
now, Mr. Member, the headlights come on automatically when 
the vehicles are started. And the old vehicles of course, it was 
necessary in many instances to turn on your headlights. As I’ve 
said, the new vehicles, the headlights come on when you start 
the vehicles. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Yes, but does the government then now have the 
authority to require mandatory running lights on all vehicles? 
And if not, those vehicles who do not come equipped with 
those types of automatic running lights, will the law now state 
that if you are driving during the daytime and you have manual 
lights, will you be required to pull them on . . . or put them on? 
And if that’s not in place, would you support that kind of a 
requirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  The response to the member is that since 
1989 of course, it’s been mandatory that the motor vehicle 
lights come on at the start of a vehicle. Prior to 1989 there was 
no requirement to do that, and this legislation isn’t suggesting 
that that would be a requirement. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the second part 
of my question was: would you in fact support that, and should 
that not perhaps be included — where it becomes mandatory 
and enforceable? 



1328  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that 
the member is suggesting that . . . at least I’m thinking that the 
member is suggesting that in terms of the safety factor, it would 
be significant that vehicles that are proceeding down roadways 
today have their lights turned on, and we certainly support that. 
And that’s why in fact we have, since 1989, vehicles that are 
built and are made where the headlights come on automatically. 
 
Of course if we were to make that kind of request in legislation 
now where we would have it mandatory, the cost of course 
would be significantly prohibitive for consumers, and that 
would be our major cost. As the member knows, as we move 
along with the years and as vehicles are replaced, we’re going 
to find that we’ll have more and more vehicles that will have 
the automatic lights on as opposed to the manual requirement to 
turn the lights on when you get into your vehicle. 
 
Mr. Osika:  So at this point in time there is no enforcement 
of that particular requirement. Is that correct? Okay. In other 
words then, if in fact people who do not have automatic lights, 
there are no provisions in place to in fact enforce that 
requirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Chairman, currently, certainly 
there is no legal requirement at this point in time for people 
who are proceeding during the daylight hours to have their 
lights turned on. Certainly I expect that this would be a 
subjective decision that would be made by someone who might 
have been practising, or is practising today, in the same capacity 
that you did in the past. If someone is driving past what might 
be considered the daylight hours and a member of the 
enforcement came along and would suggest that it would be 
unsafe for that individual to be doing that, if it was a manual 
requirement to turn your headlights on, that would be a 
subjective decision at this point in time that would in fact be 
made by the enforcement officer. But there is nothing in 
legislation at this point that suggests that that should be the 
case. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I guess you’re saying that it would 
be at the discretion or decision of the law enforcement officer. 
Are there encouragements to the law enforcement agencies to 
suggest that perhaps . . . and, Mr. Minister, as you and I do, we 
travel the highways and byways and oftentimes there are those 
people who drive without their lights on in conditions that may 
be considered not that bad, other than folks driving into the 
sunset, if you wish, and oncoming vehicles without lights on do 
create a hazard. So I guess my question is, are you encouraging 
law enforcement agencies to take note of those types of 
situations? And if you are, how do you do that, how are you 
doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Certainly, Mr. Member, what we have had 
in Saskatchewan for some time, recognizing as you have, the 
significance of having the ability to see a vehicle on a roadway 
can be better demonstrated if they have their headlights on, and 
of course in Saskatchewan and through SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) we have a number of programs that are 
in place right now which are called Lights on for Life. 
 
And not only do we promote that via the medias from time to  

time, but you see it on our roadways in signage. And we 
recognize, as you do, as manufacturers do, that there is 
significant value in having your lights on as a motorist, and 
we’re certainly encouraging that on the part of SGI. 
 
And I know that that message is certainly being conveyed to the 
police forces and the enforcement agencies across the province. 
And they pay significant attention to it as well, I know as well 
as you. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I for one 
have certainly agreed with the Lights on for Life program that 
has been going on for the past number of years, encouraging 
people to put their lights on. I know it can become a problem 
for a person who doesn’t have the automatic daytime running 
lights in their vehicles yet; maybe they’re driving an older 
vehicle such as I am. But it certainly makes for a lot greater 
visibility. 
 
And I’ve been in situations, the number of miles that we as 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) drive, in 
situations where all of a sudden you come upon a vehicle that 
doesn’t have its lights on, and depending on the circumstances, 
driving conditions, that vehicle may all of a sudden just appear 
out of the blue. And lights have certainly created an avenue 
whereby people are more visible. 
 
I do have a problem, Mr. Minister, though in the fact that while 
we’re trying to educate the public, there is a sector of our 
society where we’re allowing people to, or allowing a sector to, 
discontinue or disconnect their lights. And I’m talking of our 
police forces. I’ve been driving down the highway . . . We have 
individuals out driving, police forces, who choose now or have 
chosen to disconnect their lights and then decide whether 
they’re going to drive with their lights on or whether they’re 
going to shut their lights off. 
 
It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that if we’re going to 
educate the public, if we’re going to talk about public safety, 
that the leadership should be coming from our police forces. 
And I don’t know if there’s . . . other than maybe pursuing a 
vehicle or for some reason you’re pursuing a vehicle where they 
may want to shut the lights off so that they’re not visible. 
 
I have no understanding as to why our police officers, traffic 
officers, would be driving down the highway with their lights 
disconnected. And I’m wondering and I notice there’s a 
provision in this that allows them to do that  and I’m 
wondering in the sake of safety and public knowledge, training, 
even teaching the public, why we have allowed that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well currently, certainly I appreciate your 
comments that you make as they relate to the Lights on for Life, 
and we certainly encourage that process as well. As you can 
well appreciate, there is a great deal of concern when we have 
vehicles that proceed down roadways that aren’t properly or 
adequately lit. 
 
The issue that’s being raised here of course with us in this 
legislation is what you have put forward, in that the concern of 
course in this section is that police officers here are really  



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

asking for permission to disconnect their headlights. 
 
This request is really coming from the enforcement agencies 
and view that as an ability to assist them in doing their work. 
And I guess I would say to the member opposite that if we trust 
in the work and value of the police detachments to enforce the 
law, this would be a provision that would be recognized to 
assist them in enabling them to do their work in a more 
appropriate fashion. 
 
And the request is in fact coming, as you can appreciate, from 
the law enforcement agencies. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that we 
have men and women that we have given the licence to uphold 
the law and they’re paid by the public of this province and of 
Canada. And then all of a sudden we’re going to say, well you 
can disconnect your lights because it might be appropriate and 
it might create a more effective atmosphere for you to uphold 
the law. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I find that quite offensive to think 
that we would say you can disconnect your lights. And how 
many times have we heard even in the last year where RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officers or police officers in 
the line of duty have run into individuals, and whether it was 
the lights on or off is irrelevant. The fact is . . . or even, as one 
of my colleagues said over here right now, running into one 
another. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re trying to educate the public that it’s 
appropriate to think of public safety. We have men and women 
who have committed their lives to promoting public safety and 
protecting the public. And I’m sure many of them feel quite 
strongly too that there’s nothing wrong, and the Lights On For 
Life, or lights on certainly enhances their ability in performing 
their duties. 
 
I find it, I guess, just a little annoying that we would even allow 
them to disconnect those lights; to give them that provision. I 
don’t know of any circumstance where disconnecting your 
lights or an enforcement officer disconnecting his lights, creates 
a safety factor and allows that individual to conduct their job 
and their duties in a more safe and a more wise manner. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I have to ask. The enforcement agencies 
may be asking for it, maybe it’s time we said there are certain 
laws that apply and these laws apply to everyone. We’re trying 
to . . . I don’t want to see us get to the point where we 
implemented seat-belts and then to get people to use them, we 
start laying on fines. And those fines have increased. It’s 
become a government revenue source. 
 
If we’re trying to promote safety and the aspect of it, I think it 
should apply to everyone and probably the leadership should 
come from out of law enforcement agencies. And I’m not sure 
why you as a government would have put a provision that 
allows that to take place. 
 
So I would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to review that and 
even before this piece of legislation is passed, bring in an  

amendment that takes that section out of the legislation. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member from 
Moosomin, I want to suggest first of all that throughout the 
course of duties of law enforcement officers, they do from time 
to time take some privilege on the roadways and on the 
highways in order to provide law enforcement to you and I as 
we drive the highways, and to the Saskatchewan public. 
 
And I think that if we believe that the law enforcement agencies 
in this province do a good job and in fact enforce the laws in a 
fashion that we’re satisfied with, then we can certainly provide 
them with some provisions in order that they might be able to 
do that in a better fashion. 
 
I mean if we support your position, and that is that a police 
cruiser can’t turn off their lights while they do surveillance on 
the side of a roadway, the next thing you’re going to be asking 
me is that if somebody is speeding down a roadway, that the 
police officer can’t follow up and exceed the speed limit of 60 
or 100 kilometres or miles an hour because he’s not going to be 
able to overtake the vehicle. 
 
So I think if we base the rationale that you put forward to me on 
the lights, then I think we will need to . . . certainly the next 
question you’ll be asking me about is whether or not a police 
cruiser can travel down the roadway in excess of 100 kilometres 
an hour. And I say to you this is a request that comes to us from 
the police officers, from the police enforcement departments, 
and we think that it’s prudent, in enabling them to protect the 
roadways of Saskatchewan, to be able to proceed with this. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I need some 
clarification, Mr. Minister. You talked about turning the lights 
off when doing surveillance, and I will support that, where the 
vehicle is parked in a safe location and not being a hazard to 
other vehicular traffic. But the suggestion that perhaps a police 
vehicle should be allowed to turn off their lights while in 
motion concerns me somewhat because of situations that I 
recall that were not in the best interests of the whole safety 
aspect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well certainly, Mr. Member from 
Melville, I’m not sure what you’re asking me here, whether or 
not we need to have police officers enforcing the law on other 
police officers, because I don’t think that’s really what you’re 
saying here. 
 
I think what the request before us here is, is that what the 
enforcement officers or the police enforcement is asking across 
the province, is to be able to provide some provision in the 
performance of their duty where they might be able to practice 
in such a fashion that they can do a reasonable job of ensuring 
that you and I in the travelling public are safe. And in doing that 
they may need, on occasion, to turn off their lights. 
 
Certainly you or I or anyone else wouldn’t condone and support 
the vehicle, be it a police cruiser or anyone else, travelling  



1330  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

down a highway in the night without their lights on. And 
certainly my thought of this is that the police department and 
the people who serve in the RCMP and other detachments 
across the province, would use their discretion in such a fashion 
that, not only would they ensure their own safety, but that of the 
travelling public. I mean that’s a responsibility that we vest in 
them. 
 
If the issue is that we’re concerned about the way in which the 
police departments and the police enforcement do their work in 
Saskatchewan, I think that’s a question that you should be 
putting before the Department of Justice and should be 
reviewing with them your concerns about the practices of the 
police detachments in the province. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, that was the furthest thing from 
my mind, was questioning the police agencies and how they 
carry out their enforcement. 
 
I guess what I’m asking is, why do we need something in a Bill 
to tell policemen they can or can’t do something in the pursuit 
of their responsibilities? At this point, they continue to use their 
discretion. Why do we need it in the laws? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well in my earlier statement to the 
member from Melville, I’d indicated that the new vehicles . . . 
and most of the police cruisers in Saskatchewan now are over 
the year of 1989. When you turn the ignition switch on in the 
vehicle, the lights go on. If they’re out there patrolling in 
Saskatchewan roads and communities, there are occasions 
where they’re suggesting that they need to be in a place where 
 and you would know this better than I would  where they 
need to be invisible, if I might use that word. And part of being 
invisible is that they need to be able to turn their lights off. 
 
In the new vehicles right now, over 1989, the only way that they 
can do that is going out there with their tin snip or their 
wire-cutter and disconnecting the lights until such time as they 
want to reconnect them again. 
 
This request from the law enforcement agencies is, is to provide 
a provision for them so that in the vehicles that they operate 
over the year 1989 they can, in fact, disconnect the lighting 
units. And they’ll only use that, in my opinion, on occasions 
where they think it’s both publicly safe and required for them to 
enforce the laws of the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
responded to my colleague from Melville’s question regarding 
school buses, and I want to clarify that if I could because I 
didn’t understand your answer. And what I’m talking about is 
section 40 and section 43. 
 
In section 40, as I see it now, the school buses that will stop are 
allowed to pull over or are required to pull over to the far 
right-hand edge of the road. As I understand it, a number of 
accidents have occurred because the bus pulls right over to the 
far right-hand side, and in many instances, it may even be out 
on a roadway, an intersecting roadway. Traffic that is 
approaching sees the school bus with the flashing lights, with 
the arm out way off on the right side, and then they proceed to  

go by because they say it’s off the roadway, okay. 
 
As I understand section 40, you’re now saying that school buses 
are exempt from that and that now the school bus will be 
actually stopping in the centre of the road next to the centre line 
with its stop arm out. Could you clarify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  To the member from Pelly, the current 
legislation  Pelly-Canora, or just, Mr. Chairman, to the Pelly 
from Canora  under the current legislation and under the 
proposed legislation, what we’re in fact doing is . . . if you 
could paint the picture of two buses that were in fact coming 
towards each other to do a transfer of young people from one 
bus on to the other, the requirement would still be that each of 
the buses would need to pull over on to the right-hand side of 
the roadway. They would pull out their stop arms and turn on 
their flashing lights. And what this provision is permitting or 
requiring, is for the two buses to come closer together from the 
distance that they were before. 
 
Now we’re suggesting that they will be within a 30-metre 
radius. Prior to that, they could be further than that. We’re 
suggesting that we’d be closer to that, to within the 30 metres, 
because we think it’s too far from child A going out of the bus 
on the right-hand side over to the bus on the left-hand side of 
the road. 
 
Under the previous legislation, that distance was too far, and 
what we’re doing is really making it so that the buses would be 
closer to each other for the transfer of young people from one 
of the buses to the other. This is what this new amendment 
does. It ensures that the buses are closer together. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I understood that part of the section, and I 
accept your explanation and can see how that your explanation 
ties to the wording. 
 
The question still, though, is whether or not when it says that, 
the quotation is “except where a vehicle is stopped pursuant to 
section 43”  and that’s a quote  that excepts school buses. 
And I know that there were many disputes with traffic tickets 
where people were actually ticketed for passing a school bus 
while it was on the far right-hand side of the road. 
 
And I understand that the Department of Highways, school 
trustees’ associations and others were looking at saying, how 
can we correct that problem because if we continue to allow or 
continue to make the bus pull over as far as possible  and 
sometimes the bus is literally off the highway; it’s out on the 
shoulder  and then somebody goes by the stop arm, they say, 
well it’s off the road. 
 
And I understood that this amendment was to allow school 
buses to actually stop in the middle of the highway with their 
stop arm out, and especially in the instance where a child is 
getting off the bus and then is proceeding across the highway. 
There have been instances where there have been injuries where 
the child has been struck because that bus was way over on the 
right and vehicles were not obeying the stop arm signal. 
 
I think we have to tighten that up. The stop arm is very crucial  



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

in making sure both oncoming and traffic that is following the 
school bus stops and does not pass that bus. Does this create 
any uncertainty is my question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, if the member from Canora 
is asking whether or not the new legislation suggests for a 
minute that the buses can stop in the middle of a roadway while 
they unload their young people from within, that provision is 
not in this legislation. That’s correct. 
 
The intent of course here is that we would continue to practise 
on the basis that a bus would pull over to the side of the 
roadway in an appropriate fashion  whatever that would be; 
that would be in the discretion of, of course, the individual 
who’s driving the bus  and would assume that it would be 
safe then to unload the young people from the vehicle, and then 
they could proceed either across the roadway to the left or to the 
right. 
 
So this provision simply indicates that the stoppage would still 
be on the right-hand edge of the highway, not in the centre. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for clarifying some of the fuzzy concerns that we had 
with respect to school buses and their stopping and locations 
and so on. 
 
I wonder if we could now move on to section 6 of the Act. That 
has to do with the location of traffic lights. And I wonder if you 
could just give us a scenario where this has been a problem. It 
deals with a traffic light at a place other than an intersection 
displays one or more green arrows  that’s the particular 
section. 
 
I just wondered if there were any kind of problems and just a 
little bit of an explanation as to what the location of the traffic 
lights under this particular section relates to. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well this clarification would be to an issue 
like . . . and you’ve asked of an example that we might have and 
I can use the one here that’s in Regina, and it’s near the 
Cornwall Centre. And if I might just read the response here. 
This deals with the intersection that is an exit from the parkade 
at the Cornwall Centre. That exit has a traffic signal but is not 
an intersection  it’s not an intersection under the definition of 
an intersection. And the Act already deals with traffic lights 
containing red lights in conjunction with green arrows. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I thank you for that. I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
could you please explain to us or define what you mean by a 
new driver under this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well a new driver, under the new 
legislation, would be defined in a variety of different ways. It 
would be someone who in fact is, for the first time now, 
proceeding to get his licence and has not had any driving 
experience; and/or someone who is validating their licence for 
the first time would be classified as a new driver; a licensee 
within the last five years, regardless of what his class might be. 
It might be someone who is out of province who do not have a 
two-year driving experience and licence class higher than a  

learner’s licence. And the fourth sort of definition of somebody 
who might be a new driver would be a driver entering 
Saskatchewan from outside of Canada and/or the United States, 
would be the four classifications that would be considered a 
new driver. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Just again to clarify then, a new driver could be 
someone who has had experience driving in another country but 
would be a new driver in this province? Okay, I . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  It would be a new driver in this province, 
that’s correct, who’s come here from another part of Canada, or 
come here from another province would be considered a new 
driver. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video 
Classification Act 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, if they haven’t been here before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  They have been here before. But I have 
with me today Linda Ens, who is the policy analyst in 
legislative services; and Al Dwyer, who is the registrar in 
licensing investigation. 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to welcome the 
officials again to our Assembly. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to clause 6 of the 
printed Bill. I’m presenting to you a copy of the amendment 
that I wish to propose, along with a number of photocopies that 
you have distributed to the members of the government and to 
the members of the third party. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it disturbs me greatly that we as a Legislative 
Assembly would delegate our power to regulate the advertising 
of motion pictures to the standards board of another province. 
Mr. Speaker, we in this province are capable of regulating our 
own film and video industry, including the regulation of movie 
promotion clips which we see in cinemas before the main 
motion picture begins. 
 
I therefore move to: 
 

Amend clause 6 of the printed Bill by deleting clause 
6(1.1)(b) as being enacted therein, and substituting the 
following: 
 
“(b) by adopting an approval, prescription or prohibition 
previously given to the advertising by any body recognized 
in the regulations.”. 
 



1332  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

Mr. Chairman, I would so move. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe this 
amendment has a great degree of value to it. To allow an 
outside body to make the recommendations for the public of 
Saskatchewan moves it out of the area of our community and 
our community standards. And after all what we’re talking 
about in this area is community standards, otherwise there was 
absolutely no value in having any form of review. 
 
But since we’re prepared to admit that there is a value to having 
a form of review on films, to classify them to a certain degree, 
then it should be done in a manner that reflects our community 
values, not the community values of some other community a 
great distance from us that may not reflect our values, our 
communities, the needs, and the aspirations that we have. 
 
So when it comes time to review and to classify videos and 
films, it must be done with our community values in mind. Only 
those people within this province understand and know what 
our community values are. Therefore, Mr. Chairman, and 
members, I believe that this motion does have a great deal of 
credibility and a great deal of value to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:38 p.m. until 3:48 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  10 
 
Osika Draude Belanger 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer D’Autremont Toth 
Goohsen   
 

Nays  25 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Atkinson 
Johnson Goulet Lautermilch 
Upshall Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Teichrob 
Nilson Serby Hamilton 
Langford Wall Ward 
Sonntag Jess Murrell 
Thomson   
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal The Police Pension 
(Saskatoon) Funding Act 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m very pleased to have with me today 
Darcy McGovern from legislative services, and David Wild, 
superintendent of pensions. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to welcome your officials. Darcy, welcome. I haven’t seen 
you for awhile. 
 
I just have some brief questions. This is a very straightforward 
Bill, as I’d spoken to it on a previous occasion. The Police 
Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act is being repealed by this 
particular Bill. Is there new legislation that will in fact be in 
place to provide the funding for the Saskatoon police pension 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No. No new legislation is required 
because their pension will be covered under The Pension 
Benefits Act, 1992. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you. I should have perhaps been 
aware of that and you may have pointed that out to me before. 
But I guess it’s something to do with the grey hair and the 
memory. I’m not . . . Thank you. 
 
Are there . . . With these changes, does that involve any kinds 
of sums of money in reserve in this whole mechanism? Does 
that in some way, shape, or form affect any monies that might 
have been created by that particular police pension fund in 
Saskatoon? 
 
And where would those sums of money be or how are they 
controlled and how are they . . . what will become of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are no monetary changes at all. The 
existing plan will stay where it is. It’ll just come under this 
Pension Benefits Act legislation, and that will be the rules that 
will govern the plan. 
 
But there’s no change to the plan. Any contributions are 
negotiated between the union and the employees and the Police 
Commission in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay. Forgive me, Mr. Minister, if I’m not clear. 
There’s no need to change, to move money, for example, as a 
result of this from one particular investment to another. It all 
goes into sort of a pot that’s already there under the other 
provisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The existing plan will not change. It’ll 
just be governed by new rules. It will be governed by the rules 
under The Pension Benefits Act. 
 
And as long as we don’t repeal the specific legislation that 
relates to the Saskatoon police, then The Pension Benefits Act 
doesn’t apply. 
 
So this, what this does is, rather than making changes in the 
Saskatoon police pension plan legislation that would match 
what’s in The Pension Benefits Act, we just delete their plan  



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

with its special rules and allow the pension plan to operate 
under the existing rules for most of the pension plans in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you for clarifying that for me. Then so in 
effect that’s already taken place; so in effect this new process or 
procedure is already in place and the passing of this Bill will 
make it retroactive, will it? Or will it just be something that will 
go into effect as soon as this Bill is passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’ll take effect as soon as the Bill  this 
Bill that we’re going to pass here hopefully  receives Royal 
Assent. So that will be the effective time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, then I wish to say, and because I 
have some deep respects and deep regards and some sense of 
association with the Saskatoon police and any police agencies, I 
have no other questions. It is not our intention to hold up this 
particular Bill. 
 
I thank you and your officials and your support staff for 
allowing me to at least clarify some of the things in my mind. 
Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video 
Classification Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 57  The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 17. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my  

pleasure this afternoon to introduce my officials. Seated beside 
me is Mr. John Law who is the acting president. Just behind 
Mr. Law is Mr. Rob Isbister who’s the director of financial 
planning, finance and accommodation. And behind me is Ms. 
Deb Koshman who is the acting vice-president of finance and 
accommodation  my officials. 
 
Off to the side here, Mr. Al Moffat, vice-president of 
commercial services. I know Mr. Moffat fairly well; it’s just 
that I’m not sure what his title is. In SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) we’ve had a lot of 
movement in the last little while. It’s hard to find people 
sometimes; they may be over to the right a bit. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to welcome the minister’s staff here today 
on behalf of the official opposition. The first question I have, 
Mr. Minister, is, can you give me the number of employees that 
SPMC does employ? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, we have 931 FTEs, 
full-time employees, and 1,051 which would be including our 
part time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you then 
. . . 1,051, I believe that was with part time. Can you tell me 
what the payroll is, the total payroll is for SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  The total payroll figure is $34.294 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure . . . 
this is probably more of a request than a question, Mr. Minister, 
but would it be possible for us to receive a list of all property, 
buildings, and offices owned by or leased by SPMC? Not today 
I realize, but would that be possible to get to us at some point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, we can provide that for the 
member from Saltcoats in fairly short order. You’re asking for 
all of the owned and the leased properties that we have around 
the province; that’s your request. And we can provide that for 
you in relatively short time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Can 
you tell me then offhand what the value of the holdings that 
SPMC owns at the present time? What would the value of those 
holdings be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m looking at our 1994 annual report and 
would take you, for reference, when you have occasion to do 
that, to look at the real estate estimates and assets, and our 1995 
value asset here is 382.592 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  In this past year, did SPMC construct any 
buildings of their own? Like were there any buildings built this 
year on your behalf for SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  In checking all of our capital work that we 
might have done, the only new project that we would confirm 
would be the new construction of the court house in North  



1334  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

Battleford . . . would be the only one. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then what about 
. . . that’s construction, but was there other buildings then that 
were purchased by SPMC in the past year? Can you give us a 
list of those and where they were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  We’ll undertake to provide that 
information for you in some detail. We only . . . as we look at 
which ones we might have been involved in purchasing this 
year, the only two that come to us immediately are two, small, 
group-home purchases. One was in Regina here, and one was in 
Denholm. But we’ll confirm that for you if there are any others. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, I believe we have . . . SPMC 
has the holdings on a number of unoccupied buildings. And the 
first one that comes to mind is one in my constituency. It’s the 
New Careers building. Could you explain the situation that is 
with that building? It’s empty, I believe. But does SPMC firstly 
own that? And I guess maybe if you could answer that, and then 
we’ll go from there. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Currently the property that you’re talking 
about in Kamsack, we’re currently leasing that, currently 
leasing that property. SPMC doesn’t own it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. Now maybe 
. . . you correct me if I’m wrong, but are we locked into . . . the 
government is locked into a certain time limit for leasing. I 
believe it was the previous government, if I’m right. Can you 
confirm that that locked us into a number of years that we are 
stuck with that building and paying a lease on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Currently as the member from Saltcoats 
indicates, we have a number of properties around the province, 
SPMC has, that had been leased by the private administration 
for a long-term periods, and certainly the building in Kamsack 
is one of those. That lease will continue until the year 2001, and 
we’re correctly, you know, bound to that agreement and are 
currently paying lease costs on it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give 
us an overview then or probably a number of all cases in the 
province such as that that the previous administration were 
locked into that we are now still paying for? Is that a fair 
question even? But can you give me a number somehow on 
that, like what the total cost per year is for us that we’re 
obligated to handle . . . that were originated before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Just for clarification to ensure that we 
provide you with the most adequate and appropriate 
information, are you asking us to provide for you information 
on all of the buildings that we lease across the province that we 
acquired from the previous administration? In your question, 
are you also asking whether you want us to separate that out on 
which are occupied and which are unoccupied as well . . . if you 
could provide some direction for us as to what you’d like. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Yes, I believe both ways, Mr. Minister. But  

I think that the main question I had is how many of these 
buildings are actually unoccupied? If you get my drift here, I’m 
trying to get to the point where . . . how much money we’re 
paying for actually nothing, that these buildings are not even 
being used, but we’re locked into a lease that has been gone on 
for some time  and I understand other ones like the Kamsack 
one are going to continue to go on for a while  but the public 
out there is getting absolutely no benefit of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  What we’ll undertake to provide for the 
member opposite is . . . the question that he’d asked in response 
to. 
 
I want to indicate as well to the member that, over the last 
couple of years, SPMC of course has worked very diligently at 
reducing the amount of lease space that we have across the 
province, although keeping in mind that we have a number of 
large properties that had been used in the past for institutional 
purposes that are part of the ratio that we talk about. 
 
I might just indicate to the member that SPMC’s vacancy rate 
as of March 1996 was about 3.2 per cent. This is about . . . Of 
this, 40 per cent is considered unusable. And if I might just 
indicate to you that we have in that number the Souris Valley 
and certainly the North Battleford hospitals where you have 
entire wings of those facilities that currently aren’t being used. 
 
When we take a look at the current vacancy rate that we have, 
3.2 per cent of that compares, in our opinion, very favourably 
from where we were about a year ago. And there we were at 
about 4.1 per cent. What we’re seeing, certainly since 1992-93, 
we began a real downward trend in the government’s annual 
leasing cost. And we’ve seen overall, in terms of a saving to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer, about a $4 million reduction over that 
same period of time. 
 
So I can appreciate the question that you’re asking in terms of 
the amount of property that SPMC had acquired when it took 
administration in 1991, that had been certainly directed our way 
through the number of leases that were entered into by the 
previous administration. And over that period of time of course, 
we’ve been working very diligently to try to use as much of that 
space as we can. And we’ll provide for you, as you’ve asked, 
some of those numbers. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A little further to 
that then . . . since now that you have came to power, how many 
buildings that you have leased in new leases  that you have 
undertaken since you came to power - are also unoccupied at 
this present time? Can you give us a figure on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Certainly we’ll provide you with those 
numbers that you’re looking for in terms of the space that is 
currently vacant, and I think you’re asking the question of the 
properties that we currently have I think. 
 
What’s important to note here is that we have developed, 
through SPMC, a significant policy to ensure that as properties 
become available that we’re very actively searching for other 
opportunities for them. And the policy that’s currently in place  



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

that we’re using and exercising is first looking to our own 
administration within government to recognize if there can be 
some utilization of the spaces that are available across the 
province for a variety of different uses. 
 
At the same time, we’re paying attention and are working 
closely with some of our federal partners in the policy that we 
developed in 1992 so that when there are requirements for joint 
usage of property or where they might have some requirement 
on their own, we can enter into partnerships with them or 
provide that space for them, as well as third parties: 
municipalities, school districts, health boards. So we would use 
a wide variety of opportunities to provide access to some of the 
facilities and space that we have that we would consider as 
being excess. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Minister, could we go back to the question 
just previously and that we just touched on, the 3.2 per cent 
vacancy rate? Is that of all the total holdings of SPMC that 
we’re talking here? We just didn’t quite understand your 
percentage there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s correct. That’s the right number. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would like 
to refer you to a specific situation in Wakaw, Saskatchewan. I 
understand that SPMC owns a building there. And I understand 
also that there is a lease agreement in place and that the 
government is bound to this lease agreement. Now in that town, 
the town office, the library, and the courtroom are part of a 
complex of a building. The other part of that building was for 
an agriculture representative to have his office. 
 
The agriculture office has been locked and the rest of the 
building is being utilized for the other three purposes  the 
town office, the library, and the courtroom. I understand 
actually from being there, that there are really crammed quarters 
here for administration and for library and the courtroom. 
 
My question is this: why in fact wouldn’t the people occupying 
those three portions be allowed to use the part that was 
designated for the agricultural office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, to the member from 
Humboldt, I don’t know the building fully, so I’m going to be 
speaking a bit around policy, and that might help assist us in 
getting a better appreciation for the facility. 
 
It appears to me here that you have part of the town office 
obviously involved in renting some of that space. We have a 
courtroom which would be part of the Justice program, that 
would be renting some of that space. And the library, I expect, 
is likely either a regional library or a community library. 
 
And so they would be a partner in that along with the ag reps’ 
office which apparently is not occupied at this point in time. 
This kind of an arrangement of course is something that SPMC 
has been looking very favourably at where we have facilities 
around the province where we can get multiple use of them or 
joint usage of those kinds of facilities. 
 

We need to keep in mind here of course that although SPMC by 
and large is the owner of the building, the termination of the 
utilization of space is really determined by each of the programs 
and each of the departments. And so what they would come is 
to SPMC and indicate to them the amount of space that they 
would feel that would be required for them. 
 
Now if in this occasion we have part of the building that’s 
unoccupied and you see there needing to be some additional 
requirement for the town office and/or the library, certainly 
SPMC would be more than favoured to have an opportunity to 
sit down with those players, particularly if the ag reps’ portion 
of the building isn’t being utilized any longer to work out a new 
arrangement with the town office and the library. 
 
The court facilities as they exist currently, the determination for 
space requirement has been determined I would expect, by the 
Department of Justice and their folks. And so if there was 
requirement for a broadening of space there, we would get that 
request from Justice to accommodate that. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Am I hearing from you 
then that the request should come first of all from the town or 
people utilizing this, to the Justice minister and then they would 
determine an arrangement with the town or with the people that 
are interested in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that part of the discussion that 
we’re having on this side of the House here is determining 
whether or not the agricultural space that you speak about is in 
fact recognized as surplus space at this point in time. We 
haven’t been informed. SPMC is not aware that this would be 
surplus space that could be used by the rest of the players or 
tenants that are in the building. 
 
And as you’ve indicated, appropriately and correctly, and that is 
that if that in fact is surplus space, then what we could do, and 
would do certainly through our negotiations with the 
community, look at what their requirements might be either for 
the expansion of the town hall or town offices and/or that of the 
library, and try to make accommodations to suit them 
appropriately. We would certainly be dealing directly with the 
Department of Justice around the court-house, and our 
knowledge at this point is that their requirements seems to be 
satisfactory. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. So for the benefit of the players, 
would it be appropriate for me to refer them to SPMC with any 
questions in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Absolutely. That’s where we would want 
them to come. And as I’ve indicated to you earlier, all of the 
space that we have around the province we would be looking at 
in a variety of different ways. 
 
And this is an excellent example that you point out where you 
have a number of community groups; you have your town 
office as well that’s interested in remaining in the facility; and 
we want to encourage that as we go to do our space planning  



1336  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

across the province with the space that we have available. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Minister, 
I would like you to focus your attention up into my area, and in 
Melfort in particular if you could. And I wanted to ask you, do 
you have or do your officials have with you, information as to 
the status of renters and leasers with you in regard to the 
Norman Vickar Building in Melfort? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Could you just provide us . . . we have 
some detail and some information on the Norman Vickar 
Building, is the one you’re asking about. We’re not clear. Are 
you interested in learning who the clients are or the occupants 
of it, or whether it’s leased or whether we own it? We just quite 
don’t have that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I just wanted to know 
if your officials had any information with you. It would sort of 
determine the way I was going to ask my questions. 
 
The Department of Health . . . or not the Department of Health, 
the North Central Health District had a community meeting the 
other night and indicated they are renting from SPMC, office 
space within the Norman Vickar Building, and that that cost is 
somewhere in the magnitude of $90,000 a year. Would you be 
able to confirm if that indeed is true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t have with us the precise amount 
that the district health board might be paying, but what they 
would be paying would be the cost-recovery portion. What we 
do have is in fact a confirmation that they are leasing about 329 
square metres. And we can get for you the actual cost of that 
lease. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, for that amount of square footage, 
would the $90,000 figure be anywhere in the realm of 
reasonableness, or is that way off? I don’t need to know the 
exact dollar and cent. I just wanted to know, is this a reasonable 
figure that was quoted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  The amount of the lease that would be 
paid by someone who is leasing property through SPMC would 
vary of course around the province. And of course what would 
be built into that would be a number of components, and I 
might just share with you what those are. 
 
There would be capital charges against the property; that would 
be included in there. There would be some maintenance of the 
property, maintenance charges. If there is security requirements 
for a particular piece of property, that would be included. If 
there are parking requirements by the people who are using the 
facility, that would be included in there. And the property 
management fees and any kind of tenant improvement would be 
also included in that. Those are just some of those. 
 
And I’m also being informed that the square metre costs that I 
provided you with earlier is not the accurate one. It’s not 329; 
it’s in fact 900 square metres. So it’s a significantly larger piece 
than I’d indicated to you earlier. 
 
So all of the properties around the province that we would be  

leasing would be leased on a cost-recovery basis where there 
wouldn’t be any additional costs that the corporation would 
recover from that, other than the cost of maintaining and 
managing the property itself. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I think you may have 
misunderstood me. I’m not asking the details of how the figure 
would be arrived at. I’m asking, is the figure that was given at 
the community meeting, of $90,000 a year, would that be a 
reasonable figure that would be reasonably accurate? I don’t 
need the exact numbers. But could you confirm that given the 
factors you’ve outlined, that $90,000 is approximately what 
may be the fee to the health district for the square metreage that 
they are getting from you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  This looks like it might be. In where this 
building is located, it would work out to about $10 a square 
metre which . . . or a square foot which would, in all likelihood, 
be close to what the cost of that would be. I think that it would 
be important to recognize here that those costs, the square metre 
costs, would vary depending on where the property is. That 
same kind of property, if it were situated in downtown Regina 
or if it were in Prince Albert, you might see a variation in terms 
of what that square metre costs are. But I would suggest to you 
that that’s likely the figure that would be close. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I also understand, and 
could you confirm for me, that the rural service centre was in 
that building. And my question is, how much square metreage 
did they have in the building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m just confirming that the rural service 
centre is in that facility as well, and they were leasing about 198 
square metres. It’s taking us a bit of time to get some of the 
information for you because we have a lot of properties around 
the province, and so please bear with us if it takes us a moment 
or two to find that detail for you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And again using the formula that you just 
outlined for me in an approximate sense, what would be the 
approximate annual rental or lease cost for that square metreage 
in that building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  That cost, Mr. Member, would be around 
$20,000. I will confirm that number for you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Now at this health meeting that was going 
on, the district health board indicated to the people gathered 
that this $90,000 was a significant item on their budget or one 
of the items that they identified as a potential savings 
opportunity. And they went on to say that they are considering 
in their deliberations, spending money on renovating one of 
their own facilities so that they might not have to pay you this 
money. 
 
Now it strikes me as sort of one of those logics of government 
where the Department of Health gives money to the district 
health board; the district health board gives money back to 
SPMC which is government. And so we end up with a vicious 
circle of the left hand of government demanding money from 
the right hand of government in a vicious circle. 



May 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

What happens if the health board is forced to leave your 
premise? What happens when the agricultural rural service 
centre leaves your premise because of the fact that the 
department is closing this down? What happens to that space? 
And will you tell me, please, how you’re going to recover 
approximately $110,000 of rental income in the city of Melfort, 
and from whom you think you might get the money. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  You’ve asked me a couple of questions 
and maybe I’ll respond to them in this order. 
 
The question that you asked regarding how it is that we would 
be showing a charge from the, first of all, the Department of 
Health and it being a credit to SPMC, and it’s taking money 
from the right hand and putting it into the left hand. As you 
know, we have a process within government which is called 
public accountability, and it’s important and necessary and 
required and mandatory for us to report to the Public Accounts 
Committee all of the activity of SPMC. And so the cost of 
doing business for the district health board and the charge to the 
Department of Health of course is that piece of property . . . is 
that lease arrangement that they have. 
 
So we need to show in SPMC . . . and the health board needs to 
show that that’s an expenditure to them; it becomes a credit to 
Saskatchewan Property Management. So it’s an accountability 
process that not only occurs at this level of government, but 
certainly happens with municipalities in both urban and rural, 
district school boards, etc.; that process is there. 
 
I think what’s important to recognize here is that we know, and 
from having heard you speak on a number of occasions about 
the prosperity of your community in your area, that if in fact 
this property were to be available in your community that there 
are some options that certainly Saskatchewan Property 
Management would entertain with either the district health 
board or with the municipality or any other player in your 
community who might want to access it or to have it if in fact it 
were to become, as you’re suggesting, space that would be 
available or access space. 
 
Now $110,000 is the question that you had asked in terms of 
what the rental recovery is currently to SPMC from those two 
properties. And we’re assuming that that is the appropriate cost 
and we’ll confirm that with you in the future. 
 
I want to just share with you again that SPMC currently has 
really five methods  I think I shared earlier with one of your 
other members — in terms of disposing of properties across the 
province. If we have surplus accommodations they would be in 
space allocation to reuse long-term holdings and arrange for 
space more effectively is what we would be doing; sale of 
surplus properties through approval disposal policy which we 
have had in place now for better than three years. 
 
And of course SPMC currently and has been now for several 
years . . . and I might say that in the term of three, doing what 
we’re calling right sizing, and try to appropriately use the 
facilities that we have around the province for the kinds of  

requirements that we have. 
 
And certainly if this would be an option that your community 
would want to entertain and we were to ascertain that it was 
surplus property, we would be interested in having that kind of 
discussion and dialogue with either the district health board or 
as I said earlier, your municipality or other third parties that 
might be in your community. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I’m sure with all your properties 
you’re not familiar with the physical kind of property in all 
these places, but this is a large, three-story, stone-faced type of 
government building. This isn’t sort of isolated property spread 
around that could be easily liquidated. 
 
I’m not sure, but I’m not aware in our community of any names 
that come forward real quickly that would want pieces of 
property within a government building. It sort of isn’t as ideal a 
real estate as you might think. 
 
But having said that, I guess then with that reality, what 
happens then if you decide to unload this square footage onto 
the community. Does that then create a severe disadvantage to 
the people with commercial properties that are trying to 
currently rent properties for professional use or whatever use in 
the community? And what does that do to the real estate market 
for properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  As I’ve said earlier in my comments, that 
currently you have in your community this particular property 
you’ve identified, and your district health board is obviously 
satisfied with the arrangement that you and I are speaking of. 
And the current arrangement that we have with them is on a 
cost recovery as opposed to sort of a market price. 
 
Now if you’re suggesting here that the district health board 
would be disadvantaged by the rate that we provide them versus 
what else might be available in the community, I would be 
surprised at that of course. 
 
But certainly as we look at right-sizing across the province, one 
of the key factors here is that we would be ensuring that when 
we’re disposing of property that SPMC, and the people of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan, would 
also realize the best value for that piece of property. Certainly 
our intent is not to have vacant properties around the province 
that aren’t satisfactory usable. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
legislature building itself here, is that one of the . . . listed as 
one of SPMC’s holdings or is that a separate entity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  It’s currently now under SPMC. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Good, Mr. Minister, because I want to 
bring to your attention that there’s no bathroom or shower in 
my office, and would this be a good time to bring that up? 
Okay. I see I’m not going to get an answer, so I’ll go on to 
another question. 
 
Mr. Minister, Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre, is that  



1338  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1996 

owned by SPMC at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  I just want to first respond to the 
member’s first comment about him not having any bathrooms 
or showers in his offices. I want to have you rest assured that 
we don’t have any showers in our offices either. I think there is 
only one room in the building that has that. And I know that . . . 
well we’re hoping that, and we’re going to work hard to 
continue to make sure that it remains in the purview of that 
particular individual to sustain that shower, and anticipate that 
will be the case. 
 
I want to share with you that Whitespruce certainly is owned by 
SPMC. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Therefore if 
that’s owned by SPMC, the East Central Health District has 
submitted a bid to move the park and prairie units of the 
Yorkton mental health centre administration to Whitespruce 
centre. 
 
In SPMC’s annual report under item 14 it is stated that 
“Effective April 1, 1995, (the) district health boards will 
assume ownership of certain assets currently owned by the 
corporation.” Would the Whitespruce centre fall under this 
regulation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  My understanding of this is that there 
haven’t been any property transfers. What there have been of 
course is there have been transfers of office furniture and some 
of the equipment have actually been transferred from health 
facilities to district boards, but the actual transfer of physical 
property as yet has not been . . . 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the case of 
Whitespruce, will you be taking that into consideration, and in 
the East Central Health District’s request, will that be a 
consideration that you will give some thought to, of turning that 
building over to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well certainly not only will we be giving 
some consideration to the property of Whitespruce but we have 
a number of properties that health district boards across the 
province have expressed some interest in that are currently 
owned by Saskatchewan Property Management. And in all of 
those experiences . . . or all of those locations across the 
province, we’re going to be having discussions and are 
currently having discussions with district health boards to see 
whether or not they have an interest in using some of that space 
for their own purpose along with other venues that we’re 
pursuing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe in the . . . 
completely the opposite end now, is the Plains hospital property 
of the Regina Health Board or is that a facility that is owned by 
SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  This property is owned by the Crown. The 
property is owned by the Crown, but SPMC is managing it. It’s 
owned by the Crown and SPMC is managing it. 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1314 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1314 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
Pringle .......................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1315 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
First Nations Forum  

Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
Tourism Trends in Saskatchewan  

Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
Bruno Woman Receives Parenting Award  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
Ag Biotech Conference 1996  

Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
Drama Awards for Wadena Students  

Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
Young Entrepreneurs in Neilburg  

Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
Banner Year for Lucky Lake Bantam Lakers Hockey Team  

Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers  
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................1317 

SaskTel Collective Agreement  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................1317, 1319 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1318 

First Nations Taxation  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1318 

Health Districts Funding  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1319 

Medical Treatment in United States  
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1320 

Child Poverty  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1321 

 



 

MOTIONS  
Special Committee on Regulations  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
Referral of Bylaws of the Professional Associations and Amendments to the Special Committee on Regulations  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1322 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 70  An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1322 

Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a consequential amendment to another Act 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1325 

Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 
Municipal Board Act  

Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1330 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video Classification Act  
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1332 

Recorded division ........................................................................................................................................................................1332 
Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1332 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video Classification Act  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
Bill No. 57  The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation  Vote 53  

Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
Bjornerud ........................................................................................................................................................................1333, 1337 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1336 

 


