













































March 12, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 215 

 March 12, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  I rise today, Mr. Speaker, once again to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the names are primarily from south-eastern 

Saskatchewan: Estevan, Bienfait, and throughout that area. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) rescind the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and especially its 

mandatory union hiring hall formula; (2) prohibit the 

expansion of this Construction Tendering Agreement or 

other like agreements to other Saskatchewan Crown 

corporations or to other government departments; and (3) 

prohibit the expansion of this agreement or other like 

agreements to other government-funded construction 

projects with local health districts, school boards, 

municipal councils, or other joint venture partners in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The signatures come from primarily the Kindersley area, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’d like to table this. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

bring forward a petition today from names all throughout 

Saskatchewan, several of course being from constituencies right 

here in Regina though. And it is in regards to the Plains Health 

Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures, the names that I have here 

today, are from . . . a lot from Esterhazy, Whitewood, Regina, 

Grenfell  quite a few from Grenfell  all throughout the 

south-west part of Saskatchewan; Gainsborough, and as I said 

before, many from Regina Elphinstone and Regina Albert 

South. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, once again I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows,  

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina and they’re from Moose Jaw; they’re from Estevan; 

they’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

like to present this petition today. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

numerous communities throughout southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions also 

from names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions are from Craik, 

Moose Jaw, Regina, and throughout the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Moose Jaw and Regina. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to present 

petitions of many names from people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

This petition is signed by many people in the Bienfait area as 

well as Regina. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows,  



216  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Kipling, Windthorst, Estevan, and other centres. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to present petitions of behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increase in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Dysart-Cupar area of the 

province, Mr. Speaker; Regina, Lipton, Lestock, Blaine Lake, 

Meadow Lake, Makwa in the north-west, Mr. Speaker. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition dealing with SaskPower rates. And I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be please to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party review committee is in place in order to debate, 

review, and revise any utility rate increases in the future in 

order to restore fairness to the utility rate process in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these come from Val Marie and from the city of Swift 

Current. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today, Mr. 

Speaker, a new petition that hasn’t before been presented, but I 

think it will be self-explanatory, so I’ll simply read it to you. 

 

Now that despite how busy the Cypress Lodge kitchen 

presently there is a proposal to close the kitchen facility 

and have all meals brought in from the Maple Creek 

Hospital kitchen. That the citizens of Maple Creek and 

surrounding area feel closing the Cypress Lodge kitchen 

services is not a decision based on common sense or 

principle. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to halt this absurd proposal 

before it is implemented. 

 

Now these come mostly from the town of Maple Creek, but a  

good many from the surrounding area and from surrounding 

villages that also have people in the lodge at the present time. 

I’m happy to present these on behalf of those people from my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

challenge the implementation of Bill C-68, the federal 

firearms legislation. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding child protection services in Saskatchewan: how 

many children between the ages of birth to 16 years are 

under the care of the Department of Social Services; how 

many child protection workers are presently employed by 

the Department of Social Services; and what is the average 

case-load for a child protection worker in Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Executive Council’s order of September 6, 

1995 authorizing the Crown Investments Corporation to 

borrow $100 million: (1) for what specific purposes was 

this borrowing authorized; (2) will the purpose or 

purposes behind this borrowing help create any jobs, and 

if so, how many; (3) why was this borrowing over and 

above what the Department of Finance had anticipated for 

the Crown Investments Corporation in the 1995-96 

budget; and (4) what were the terms of the financing 

obtained? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to all 

members of the House, guests, Mr. Speaker, that will be 

familiar to you. These are 15 adult students from the city of 

Moose Jaw. They are involved in the English as a second 

language course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These adult students will have come to us from literally all 

corners of the world and from other parts of Canada. In many 

ways these are, Mr. Speaker, our newest pioneers. They are, Mr. 

Speaker, taking their course under the auspices of the  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Moose Jaw Multicultural Council. The council in Moose Jaw 

does some very important work with immigrants and 

newcomers to our city, our province, and our country. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, these students are accompanied by Mr. 

Dean Kush, Ms. Monique England, and Mr. Darryl Peacock. I’d 

invite all members to welcome these students to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I want to introduce to the members of the 

Assembly this afternoon situated in the far gallery my daughter, 

Corinne, who has come to watch the proceedings this 

afternoon, and I wish everyone to make her welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Congratulations to Thomson Meats 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are 

many examples of jobs being created in Saskatchewan through 

exports. That is why it is important to develop our province’s 

export potential as outlined in the Partnership for Growth 

strategy. Just last week we heard the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland tell us about Shuttlecraft International and how it 

blossomed into a successful company with $2 million in sales a 

year. 

 

Thomson Meats of Melfort is also included in a large group of 

Saskatchewan businesses that are taking advantages of new 

opportunities and growth. Thomson Meats got its start in 1960, 

when a small butcher shop was opened. The company moved to 

Melfort in 1982 and the plant expanded in 1986. In an effort to 

promote expansion, diversification, and growth into new 

markets, the company went public on the Alberta Stock 

Exchange in 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s sales are expected to increase by 230 

per cent over last year. Thomson Meats has undergone an 

expansion that will increase its production capacity as it seeks 

out new markets in the Pacific Rim, such as Korea. 

 

Congratulations to the Thomson family for having the 

confidence to invest in Saskatchewan, for producing top-grade 

meat products, and for creating new employment in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities Convention 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

welcome the 1,500-plus delegates to Regina for the 91st annual 

convention of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural  

Municipalities. I was a councillor for the RM (rural 

municipality) of Saltcoats for seven years then served another 

seven years as the reeve. So I have many of my friends and 

former colleagues at the convention. I know they are dealing 

with many trying issues and face a challenging year ahead. 

 

I hope the provincial government takes the time to listen to the 

concerns of the delegates. After 91 years of regular meetings, 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

delegates of the past have dealt with countless complex issues. 

The provincial government would do well to draw from a 

tremendous amount of wisdom and experience among the 

current delegates. 

 

I ask that all the members of this Assembly join me in 

welcoming SARM delegates to Regina. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Maple Syrup 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can remember, and I 

suspect that you can too, that once upon a time in Saskatchewan 

one of the first signs of spring was the arrival in our home 

towns of maple syrup  maple syrup in those tall, rectangular 

cans. The syrup was doubly sweet, first because it was a once a 

year treat, and secondly, because it came from the mysterious 

far East of Ontario and Quebec  Central Canada bestowing 

its blessing on those of us on the bald-headed prairie. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have good news for those of us who are 

maple sugar nostalgia buffs. Right here in Saskatchewan we are 

beginning to tap our own trees, collect our own sap, and, 

wonder of wonders, manufacture our own finished product. 

 

I’m not quite ready to say that this new industry is the final 

proof of the success of our efforts at economic diversification, 

but I do think that in a small way the fact that some 

Saskatchewan people are successfully doing what most would 

think is impossible is a symbol of the Saskatchewan way we so 

proudly boast of. 

 

A group in Broadview tapped about 4,000 Manitoba maples in 

the Qu’Appelle Valley near Marieval and produced a product 

labelled “Prairie Valley Maple Syrup;” in Cumberland House a 

group is marketing “Witches Wand Maple Syrup,” made from 

the native maple trees; and the PFRA (Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Administration) centre in Indian Head is actively 

promoting maple syrup production on the Prairies through 

research and workshops. 

 

In ways large and small, Mr. Speaker, we are taking back our 

economic destiny from central Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential Federal Jobs Transfer 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, members of the official 

opposition have recently met with the national Health and  



218  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

Welfare union, Public Service Alliance of Canada, and we 

share the concerns about the potential transfer of jobs from 

Regina to Winnipeg. We believe this is not in the best interest 

of Saskatchewan people and may further erode services 

available to the people in this province. 

 

To outline our concerns and those of our constituents, we have 

written a letter to the Hon. Ralph Goodale which I’ll table at 

this time. Today we join to express our concern and to publicly 

support the efforts of the national Health and Welfare union to 

maintain this critical service in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Schools’ Energy Conservation Program 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, three school 

divisions in the Wilkie region of my constituency are in the 

second year of a three-year project that has already saved them 

$60,000 and will further reduce their expenses in the third year 

and into the future. This energy conservation project is one 

based on a series of small, common sense activities which is 

leading to large savings as well as setting an example for others. 

The Wilkie School Division, St. Peter’s School Division and St. 

George’s School Division are taking part in the project called 

Destination Conservation. The program is the creation of the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society which is dedicated to 

helping groups save money by protecting the environment. 

SaskPower, Petro-Canada, Estevan Coal, and Prairie Coal all 

contributed to the start-up costs. 

 

The teachers and students began simply; they turned down the 

thermostats and adjusted lighting levels. In the second year, 

they introduced state of the art lighting and heat monitoring 

equipment. The savings from the first two years will be 

reinvested in further energy retrofits. 

 

As Ray Johnson, director of the Wilkie School Division said, 

the project would not have worked without the enthusiastic 

support of the students, teachers, and custodial staff. I join him 

in congratulating all involved in this project, which saves both 

money and the environment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Training Program at 15 Wing Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to inform members of this House about recent changes to 

the federal programs that will benefit the people of Moose Jaw 

and district. 

 

After several years of defence cuts, I am pleased to say that 

some of the downsizing will bring more jobs to Saskatchewan. 

This employment will provide direct and indirect benefits to the 

people of Thunder Creek and Moose Jaw. 

 

Last year the department of National Defence retired the CF-5 

fighter aircraft in a cost-cutting move. The CF-5 was used for 

fighter lead-in training for pilots moving from basic training to 

service in Canada’s state of the art fleet of CF-18 fighter  

aircraft. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the retirement of the CF-5, the department of 

National Defence will now be conducting this fighter lead-in 

training on Tudor aircraft at 15 Wing in Moose Jaw instead of 

in Cold Lake, Alberta. 

 

The moving of this program will bring six additional instructors 

and will graduate some 24 students per year. The moving of 

these jobs to Saskatchewan will help save costs. It’s also a 

tribute to the quality of training provided at 15 Wing Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last several years, several military 

officials from NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) 

member countries have also visited Moose Jaw to consider it as 

a site for both basic as well as advanced air training for member 

countries. 

 

The moving of the fighter lead-in training from Alberta to 

Moose Jaw will surely improve the odds of Saskatchewan 

eventually becoming a pilot training centre for other NATO 

countries. At a time when the military is scaling back, it’s 

positive to know that Saskatchewan is getting programs rather 

than losing them. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Shared Services in Saskatchewan’s Rural Municipalities 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The discussion over 

shared services in Saskatchewan’s rural municipalities will 

continue throughout the province. And while that is taking 

place, there is a community in my riding which is quietly taking 

advantage of consolidating services into one facilities, and 

everyone is overjoyed at what is taking place. 

 

How can the community of Maymont with a population of 180 

people build a facility that cost $3 million? The answer is 

simple. Smart economics, smart planning, and a caring 

community; not to mention fund-raising projects that included 

bingos, bake sales, and bred cattle auctions. 

 

Maymont has a new facility that houses a hockey arena, 

kindergarten to grade 12 school, doctors’ rooms, town office, 

seniors’ centre, and regional library. 

 

By having all these services under one roof the community is 

setting an excellent example of cost efficiency, and the space 

provided in the facility is being used to its maximum potential. 

 

The rink fits in nicely with the schools’ athletic program and a 

classroom is used as a snack room for the hockey games after 

school hours. And those are just two examples. 

 

Congratulations to everyone who helped with this project to be 

brought to its completion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the minister responsible for Sask Water. On 

Wednesday, January 13, 1995, the Sask Water Corporation 

opened tenders for two contracts regarding the installation of 

materials for one phase of the Wakaw-Humboldt regional water 

supply system. The contracts were instructed to bid both 

contracts using union labour. The lowest total price for both 

contracts using union labour was approximately 30 per cent 

higher than the total cost for both contracts using non-union 

labour. This equates to an addition of about $1.6 million on this 

phase of the project alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the minister challenged me to table 

figures that I am pleased to do so today. Mr. Speaker, will the 

minister confirm that the CCTA (Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement) will cost taxpayers an extra $1.6 million 

just for this phase of the project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for 

his question. I cannot confirm or deny the assertion he makes 

today. The tenders for the Wakaw-Humboldt pipeline in fact 

were tendered. They’ve been awarded, at least for a section of 

the pipeline, and they were advertised under the Crown 

construction tendering policy and the low bidder received the 

contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I understand that the 

remaining two tenders for this project were opened two weeks 

ago. Once again these tenders were subject to the requirements 

of the CCTA. As I outlined earlier, this has added 30 per cent to 

the first phase of this project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the extra cost will result in the CCTA costing 

these two sections of the pipeline an additional million dollars. 

Will the minister confirm that the CCTA bidding requirements 

will cost Saskatchewan taxpayers in excess of two and a half 

million extra for this entire project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, we’ll not confirm those 

figures that the member is using in the House today. He has no 

model or way of documenting, that by use of the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement, that the contracts actually 

cost any more than they would without the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement. 

 

The other spreads on the Wakaw-Humboldt pipeline will be 

tendered in accordance with the Crown construction tendering 

policy. We believe that there will be good quality work done 

and the contracts are awarded to the low bidder. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, contrary to the minister’s 

denials, estimates range from 17 to 30 per cent that we 

documented today. The Saskatchewan Construction Association 

believes that in ’95 there were approximately $575 million in 

Crown construction projects that would fall under CCTA. Even 

if we use NDP (New Democratic Party) math, we can see that 

this agreement is costing taxpayers anywhere from 97 million to 

$172 million each and every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister justify to the people of 

Saskatchewan this waste of hard-earned taxpayers’ money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I point out to the 

hon. member that over many, many years in Saskatchewan, 

whether it was a Conservative administration or whether it was 

a Liberal administration or New Democrats, there have always 

been tendering policies when it comes to work that’s associated 

with government, either executive government or with Crown 

corporations. And some of those policies have served us well. I 

believe that the current program serves us well, which we 

continue to review to make our tendering practices the best they 

can possibly be, taking into consideration Saskatchewan 

workers, Saskatchewan content, and good quality of work. 

 

And we believe the figures that the hon. member uses are not by 

any scientific model that he puts those in place. He’s making 

assertions that I think are misleading in terms of quality work 

being done by Saskatchewan people for Crown construction 

jobs within this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. Speaker, the 2,000 

delegates attending this week’s SARM convention are also 

keeping a close eye on this government to see whether they will 

keep a promise to direct 10 per cent of VLT (video lottery 

terminal) revenues to our communities. The Minister of 

Municipal Government indicated yesterday that her government 

intends to break this promise and these funds will be directed 

into General Revenue Fund because, and I quote, “It doesn’t 

matter which pot the money is in.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our community leaders care which pot the 

money is in. They are counting on these funds to provide more 

services or to lower their mill rates. 

 

Will the minister explain why she uses the cost of the 9-1-1 

system as the reason for not keeping this promise when in fact 

this had nothing whatsoever to do with the promise of VLT 

funding for our cities, towns, villages, and RMs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have the 

opportunity to answer that question. And I’m glad that in his 

opening statement the member opposite referred to the wisdom  



220  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

and experience to be found amongst the delegates of the SARM 

convention. And having been a reeve and councillor myself for 

12 years, I try to bring that same wisdom and experience to bear 

on dealing with his questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the answer that I gave 

yesterday still holds. And it is that we have used the money . . . 

well, are dedicating the money to health, education, and social 

services in this province  our priorities, the people of 

Saskatchewan’s priorities. And it’s as a result of cut-backs from 

the federal government that we need that money, and all the 

dollars we can find, to sustain the level of services in rural 

Saskatchewan and in all communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House I 

questioned the Minister of Municipal Government about her 

government’s intentions regarding amalgamation. The minister 

once again indicated there is no top-down plan, but added, and I 

quote: 

 

(The government wants) to help municipalities . . . be as 

strong as they can be. 

 

(And) if we can’t . . . we will come (to) the 21st century 

stronger, one way or another. 

 

Does this mean the minister is prepared to take tougher steps to 

force  and I reiterate force  amalgamation if municipal 

governments will not play by this government’s rules? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, may I say that 

this government doesn’t have any rules. And this is not a game. 

This is not a game. This is serious. This is about the future 

capacity of rural Saskatchewan to respond to the challenges 

brought upon them by the withdrawal from the federal Liberals 

of the Crow payment, of transportation responsibility, of 

responsibility in housing, a number of areas where the federal 

government has done funding and they’re not doing it now. 

This is as a result of that. We are using our best efforts to make 

sure that we can sustain the quality of our health, education, and 

social systems in this province. And you should be applauding 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wildlife Damage Compensation 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question is to the Minister of the Environment. Mr. 

Minister, the deer population has become a very serious and 

costly problem for farmers throughout all of Saskatchewan. 

Deer are causing thousands of dollars of damage to unharvested 

crops, stored grain, and feed supplies. And your government 

has no plan in place to deal with this problem. You refuse to 

even consider any kind of compensation plan. Mr. Minister, the  

deer belong to the Crown, and the Crown’s management plan 

has led to the current problems of overpopulation. Yet you 

refuse to accept any financial responsibility. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you implement a compensation plan for those 

farmers who have had their crops and feed supplies destroyed 

by deer this winter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the dear 

member for the deer question. Certainly it is no secret that there 

is problems in rural Saskatchewan regarding conflict between 

landowners and wildlife populations. 

 

The member opposite indicated that we had no plan. Well for 

the member’s information, we have spent over $200,000 

working with landowners in prevention programs, from the use 

of Bloodmeal to fencing to intercept feeding and a number of 

other programs. So we continue to work with landowners and 

will continue to do so until this winter is over. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

your $200,000 doesn’t keep the deer away from the people’s 

feed supplies and from their unharvested grains. It’s costing 

them thousands and thousands of dollars and you aren’t 

providing any compensation to them. 

 

In Manitoba, crop insurance covers 75 per cent of the wildlife 

damages to a maximum of $7,500 per quarter  that’s per 

quarter. In Alberta, they cover 80 per cent of the losses up to 

$13,000. But just like the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program, Saskatchewan farmers are left out in the 

cold with no coverage compared to our neighbouring provinces. 

 

Mr. Minister, why do you refuse to deal with this issue? Why 

have you no plans in place to compensate farmers for the losses 

they are suffering this winter from deer depredation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I thank 

the hon. member for the question. We are working with 

landowners, and in a number of areas; in addition to what I 

mentioned, we are circulating a questionnaire to over 1,500 

farmers in south-east Saskatchewan to get their input as to how 

we can better design programs. We’ve already decided that we 

will open the season earlier next year for non-trophy animals 

and we’re also looking at a permanent compensation program 

in cooperation with SARM and landowners. 

 

Unlike the opposition, we are working with landowners and 

groups like SARM and the wildlife federation to come up with 

a permanent, long-term program to deal with these matters. And 

as far as Manitoba and Alberta goes, the farmers are not 

satisfied with the programs in those provinces either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In spite of the NDP 

terrible job creation record, there are a few jobs being created in  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

Saskatchewan. In fact some NDP supporters wind up getting 

more then one job, Mr. Speaker. Take Garf Stevenson for 

example. First he gets $500 a day to figure out how to delay 

health board elections. Then he gets appointed chairman of the 

Regina Health Board. And if that’s not enough, he has just been 

re-appointed and had his term extended on the SaskTel board. 

 

To the Minister responsible for SaskTel: Madam Minister, why 

is it necessary to give so many patronage appointments to Garf 

Stevenson? In fact why is it necessary to load up SaskTel with 

NDP patronage appointments in the first place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Let me respond to the member for 

what I think is quite an unfair treatment of a very distinguished 

Saskatchewan citizen. This is someone who has headed 

Canada’s largest . . . this is someone who with considerable 

success is head of Canada’s largest grain trading organization. 

This is a distinguished son of Saskatchewan who members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, are maligning. 

 

I would have thought that members opposite would want to 

temper their comments somewhat when made in here when 

they’re talking about someone such as Garf Stevenson who has 

no option to respond. We are proud that Garf Stevenson is able 

to lend his services to as many projects as he has. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, I’m 

glad that somebody over there finally decided that maybe you 

should answer the question because there really wasn’t a good 

answer for it. I know that, and it’s pretty tough when you have 

to defend a man that has only one distinguishing characteristic 

for all of the three jobs that he’s got, and that is that he has an 

NDP Party card. And it’s pretty tough to defend that. 

 

So let’s carry this a bit a bit further, minister. Let’s look at a 

couple of other names on this list like Sherry Leach, former 

member of The Commonwealth editorial board. I wonder what 

that is. Jim Scharfstein, the minister’s business manager in the 

1991 election, the other minister of SaskTel. 

 

And prior to 1991’s election, the Premier promised to eliminate 

patronage positions, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Mr. Premier, in the 

1991 election platform, the democratic reform package, the 

Premier promised to ensure that appointments to Crown 

corporation boards and commissions would be made on the 

basis of merit and not on the basis of politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is this: when are you going to fulfil 

that promise, Madam Minister? When are you going to make 

good on your word to end this kind of outrageous patronage 

appointments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, what Mr. Stevenson 

was not, he was not an admirer of the former administration of 

which  two at least  some members opposite were a part. In 

that I may say he was joined by a lot of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  So if you’re going to condemn Garf 

Stevenson for not being an admirer of that administration, then 

you’re going to condemn a lot of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Let me say with respect to the comment of the now Premier 

with respect to the public service, what he said was we would 

eliminate patronage within the public service and we have done 

that. And the kind of shameful activities which went on when 

members opposite were in office has been eliminated. 

 

I am amazed that members opposite actually have the gall to 

raise the question of patronage in the public service. When 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, were finished with the public 

service of Saskatchewan, it was nearly decimated. We have 

restored it, and we have restored the integrity and 

professionalism of the public service, and for that we are very 

proud. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

the thing that is shameful in this province is the way that this 

government would promise to do things better, promise to do 

things differently and then come right back and break those 

promises one right after the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in just a few minutes my colleague, the member 

from Rosthern, will introduce legislation to establish an 

all-party committee to review the appointment of government 

boards and commissions. We think this would be an appropriate 

way to address this issue and fulfil your commitment to end 

political patronage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ask the Madam Minister, or Mr. Minister, 

whichever the case might be, whichever one wants to answer 

the question, will your government support this legislation and 

straighten this mess out once and for all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Let me just give a little advice to 

members opposite. Patronage is not the long suit of the 

Conservative Party. I think I’d pick another issue if I were you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has 

stated repeatedly over the past week that he will not honour a 

promise to the farmers of Saskatchewan. The minister has said 

that GRIP wind-up bills will have to be paid in spite of the 

promises to the contrary from his government. The minister 

stated on March 1 in this House, and I quote: 

 

. . . and those people who have not paid their bills, to get 

their interest waived, it doesn’t make any sense. It’s not 

fair; the rules are there. 

 



222  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

Would the minister confirm that the rules have not changed or 

he has not changed his mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

answering the member’s question, I will again repeat that the 

rules are in place. If people have a problem with repaying their 

overpayment, then they should contact the corporation to see 

what options are available to them and to make arrangements 

for repayment. 

 

But I just want to add, Mr. Speaker, that the member’s 

credibility in this thing is still waning. If he wants the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan to pick up the $12 million in overpayment, I’ll 

tell you when we sat down to review the Agriculture budget, 

there was a number of things that we would have been erasing 

if this member gets his way  things like 4-H programs, things 

like SCIC (Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation), and the 

list will go on and on. I can provide a list. 

 

If you want that $12 million cut, Mr. Member, I ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask you to ask the member which ones he would cut 

in agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m a little surprised 

by the minister’s response because it is my understanding that 

he has personally stepped in and examined at least one 

individual’s concerns about his GRIP bill and has actually 

cancelled the farmer’s bill. For his actions, I congratulate the 

minister for that. 

 

Handling the situation on a case-by-case basis is what should 

have occurred from the outset. Would the minister confirm that 

he is now prepared to examine each and every bill on an 

individual basis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I said the other day that the member’s 

credibility was waning, and it’s just dived off the scale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that it is not true. I can tell you that 

the process is in place; that the minister does not, will not get 

involved in individual cases. And the member probably knows 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have described in 

the House over the past few days the anxiety and financial 

stress that this government has placed on the farmers of 

Saskatchewan because they refuse to honour that promise. 

 

As a result we have a widow who has no idea where she will 

find the money to pay the bill. We have young farmers who will 

not be able to properly meet the needs of their children, and 

many others who simply do not have the financial means to pay 

these bills. 

Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Agriculture not feel it is 

appropriate that he take the same approach with each farmer 

who received the bill as he did with the one individual? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, the first thing I would like 

to do is to ask the member to table this alleged interference. 

Please, would he do that, and then maybe we can get on with 

clarifying this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hear the minister 

saying that he has not stepped in, Mr. Speaker, and we have 

information to the contrary and I’d be happy to table that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’m wondering what message is the minister opposite sending 

to the farmers of this province whom he refuses to acknowledge 

their individual problems and does step in to intervene with one 

particular farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I do not find this funny, 

okay. I’ll tell you the credibility of that member and his 

accusation without tabling a document is nothing short of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Scandalous. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Member  short of 

scandalous. 

 

I have not interfered in a case. And for him to grab cheap 

headlines, first of all, on the back of a woman who has suffered 

a loss in her family, is cheap and disgusting; and secondly, to 

come forward with this again is cheap and disgusting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I will be happy to convey your 

messages back to the people that have asked, including this 

widow who has asked me to bring her concerns to this House. 

And I’d be happy to convey your message back that it’s 

disgusting that I do so, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would like to at this time table, Mr. Speaker, the document 

from the individual farmer for your perusal. And I will ask the 

minister once more, will he commit to individually talking to 

these producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, for the umpteen thousandth 

time, the member knows what the rules of the program are; the 

member knows that it is not possible for any one person to 

review the documents. It’s ludicrous. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, just start looking 

to the future. The past is gone; start looking to the future.  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

We’ve got a crop insurance program that we must maintain in 

this province. We’ve had 10 meetings around this province 

trying to . . . we’re talking to farmers to build a better program. 

I’d ask the member to get on the bandwagon with trying to 

build a better crop insurance program, and get off the 

bandwagon of having his head buried in the past in the GRIP 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Casino Regina Tenders 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, the cynicism prevails throughout 

Saskatchewan, and my question this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is 

for the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, virtually since the Regina casino project was 

announced, its tendering process has been awash in 

controversy. The most recent reports about the labour relations 

with employees is another example. Some contracts have been 

given out without tendering process as was the case with the 

touring contract awarded to a Manitoba company. And in other 

cases it appears superior local bids were not accepted, as was 

the case with the restaurant contract where a reputable local 

company put in a far lower bid but was still rejected in favour 

of a Manitoba company. And in both of these cases concerns 

have been raised subsequently about these Manitoba 

companies. 

 

My question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is why the people of 

this province do not have a right to know the details contained 

in these contracts. And would the minister not agree that when 

public money is used by the government, the taxpayers have a 

right to know what’s in these contracts? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like 

to thank the member for his question. 

 

It’s too bad that this is the only response that the members on 

the opposite side are able to have to success; that 500 jobs in a 

successful business enterprise don’t seem to be at the top of 

your mind when you’re discussing these issues. 

 

I was pleased to hear you say that you support the labour laws, 

and we’re concerned that they be followed. I think that’s 

important to note. 

 

I will mention that when it comes to the tendering, one of the 

big concerns here was to bring people from out of the province. 

And the only people who had the experience in the industry 

with the casino touring were the Mr. Canada Tours. Now over 

the long run there’s many small operators in Saskatchewan who 

are starting to get involved in bringing people in from other 

areas. They may develop that expertise, and over a time we’ll 

look what happens at the end of this contract as we move into 

another one. But people generally in the business community 

thought this was a good business decision to go with, someone 

with experience. 

 

The restaurant was tendered. There was professional advice in  

the reviewing of that tender. And the successful applicant 

received the tender. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I would just like to reiterate my 

question to the minister responsible for Gaming. When public 

money is used by the government, do the taxpayers not have the 

right to know what’s in these contracts, Mr. Speaker. That was 

my question. I didn’t hear the answer to that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just 

mention that some information requests that came through were 

presented to the conflict of . . . or to the Information 

Commissioner and the ruling was that they contain sensitive 

business information and therefore could not be made public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11  An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(Appointments Review Committee/“ARC”) 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Appointments Review Committee) be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 

and to enact consequential amendments 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move An Act to amend 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact 

related amendments be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The 

Department of Social Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill entitled 

The Department of Social Services Act be moved a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill entitled 

The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act be introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



224  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The 

Child and Family Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Child and Family Services Act now be introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Highway Traffic Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts 

respecting Highways and Vehicles 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill respecting 

Highways and Vehicles be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I wish to obtain a ruling from the Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  What is your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Ms. Lorje:  In statements by members, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale, while making a statement about 

jobs being moved from Regina to Winnipeg, tabled a letter to 

the Hon. Ralph Goodale, federal Minister of Agriculture. It was 

my understanding that statements by members were exactly 

that, and no more. And I would like you to rule on whether or 

not private members could or should table documents during 

those statements. 

 

The Speaker:  Does anyone else wish to speak to the point 

of order? 

 

Then if I’ve heard the member’s point of order, I will take it 

under consideration and bring a ruling back to the House at the 

earliest convenient time. 

 

Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Stanger:  To introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and through you to the House a constituent of mine and a 

former MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and a 

former cabinet minister in the former Blakeney government. I’d 

like everyone in the House to welcome Bob Long, sitting at the 

back. And please enjoy the proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Questions no. 3 and 4, convert. 

 

The Speaker:  Converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Opposition to Amalgamation of Rural Municipalities 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, at the end of my presentation 

I will be tabling my motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government continues to talk about bringing 

Saskatchewan into the 21st century, preparing for the new 

century, they say, making choices for today and tomorrow. In 

one sense I can’t fault them for what they say; they truly are 

making choices. Unfortunately they are making choices without 

talking to the very people who will be most affected by their 

short-sighted decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because of this government’s unilateral 

decision making that I am obliged to address the House today. I 

am talking about forced amalgamation for municipal 

governments, Mr. Speaker. Although this government makes so 

many one-sided decisions I can see how someone can become 

confused. 

 

Municipalities are worried because this government is hiding 

the blueprint for amalgamation under a pile of empty promises. 

I am not against rural amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. If 

amalgamation promotes the sharing of services and the sharing 

of ideas and resources, then I support it strongly. 

 

But what this government doesn’t realize or won’t admit is that 

for amalgamation to work it must be a cooperative process. All 

changes have to be voluntary. The government needs to figure 

out that reorganization must be driven from the ground up or it 

just won’t work. 

 

Changes made now in haste without input and consultation will 

be a detriment to rural Saskatchewan for many years. Rural 

governments and rural people will suffer the consequences of 

decisions made by urban bureaucrats who in most cases have no 

knowledge of rural Saskatchewan. Just because the population 

has dropped in rural Saskatchewan doesn’t mean the need for 

services has. Roads still need maintenance for transporting our 

products to market, so the same attention is  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipalities and communities are not stuck in 

the past; they know that money is tight and they know they have 

to buckle down to prevent the debt from consuming our 

province. Yes, they know that well, Mr. Speaker, because for 

many years they have had to cope with the financial offloading 

by the provincial government. In the past eight years rural 

municipalities have suffered a 36 per cent drop in revenue 

sharing. This NDP government has cut municipal transfers with 

a vengeance. And yet during this time, rural municipalities 

raised their mill rate only 10.8 per cent and managed to 

maintain services even while inflation rose by 34 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the province, municipalities aren’t allowed 

to deficit budget. So these municipal governments have become 

skilled axe men and they have chiselled away as much as 

possible without destroying their communities. Imagine their 

frustration though, Mr. Speaker, when the government tells 

them to get ready for cuts and then increases the size of its own 

cabinet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his sheep need to start leading by 

example. While the Premier is speaking out one side of his 

mouth telling municipalities to buck up for cuts and the other 

side of his mouth is busy creating cabinet posts and hiring 

expensive staff to run non-departments, what’s even more 

frustrating is that the costs of municipal government are a mere 

fraction of the costs incurred by his government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are leading the public to 

believe that amalgamating rural municipalities would put 

money in taxpayers’ pockets. They are trying to convince 

people that switching to a county system like Alberta’s would 

be good for our pocket books. But a report published in the 

1995 edition of The Rural Councillor showed that in Alberta 

the cost per capita for municipal governments is $129.24 per 

annum. Right now in Saskatchewan the cost is $117.12, or $12 

less per capita. Why would we move to a system that was more 

expensive to run, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Similarly, in Manitoba the provincial government completed a 

study to see if amalgamating school boards would save money. 

That study showed no significant savings would occur if 

amalgamation took place. Has this government even done such 

research, Mr. Speaker? If the reaction from municipalities is 

any indication, I highly doubt it. 

 

To bring back this to an analogy the member’s opposite can 

understand, I’ll quote from the Premier himself. He recently 

told SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

that he would never consider amalgamating the prairie 

provinces because, and I quote: I believe strongly the closer a 

government is to the people the better that government is. 

 

Well those were impressive words, Mr. Speaker; too bad he 

doesn’t stand by them. If he did, he would understand why 

municipalities are dead set against forced amalgamation. Of 

course this government is notorious for not keeping its word. Is 

it any wonder that municipalities are living in a state of fear 

after they watch this same government viciously tear down the  

health system in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was a reeve during the so-called health reform, 

and back then they talked about holding consultation with 

communities too. I, along with many other municipal 

representatives, thought the government actually wanted our 

input. But before the process was finished, the former Health 

minister brought in changes she had planned all along. 

 

But I won’t let myself be fooled again, and we will do whatever 

it takes to make sure this government doesn’t get away with 

another farce like their health care reform. We will not let this 

government balance its books on the back of rural 

municipalities, and we will not stand by while this government 

systematically destroys rural life because I truly believe that 

rural life is still the lifeblood of Saskatchewan. 

 

I can understand why this government would look to other 

provinces for answers, but before they jump on someone’s 

bandwagon, they should hold up a mirror and take a good look 

at what Saskatchewan has to offer. 

 

(1430) 

 

Our province doesn’t have the large cities of Ontario, Alberta, 

or even Manitoba. We are still a highly agricultural province. 

We have almost half of the arable land in Canada, and yet we 

house only four per cent of the population. That makes us 

unique, Mr. Speaker. Instead of cramming municipalities into 

an awkwardly fitted model from another province, this 

government should be creating its own model, a balanced 

model that incorporates cost effectiveness with natural 

occurring patterns of rural life. Most importantly, the designers 

of this Saskatchewan-based model should be municipalities 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 298 RMs and the 549 urban municipalities are 

a fundamental part of this province. If these small urban 

municipalities want to join rural municipalities or share 

services, which I believe they already are doing, we fully 

support this. Because RMs are the foundation on which rural 

Saskatchewan is built, no other province has the same emphasis 

on communities that Saskatchewan does. Counties and regional 

municipalities in other provinces don’t play the same role as our 

municipalities. 

 

Our RMs provide the focus for rural life. They boast volunteer 

groups, charities, community leagues, crime-watch programs, 

sports and recreation, agricultural societies, and 4-H clubs. 

They provide rural people with a support system, with a higher 

quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is in trouble right now. On the 

government side of the House, we see a large contingent of 

members from the major centres. In a 19-member cabinet, we 

see only five representatives from rural areas, and those 

members are voiceless, particularly when they are faced with a 

top-down governance by professional politicians. 

 

So who is speaking up for rural people, Mr. Speaker, if not the 

government? I can assure you that we as official opposition are  



226  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

trying to be heard, but we are 10 voices in a room full of urban 

noise, and that’s not easy to be heard. Mr. Speaker, I implore 

the government to listen to us. And I know they will want to 

turn a deaf ear to our pleas because we are opposition, and they 

are definitely not supposed to agree with us. 

 

But this issue, Mr. Speaker, is too important to be trivialized in 

a political game. It should not be about winning or losing 

political a contest. If it does become a competition, the people 

in rural Saskatchewan will lose. But if this government truly 

cares about the people of Saskatchewan, the members opposite 

will not jump down my throat about listening to my message. 

Instead they will accept my words on behalf of the people of 

rural Saskatchewan who do not have a chance to talk to them 

directly. And if the government truly has the people’s best 

interests at heart, they will re-examine rural amalgamation, and 

they will open up the discussion to every person in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is what being in government is about, Mr. Speaker, and I 

just want to close by asking the government one question. What 

is the hurry? The amount of money to be saved is minimal at 

best, but the damaged caused by amalgamation could affect this 

province for years to come. It’s worth thinking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am tabling this motion, seconded by the member 

for Wood River: 

 

That this Assembly denounce any actions the government 

may be planning concerning amalgamation of rural 

municipalities, particularly because, as this Assembly is 

aware, municipalities have expressed vehement opposition 

to amalgamation done without extensive consultation with 

all parties that may be affected by these plans. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 

to join into the debate today and especially happy to second the 

motion put forward by the member from Saltcoats. Since I’ve 

come to know the member from Saltcoats as a colleague, I have 

learnt more about rural municipal government than I’ve ever 

heard from any of the people in the government benches, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m proud and honoured that we would have 

someone so knowledgeable on local governments and rural 

municipalities as we do in our own caucus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I have noticed also are the calls that I get in my 

constituency office, at home on the weekends, in the legislative 

office, from the reeves and the councillors. If you take a look at 

the riding I represent, I would have somewhere around 25 rural 

municipalities and about 25 towns or villages, and so we get a 

number of calls. Some of the members signalling to me 

opposite wouldn’t understand this, Mr. Speaker, because they 

of course don’t have any relationship to the rural municipal 

governments at all. 

 

But you know the number of calls that we get, one thing has 

become clear because the message is the same all the time. 

They ask a few things. Firstly, they ask that the downloading 

stop. You can’t continuously have downloading from your  

provincial government on to the backs of the school boards, the 

health boards, the towns, the villages, and the RMs. 

 

At some point we’ve got to come to grips with the fact that the 

people are paying taxes so that they can enjoy a level of service, 

even out in the rural areas. Not all services are for Saskatoon 

and Regina and Moose Jaw of course, Mr. Speaker. But in fact 

we do need services out in these rural areas and it’s about time 

that I think we listened . . . I think the government listened to 

some of these local governments and start to hear them out. 

Year after year you can’t have downloading and expect to have 

any sort of service out there. 

 

Another thing that you hear continuously from them . . . and 

you would know that they’re concerns are valid if you would 

just drive out to rural Saskatchewan, you know. And the 

members over there are heckling and laughing, but I’ll even 

lend you a vehicle if you would just drive out and see what 

these people are dealing with out there. The roads, the roads are 

in just absolutely terrible shape. Why? Well it comes back to 

funding. You know everything that that government does comes 

back to funding  everything. The bottom line is I think we 

could run this province with five accountants, and I’m not so 

sure we aren’t. 

 

Gravel. When was the last time that there was extra money in a 

budget put forward by the government opposite that allowed for 

extra gravelling? It’s one thing for them to complain about, you 

know, changes in transportation, even though I’m not so sure 

that they know anything of what they talk. But, in fact, why 

don’t you do something about the roads? 

 

You have a former minister of the Blakeney government in the 

House today, and I know that minister used to be in charge of 

Highways and Transportation, so I would ask, if you have a 

little time later, could you take the former minister and just go 

and hear from . . . his advice because I’m sure that he doesn’t 

agree with what the government is doing today either. I’m sure 

that back in the ‘70s when he was the minister, there weren’t 

these continual cuts to the highways and to the gravelling and to 

the RMs that . . . otherwise where did these roads come from? 

 

You talk about, you know, you talk about having no money 

today, and yet we look at what happened over the years in 

Saskatchewan. We haven’t been a wealthy province for 40, 50 

years and built something up. They built it up in the tough 

years, Mr. Speaker. They built schools and hospitals and roads 

and highways. They did that in the tough years. 

 

Now when everyone is living a fairly decent life . . . especially 

the Tories and then I’ll give them some credit. There’s 

problems there, you know, from what the Conservative 

government left but that doesn’t mean you quit progressing. 

That doesn’t mean you just put an end to having services out in 

the rural areas  hospitals or STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) or on and on, schools. They’re just 

cutting on a daily basis. 

 

But getting back to RMs in particular, they’re losing their funds 

for just basic maintenance and gravelling programs and roads as  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

a whole. 

 

Another thing that they raise quite a bit is if in fact the 

government feels that they should involve themselves in 

municipal politics, has the government first of all taken control 

of their own problems, of their own deficits? And you know, 

that's an interesting question that gets raised . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. I want to remind the member 

that the motion focuses very much, and several times the 

wording within, on the amalgamation. And I would ask the 

member to tie his remarks to the motion for the Speaker if he 

would, please. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

exactly what I’m going to do, Mr. Speaker, because the driving 

force behind their so-called need for amalgamation, Mr. 

Speaker, is savings, is dollars. 

 

And that’s the point I was trying to make. In fact it is one of 

doing it for financial reasons, amalgamating for financial 

reasons. That’s why you did it in health care. There was 

amalgamations all throughout the health care. We couldn’t have 

400 boards  costly, too costly. 

 

But do you know what I find costly? It’s not just 

amalgamations. It’s 42 political staff at two and a half million 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. Those are over and above what they had. 

 

And I don’t think the legislature wasn’t operating at a certain 

level. I didn’t see problems. And yet they clearly felt that they 

needed to have two and half . . . Do you know how many loads 

of gravel that would help out in rural Saskatchewan, putting on 

some of these roads to perhaps alleviate some of the financial 

stress out there? 

 

And why, firstly, why would you think that there’s a savings in 

bringing forward any plans of amalgamation? I have yet to see 

any studies done. Do you have a study? Does anybody over 

there have a study showing that there’s big savings to the 

provincial government for doing this? 

 

An Hon. Member:  We didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well sure you’ve said that, Mr. Member. 

Time and time again you’re talking about your savings. Well 

where are they? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, there are savings to be had. Just the 

interest on Crown tendering alone is probably more money than 

they’ve spent on local governments outside of the major 

centres. And I say take that money and let these local 

governments operate at the efficient level that they have been 

able to do. You have laws in place disallowing them to deficit 

finance. If you could only operate at the same level that some of 

these rural municipal governments operate at, we’d be away. 

 

And I agree that if the Tory . . . if those same rules would have 

been in place for the Tories, then it would be heads up for all of 

us. 

 

But getting back to this savings. I have yet to see where anyone 

thinks there’s savings. These rural municipal governments are 

basically funded by local tax dollars. The amount of dollars that 

the provincial government puts into funding RMs is very 

insignificant. You probably fund more on patronage than you 

do on local government. So where is the savings? Firing one or 

two rural administrators? You know, if that’s where the savings 

is, I could tell you where we could save a lot more  right here. 

And I’m going to quote from the Leader-Post, Regina, January 

23: 

 

The chief of staff also said some of the 42 assistants and 

secretaries  whose average salary is $37,580  are (still) 

being promoted and . . . receiving pay increases. (The 

salary ranges from $26,000 for a junior secretary to 

$62,000 for a senior ministerial assistant.) 

 

And we’ve got 42 of these. Now how many jobs do you feel 

that you will save out in the rural areas? Like I’m not sure if 

you feel that you can force enough downsizing or 

amalgamations onto RMs that you’re going to save 42 staff. 

Because, you know, if you were to go out and poll the people 

. . . They do like consulting. Of course they went out and 

consulted a few hundred people and say this is the driving force 

why we’re now going to change how the government operates 

and what services are provided. And yet we can bring forward 

70,000 signatures about saving a hospital and no, that’s not 

consulting. No. A few hundred is far more important, so that’s 

the way we’ll go. 

 

If you were to actually go out into rural Saskatchewan today 

and ask the people, would you rather have 42 staff at $62,000 

each or would you prefer some rural administrators; give us a 

pick; you know what they would say. They would say, leave us 

alone out here. We’re funding our own. We’re taking care of it. 

We’re not running deficits. Why don’t you people go home and 

take care of your own problems? You people  New Democrat 

government. That’s what you should be doing. 

 

The Speaker:  The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to enter into the debate today. Before I start that, I wish to say 

first that I’m very pleased — this is my first opportunity to enter 

the debate in the legislature as the member of Saskatoon 

Northwest — I feel very privileged to represent a constituency 

that is urban and rural. I’m also pleased to state too that I also 

live in rural Saskatchewan, just outside the community of 

Saskatoon, the small community of Harris. 

 

I fully understand the changes that are taking place within the 

rural communities, Mr. Speaker. When I speak of communities, 

when I read this resolution today and when I hear what the 

opposition members have talked about . . . and they’ve used the 

harsh words of amalgamation. They used the harsh words of 

division between . . . of communities out there and not 

recognizing the problems are going on, not recognizing the  



228  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

changes that are taking place in society in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I think of the community that I drive by every time I come to 

Regina  that being Davidson  and seeing the changes in the 

grain-handling system and the centralization of that 

grain-handling system and what that does, threefold, to our 

communities out there. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, it accelerates the removal of the local 

elevators and the tax base for local communities out there. That 

is a problem. The other one it accelerates is the question of the 

road system and trying to manage that into those centralized 

systems. And what we create within the municipal side are RMs 

that are faced with the problem of what is called drive-through 

RMs. It is not their own people within their tax base that are 

using the roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is people outside that community and those 

communities that are using those road systems, and RMs 

recognize that. Local, small urban communities recognize the 

problems. They know change is coming. They know change has 

already taken place. And they know there is a need for a spirit 

of cooperation, for communities to work together to solve their 

problems. 

 

And they have come to this government with this problem. 

They have tried to work on a cooperative basis and many of 

them have done it successfully. But there are roadblocks to 

doing that. There are roadblocks within the system of creating 

that kind of spirit of cooperation. And it is this government’s 

role trying to deal with that question, trying to make it a better 

system by which municipalities  urban and rural, no matter of 

their size  can come together to solve problems. That is the 

Saskatchewan way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  But when I hear harsh words of 

amalgamation, when I hear harsh words of the question of 

division, that doesn’t solve the problems  it inflames them — 

and it does not allow for a creative solution to the problems. 

 

I know where municipalities are coming together to share things 

 the sharing of administrators, the sharing of equipment. 

Small urban communities asking municipalities to use their 

road equipment to clean their communities. The question of 

working together, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time, it is 

important to state that this government recognizes the value that 

these municipal elected officials have on the communities. 

 

These people provide a great deal of volunteer time and effort 

to their communities, to their RMs, be it in terms of work, be it 

being work in terms of . . . I know of one case of an RM where 

the road patrol had broke down. Two farmers who were their 

councillors got together and worked together to fix that 

equipment over the winter in their shops. That’s the spirit of 

cooperation, Mr. Speaker. And that is the direction that we need 

to take, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when I see what’s being talked about out  

here and what a resolution does in terms of how it inflames, at 

the end of my talk I will present an amendment to the 

resolution, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my speaking, which I 

think captures the spirit that is out there in terms of working 

together. And this government has a proven record of doing that 

cooperation. 

 

We brought forward a program where we would help 

municipalities, urban and rural, work together on projects  

inter-cooperative projects, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 

highlight some of those projects that are out there and why 

they’ve come forward and where those communities are, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think the first noted one where municipalities have come 

together to solve a program is in south-west Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, in the area of 9-1-1. Big time, Mr. Speaker, big time. 

The lists of RMs: the RM of Gull Lake, the RM of Lone Tree, 

the RM of Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker, the town of Shaunavon, 

the village of Climax, the village of Consul, the village of 

Golden Prairie, the village of Hodgeville; I’m just dancing over 

the list, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t touched a tenth, but it illustrates 

communities coming together to work together for a common 

goal. 

 

The Assiniboia district coordinated regional response system, 

Mr. Speaker. The town of Assiniboia; the town of Rockglen; 

the town of Mossbank; the RM 11, Hart Butte; RM 74, Wood 

River; RM 42, Willow Bunch; RM 44, Waverley. Again the 

spirit of cooperation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon planning district information 

system where we see a large urban and a rural coming together 

to work. The city of Saskatoon, the rural municipality of 

Corman Park, and the Saskatoon Economic Development 

Authority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the most noted ones that is active in 

west-central Saskatchewan is the west-central Saskatchewan 

municipal association where we have urban and rural 

communities coming together to work on common solutions, 

Mr. Speaker. It goes from Leader . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Member, put your point of order. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like you to rule on 

whether or not the member is being topical to the motion. I’ve 

heard much to do about emergency response systems and so on. 

So I’d like to hear your rule. 

 

The Speaker:  I have been listening to the member’s remarks 

and I’ve found them generally in order. I encourage all 

members to be very conscious of the motion and to direct your 

remarks accordingly. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

reinforces my argument of the question of division and  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

opposition to change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. Now the 

member for Saskatoon is a veteran member and knows that it’s 

entirely out of order to make comment on a Speaker’s ruling. 

And I’ll ask him to just avoid doing that and get on with his 

remarks. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think one of the, 

you know, the other areas where communities are working 

together in terms of solving their problems is in waste 

management. Project of the north-east Saskatchewan regional 

waste collection and recycling system, including the towns of 

Tisdale, city of Melfort, and town of Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Last Mountain waste management project, Mr. Speaker, 

which includes many of the villages around the Last Mountain 

area, the town of Strasbourg, the village of Bulyea, the RM of 

McKillop, the resort of Glen Harbor, and such, Mr. Speaker. 

Again, example of cooperation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just one more. The project to organize a municipal 

government committee, Mr. Speaker, which is the area of the 

town of Eastend, the village of Climax, and the town of Maple 

Creek, and the town of Shaunavon and surrounding 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker. These are examples of 

cooperation. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose an 

amendment to the resolution, seconded by the member of 

Meadow Lake that: 

 

Delete all words after Assembly and add the words: 

support the governments cooperative work with urban and 

rural municipalities to prepare for the next century by 

ensuring government at all levels provide effective, 

sustainable services within an affordable government 

structure. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly I am pleased to enter into the debate this afternoon as 

the member from Meadow Lake. I would also say that I will be 

speaking certainly against the main motion as put forward by 

the member from Saltcoats and as seconded by the member 

from Wood River, and will be speaking in support of the 

amendment from my good friend and member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. And that is to support the government’s cooperative 

work with urban and rural municipalities to prepare us for the 

next century in ensuring good government at all levels. 

 

I would like to say that certainly I believe that this is all about 

being positive. I think the key here is to be focusing on 

governments at all levels  provincial, local, RM, and even 

towns and cities  to be working together. I think that should 

be the seed of almost every decision that we make. 

 

I do want to say that the government certainly has in its plans  

absolutely no strategy or any plan at all for any forced 

amalgamation. The restructuring of municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 

will not take place unless they are initiated and supported by 

local government. 

 

And it is certainly not any sort of a top-down approach by any 

stretch of the imagination, unlike . . . and I remember as the 

debates went on last year here in the Assembly and years prior, 

we listened and heard often from the province of New 

Brunswick where the Liberal provincial government there just 

arbitrarily downsized and created, I think it was seven districts, 

seven health districts if I’m not mistaken, and with very little 

consultation. So I find it just a bit ironic that members opposite 

from the Liberal opposition there are suggesting that working 

with local government is going to be problematic. 

 

An Hon. Member:  I guess that’s all they know. 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  It certainly is. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

let you know that the department has reported through to the 

minister and to ourselves that a number of municipalities have 

actually approached the department officials for more 

information with respect to restructuring. And that’s been 

certainly their own local decision. 

 

I want to refer to a letter that was sent out — and probably most 

members will have seen it, including those opposite — and that 

is a letter sent March 1 from our Minister of Municipal 

Government who sent out to all the RMs and to the reeves and 

councillors, both urban, rural, and northern municipalities, in 

which she refers to the new services district Act which was 

referred to in the throne speech. And she outlines some of the 

background to that proposed new Act, and I know it’s not been 

brought forward here, but in reference to that, she talks about 

and makes it very clear to all those involved that what this will 

be about is about cooperation between the different levels of 

government. 

 

And I find it strange, in passing, Mr. Speaker, if you buy into 

the logic of the opposition members that suggest that local 

government is entirely efficient, perhaps those local 

governments who have marginal bottom lines would or should 

consider dividing their RMs into two or three or even maybe 

four. This logic would suggest that it makes them more 

efficient. 

 

(1500) 

 

When I listened to the member of Saltcoats who said that in 

Alberta  I believe it was  the cost per elected local 

government member was $117, and here in Saskatchewan it’s 

. . . or I should say, in Alberta it was 129, and here in 

Saskatchewan it’s only 117, well again I say that logic would 

say, let’s bring that cost down to $50 per elected member and 

triple the number of RMs in Saskatchewan. I mean that seems 

to make good sense to me. Better yet, why not instead of 

suggesting . . . I suggest to our federal Liberal counterparts that 

the way to create efficiencies is not by cutting transfers, but 

let’s look at doubling the number of Members of Parliament; 

let’s look at increasing the Senators, the number of Senators in 

here. That would be popular, wouldn’t that? This should get us  



230  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

closer to a balanced national budget. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done is we’ve adopted a more 

logical approach and thus to provide a vehicle that allows for 

cooperation, and that vehicle will in fact be the new services 

district Act that I referred to earlier in the letter from the 

minister and certainly that was referred to in the throne speech. 

 

Just a bit of background as well, Mr. Speaker — the average 

population per municipality here in Saskatchewan is less than 

1,200. In Manitoba I know, as our Premier’s referred to a 

number of times, it’s over 5,400, and in Alberta it’s nearly 

6,900, and in British Columbia I think it’s very nearly 18,000. 

And I see the member from Rosetown-Biggar nodding his head 

in agreement. 

 

We have, we have 850 municipal governments represented by 

about 6,000 mayors, reeves, and councillors, Mr. Speaker. And 

in small urban communities there is on average one elected 

representative, Mr. Speaker, one elected representative for every 

29 people and I certainly . . . not to suggest that, in my remarks, 

that anything will be imposed, but I think even when you talk to 

local government members . . . I know in my area up in 

Meadow Lake and through the different communities, Paradise 

Hills, St. Walburg, and the different RMs, all of them are good, 

common sense, logical people who recognize that something 

has to be done. And they realize as well that in working 

together with other RMs and local town councils and with our 

provincial government that that is in fact the way, that is in fact 

the way that they will accomplish more efficiencies  or 

greater efficiencies, I should say. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer you to one more fact. 

In some of the smaller towns and villages administrative costs 

take up nearly 46 per cent of the total overall expenditures. I 

will therefore, I will therefore again, just before I take my place, 

want to again take up, to second the motion by the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest and say that I will certainly be 

voting in favour of the amendment and against the main 

motion. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 

delighted to join in my first debate in this legislature, and as a 

member, lifetime member of rural Saskatchewan, I feel it most 

appropriate to do so. 

 

Growing up on a farm near Liberty has kind of kept me close to 

what I consider the grass roots. Maybe a little bit opposed to an 

acreage outside of Saskatoon, I think Liberty might be a little 

closer to the grass roots than that. I’ve also been raised in a 

family of people that have been on RM boards, have been 

reeves and councillors for many, many years and have suffered 

some of the consequences and some of the volunteer work 

that’s gone on by reeves and councillors of local municipalities. 

 

My father was a reeve, a councillor first, and a reeve for many, 

many years, and I know firsthand of the amount of work that he 

did in the most frugal way to support our local municipality — 

many, many hours of meetings; many, many hours of trips  

across the roads; many hours of testing bridges, looking at 

culverts; going to SARM conventions, meeting with other 

councillors from across the province. So I know full well the 

amount of work that those folks have done. I also have a 

brother now that’s involved with the council and is actually the 

councillor for the division which I farm in. I know firsthand the 

amount of time that he spends doing RM work and council 

work because then that leaves a lot more of the farm work for 

me to pick up on. 

 

I have a problem with, when we’re trying to convince people 

that have worked for years in the most economical and sincere 

way as to how they should run their business. And this is what 

is exactly happening here with the provincial government and 

local municipal bodies in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to quote from, if I can, Mr. Speaker, from “The Rural 

Councillor” newsletter on December 1 when it talks about what 

SARM wants: 

 

A recommendation that SARM oppose any mandatory 

restructuring of rural municipalities, but not oppose 

amalgamations which are locally driven. 

 

Many of these amalgamations and cost-saving measures have 

been in place and have been taking place over the last decade, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that they will continue to do so with 

the good wisdom of the people, local people that are involved. 

It goes on to say: 

 

The association should negotiate with the province to 

address specific concerns such as debt and potential 

liabilities. 

 

Many instances I see the liabilities being toward the province 

and I would cite the capital road grants that are liabilities to the 

provincial government at this point in time, to many of the local 

municipalities, in the millions and millions of dollars. 

 

It goes on further to say that: 

 

A full-blown number crunching study not be undertaken 

because the numbers could be so easily manipulated. 

 

And I would certainly agree with that. I’d also refer then to the 

amendment to the motion which talks about: 

 

. . . ensuring government at all levels provide effective, 

sustainable services with an affordable governance 

structure. 

 

I’m kind of wondering what that means. If someone in Regina 

decides that we don’t have an effective service in their eyes in 

rural Saskatchewan and don’t feel they want to sustain it with 

any further dollars, then we could almost see the disappearance 

of rural Saskatchewan once again. So I have a bit of a problem 

with the amendment. 

 

I also was very much involved in another program — of health 

reform, Mr. Speaker, and a little sceptical of this problem with 

the amalgamations of the RMs. I would wonder if these people  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

that think that there are so many inefficiencies in rural 

Saskatchewan have ever really gone out to rural Saskatchewan 

and took a look at what we’re up against. We look at miles and 

miles of gravel road. We’re now seeing more and more miles of 

road being turned back to gravel, plagued by pot holes. I think 

maybe the term pot hole doesn’t apply any more because many 

of them are much bigger than pot holes. We could talk about 

losing graders and that type of thing, and maybe that’s where 

there could be an efficiency found. 

 

Also I’d like to mention that on March 6 the member for 

Municipal Affairs stated that there was no plan to force rural 

local governments to amalgamate. And I heard the member 

opposite this afternoon talking about that as well. If there is no 

plan to force amalgamation, I would feel much happier about 

this  and I’m sure most of the councils across the province 

would as well  I’d feel much happier about this if the 

government could come onside and come up with a common 

message that this indeed is the case. It doesn’t help when the 

Premier makes a comment contradicted by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

I’d also like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from a column by one of the 

writers for the Leader-Post, if I could. And we’re talking about 

making municipal governments more accountable. And he goes 

on to write: 

 

But don’t be seduced by the Romanow government’s 

holier-than-thou attitude when it talks about the excesses 

of municipal government. The fact is local politicians have 

little to learn from provincial governments. 

 

I would certainly have to concur with Mr. Eisler on that 

comment, in that many of the ideas that have come forward 

over the years have been born at the local level by rural 

councillors and those people on small urban boards as well. Mr. 

Eisler goes on to say that while the provincial government 

brought the province to the brink of financial default, local 

governments were busy balancing their books. 

 

Our local politicians, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, at the local 

levels have to be accountable to their neighbours. The 

councillor that represents us knows that he cannot come back to 

us with increase after increase, mill rate increase after mill rate 

increase year after year, whether it be for local municipal 

funding or for health boards or for education. We’re to the 

point now where the local tax base cannot support a further 

increase, and I see the forced amalgamation of many of these 

municipalities not being an answer to the problems. 

 

Mr. Eisler goes on to write: 

 

The problem that many in SUMA have with Romanow’s 

talk of municipal amalgamation is that the idea is presented 

in such a simplistic manner. It is based entirely on the 

number of municipal governments. What is missing is talk 

about the roles and responsibilities restructured municipal 

government faces now and in the future. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that as we move on and prepare for 

the next century that we all must change, and we’re certainly  

prepared to do that at the local level and at the rural level and 

we will be doing that. 

 

I’d go on to add as well, there are many unanswered questions, 

Mr. Speaker, as to how amalgamation might work. And I would 

like to see from the provincial government some form of a plan 

of what they suggest as we see an urban and a rural 

municipality amalgamating. There are many problems that are 

associated with it. Funding certainly is one where we have a 

large debt on our land base. As I mentioned earlier we can’t 

afford any further tax hikes and I’m just wondering what the 

proposals might be on some of these issues. 

 

There are also the issues that I mentioned earlier about the 

capital grants, Mr. Speaker, that are owing to the local 

municipalities; how that would be factored into the equation 

when a number of them amalgamate, if they do. 

 

I also have a bit of a problem with the top-down entity as well 

being forced when we look back to our pesticide storage site 

proposals when a proposal came out into our area that 

suggested that us and a RM (rural municipality) near Govan 

have a combined storage site. What the bureaucrats failed to 

look at when they were drawing up the plan, that there’s a 60-

mile body of water in between the two of us and it’s a little hard 

to get across there to store cans in their site. 

 

Those are the things that we need input from our local 

communities, our local municipalities, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that some of these changes are made with what I referred to in 

my maiden speech, if I would, as to common sense. Lots of 

times common sense is forgotten and decisions are made for 

political and other reasons and I certainly would like to see 

some common sense brought back into this issue. 

 

Also one of the other problems that I see with forced 

amalgamations, and we certainly noticed that in the health 

reform, was trading patterns. We talked about that extensively 

and my involvement in health about trading patterns, 

economics, and all those types of things. And when people are 

sitting in Regina drawing up boundaries, once again they tend 

to forget where we like to go and where we do our shopping 

and where we do our purchasing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I really can’t accept the amendment 

as it really doesn’t do what we’d like it to do and I just hope 

that through this whole process, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government will come to its senses on this. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 

to make my brief comments in this debate. And I’d like to begin 

by reading the motion of the hon. member from Saltcoats, 

which says: 

 

That this Assembly denounce any actions the government 

may be planning concerning amalgamation of rural 

municipalities, particularly because as this Assembly is 

aware, municipalities have expressed vehement opposition 

to amalgamation done without extensive consultation with  



232  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

all parties that may be affected by this plan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is an assumption here, the assumption 

that there is a plan to amalgamate. Let me assure you that there 

is no such plan to force amalgamation. There is a plan, 

however, to continue to consult and to work cooperatively, to 

work together with our rural and urban municipalities as we 

have done in the past and as we will continue to do in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

support the amendment proposed by my colleague and good 

friend, the hon. member from Saskatoon Northwest, which 

reads: 

 

to delete all words after Assembly and add the words, 

support the government’s cooperative work with urban and 

rural municipalities to prepare for the next century by 

ensuring government at all levels provides effective, 

sustainable services within an affordable government 

structure. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was my honour during the last term to 

represent the rural constituency of Qu’Appelle Lumsden and 

now I represent the urban-rural constituency of Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

In all the time of service to the people of Saskatchewan, I 

would like to stress that any government initiative has always 

followed our strong belief in community and community 

leadership, cooperation, consultation and communication. 

 

As an individual MLA, I appreciate the open door that has 

always been extended to me by rural municipalities, by my town 

councils and by my school boards. In turn, to our government 

caucus committees, the door is open to them to meet with us to 

share their ideas and concerns. 

 

Most recently that was done through the consultation process, 

Preparing for the 21st Century. People in rural Saskatchewan 

have seen many changes take place. They are concerned about 

their ability to sustain programs and services in the face of these 

changes. 

 

The federal government’s withdrawal from the Crow benefit 

will force changes in transportation and trading patterns. Free 

trade agreements and the speed with which the federal 

government is moving towards deregulation of utilities has 

forced them to face changes in farm security programs and the 

cost of their inputs. 

 

The changing demographics  changing shopping patterns, 

changes to where people access their health care, their 

education and their recreation  changes the ways local 

governments provide these programs and services. 

 

Rural and urban Saskatchewan people are no strangers to  

change, Mr. Speaker. They know they must prepare themselves 

for the 21st century and that change is inevitable. They also 

know from past experience it is our New Democrat government 

that is committed to work with them, to facilitate wherever 

possible and whenever possible, and to consult with them every 

step along the way to preserve our quality of life for future 

generations. 

 

Our government has a history of consulting, working 

cooperatively with groups and organizations in economic 

development, for instance, through REDAs (regional economic 

development authority), Partnership for Renewal, and now 

Partnership for Growth; in agriculture and environmental 

programs; and in health. Working together cooperatively in all 

areas. 

 

We’ve done much already. We’re developing a 9-1-1 system to 

blanket Saskatchewan. We’ve worked in consultation with rural 

Saskatchewan to establish a new health delivery system. It was 

not without its problems but is acknowledged to be a 

world-leading change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s cooperation with municipalities 

has strong roots in history. Rural electrification may be one of 

the most significant initiatives accomplished by a CCF-NDP 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 

Party) government in Saskatchewan, closely followed by the 

completion of the telephone system across rural Saskatchewan 

by SaskTel. This little engine that can, Mr. Speaker, now with 

an international reputation; now bringing its technologies not 

only to the international market-place  and we’ve all heard of 

their involvement with the Chunnel  but SaskTel is bringing 

Internet services to rural Saskatchewan, the only province in 

Canada to provide this exciting new information highway. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there has never been a greater 

indication of mutual action than the recent changes we’ve seen 

in agriculture and the economies of rural Saskatchewan: value 

added processing, machinery manufacturing, world-leading 

technologies in ag biotech. 

 

We’re continuing to work with communities in delivering and 

designing health care, in pursuing educational change to 

respond to the need for lifelong learning, and in the challenge to 

work together to examine, to determine the best and most 

effective and efficient models of governance for Saskatchewan. 

Sustainable services within an affordable governance structure. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the measure of success is in the excitement 

evident in every community in Saskatchewan  in the new 

REDAs, the new economic ventures that are emerging, 

farm-based furniture manufacturing, eco-tourism, guest 

ranches, environmental industries, seed processing, cottage 

industries. The list is endless and limited only by the 

imaginations of the Saskatchewan people. And let me tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, that is virtually limitless. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is for these reasons and many more that I 

have entered into this debate and that I will be supporting the 

amendment and not the main motion. Thank you. 

 



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  If there are no more members wishing to 

speak, then we will move by virtue of rule 17(2) to questions 

and comments briefly on matters relevant to the contents of the 

speeches, questions and comment from members. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do have a 

question. I’d like to put this question to the member from 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Madam Member, has the 

government undertaken a study of how many small rural 

communities might be turned into ghost towns by your 

government’s forced amalgamations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to 

stand in this House and answer the question. As with all things 

 and the member well knows this  it’s our plan to continue 

to consult, to talk with rural communities. Now remember there 

are things that have happened as a result of your federal 

colleagues, i.e., the abandoning of the rail lines, which is going 

to create all sorts of problems we might not have anticipated. 

But as always, we will continue to talk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is directed 

to the hon. member from Wood River. As I was listening to 

your comments in the debate, Member, you commented on . . . 

you tied in the interest on the Crown corporations tendering 

agreement, and I believe I heard you say that the money spent 

on the . . . the extra money spent, the interest on that alone 

would be more than this government spent to municipalities. 

I’m just wondering if I heard you correctly or if you would care 

to elaborate a little bit on what it was you were driving at. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to elaborate because as what we were talking about, the Crown 

Tendering Agreement is a cost of some 115 million to 160, 

150-60 million; who knows how large this is? And what we’re 

saying is that it’s millions and tens of millions of dollars that 

could be saved on Crown tendering if in fact your government 

would get its act together and listen to these RMs out in rural 

Saskatchewan who in fact are funded by the local taxpayers out 

there. And if in fact if you would listen to them . . . because 

what they’re saying to you . . . and I have probably 50 or 60 

letters from RMs here alone on the Crown Tendering 

Agreement. Now these people, if you’re such a consulting 

group, this is a perfect opportunity for you to consult with these 

RMs and in fact use the monies that could be saved by not 

having preferential treatment on government Crown corporation 

contracts, tendering contracts, and that’s what I was getting at. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Again I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I direct 

my question to the member for Wood River because I’m not 

quite clear what it is you’re driving at yet. Perhaps I’m a little 

dense. I know that you would like to think that. I’m wondering, 

is it the position of the member, and thereby the Liberal 

opposition, that the Crown tendering costs . . . are we spending  

115 or 150, 160 million? I don’t care; use any one of those 

three numbers. Is that the total cost or is that the extra cost that 

we’re incurring because of the Crown corporation tendering 

agreement? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. 

Minister, I don’t think that you’re dense. It’s just that perhaps 

your government hasn’t shared with some of the members, you 

know back-benchers and such, some of the costs of things such 

as the Crown Tendering Agreement. So that’s why it’s up to the 

official opposition to always make the members who are not in 

cabinet aware of some of the horrific costs that your 

government and the cabinet has placed upon the citizens of this 

province. And that cost is an estimate of $115 million on the 

low side to some $150 to 60 million. 

 

If we’re looking at some $800 million of Crown corporation . . . 

of government contracts, some 550 to 600 million is in Crown 

tendering and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well what you 

would pay extra, Mr. Member, is in fact some  what is it?  

20, 30 per cent, 30 per cent more because of this tendering 

process. And we’ve brought forward many contracts . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now we’ll try and bring a little 

order to the discussion here. The member was doing a fine job 

of answering the question and then began to respond to a 

question shouted from the desks. And I would simply ask that if 

you have a question, that you wait until you’re recognized, put 

the question, allow the member opposite to answer it if they 

will. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle. 

 

At the present time, RMs, towns, are allowed to, under the 

current legislation, share services, amalgamate if they so wish. 

And I’d like to ask the member opposite, that if there is no 

forced amalgamation in the plans, then what is the need of 

legislation? I haven’t had one RM or town tell me we need new 

legislation. So what I am asking is, what is the purpose of the 

service district Act legislation being brought in? 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’m going to rule the question 

out of order because the question is related to an Act which is 

neither before the Assembly nor the responsibility of the private 

member. And so for that reason, I will not allow the question to 

be put. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Was he not 

speaking . . . 

 

The Speaker:  No, I would ask the member not to challenge 

the ruling of the Chair. 

 

In the interest of clarity, I’ll simply repeat that it is always out 

of order to ask a question of a private member for a 

responsibility for which they do not have, and the question was 

also related to a specific Bill which is not before the House. So 

on both of those points I find that specific question out of order. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question I have  



234  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

for one of the members opposite; I don’t believe I have to 

specific. Any one of them could answer it if they can. And the 

question . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Again, on a point of order . . . And I think we 

can deal with this in a little more relaxed form because this is 

the first time that we’re dealing with the private . . . with the 

seventy-five minute debate, and we want to add to clarity in 

doing that. 

 

If I may take a moment just to clarify rule 17(2), and if 

members want to refer to that in your rule books, and let me 

read it and if you want to follow and make comment as to what 

this allows you to do: 

 

At the expiration of sixty-five minutes, there shall be a 

period not exceeding ten minutes to be made available, if 

required, to allow Members to ask questions and comment 

briefly on matters relevant to the contents of the speeches 

and allow Members who spoke in the debate to respond to 

questions raised. 

 

The Chair is of the view that that means that any member can 

make a comment on the topic of debate or any member can put 

a question. However, the question can only be responded to by 

someone who participated in the debate, and therefore when 

putting a question it must be directed to a specific member who 

has participated in the debate. Not to a member who has asked a 

question, but who participated in the first 65 minutes of the 

debate. 

 

I appreciate the cooperation of the House to allow me to do this, 

and I’ll recognize the hon. member for Arm River. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

clarifying that. 

 

I’ll direct my question then to the member from Meadow Lake. 

And it’s a question that’s been asked by many of the 

municipalities in my area and I’ve said that I would bring it to 

this forum. How many dollars will be saved from the 

amalgamation of RMs? 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just respond by 

saying to the member  and thank you for the question  that 

certainly our government is all about cooperation and working 

together with the different levels of government. The premiss in 

the question, I would say, is that he’s suggesting that if there are 

smaller RMs, for instance, that we would force them to 

amalgamate. 

 

We’re not suggesting that at all. We are saying that maybe even 

smaller RMs might be more efficient. Our point in the 

amendment that we put forth is that we’re wanting to be 

positive and we’re wanting the different RMs and local 

governments to work together to create the best efficiencies, 

and we’re not going to say where those efficiencies are. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the  

member from Saskatoon Northwest. Does your government 

have a list of RMs that they’re going to be forcing to 

amalgamate? And will you table that list so these RMs have the 

opportunity to protect themselves from such legislation? 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, before I answer the question 

I’d like to make a couple of comments. One, the question was 

raised in terms of my residency. I have been an active farmer on 

the family farm since 1977. To the question of rural 

municipalities  the amalgamations  there is no list, no list. 

As a former president said in terms: read my lips; there is no 

list. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a follow-up 

question for the member from Saskatoon Northwest because, as 

we saw from the Department of Highways, in fact they 

produced a list of which highways could or . . . you know, a 

priorized list of which highways should be worked on; and in 

fact we know that the government has made lists like lists of 

hospitals to be closed and lists of schools to be closed and lists 

of highways that won’t be worked on. 

 

I would just ask him to just rethink the answer. Perhaps he 

could remember just a list of RMs that they know that they 

would like to cave in on. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. As I referred to earlier in my comments, we see an 

opposition that wants to talk about division, Mr. Speaker. We 

are talking about a cooperation spirit between urban and rural 

municipalities to work together. Theirs is one of preparing what 

they think is a list, and I do believe if anyone possesses a list, 

they do. For I think it’s shameful for anyone to even concede 

that, when we are entering into questions of consultation with 

stakeholders, be it SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association), in terms of the trustees association, SUMA, 

SARM, and the affected municipalities, in terms of the 

discussion and developing a cooperative spirit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:34 p.m. until 3:35 p.m. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  19 

 

Van Mulligen Shillington Whitmore 

Kowalsky Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Trew Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Flavel Murrell 

Thomson   

Nays  8 

 

Aldridge McLane McPherson 

Belanger Bjornerud Julé 

Krawetz Gantefoer  

 



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 

opportunity to speak on a motion of great importance to the 

province of Saskatchewan and to many people in the 

construction industry in particular. 

 

In my maiden speech, Mr. Speaker, I said that if we’re going to 

move forward to the next century, that the Premier always says 

that we have to be challenged to do, we have to first of all look 

at our past, and we have to be willing to look at our past with 

the light of correcting mistakes that have obviously been made. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this government has 

made a very tragic mistake in their implementation of the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

In the 1991 caucus document of the NDP entitled Democratic 

Reforms for the 1990’s, and I quote from that document, it said: 

 

. . . public tendering and acceptance of the lowest bidder 

should ensure that Saskatchewan taxpayers get the best 

possible price for all work. 

 

It also further stated that contract specifications must be written 

without favouritism and must not change. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that most people would agree that 

that is a very laudable type of direction to put into place. And 

what we have instead is the reality — that the government has 

implemented a Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, 

CCTA, which will make it easy for all of us for the rest of this 

debate. And the outrage and the actual concern that has been 

expressed about this whole issue has been pretty much 

universal. 

 

I quote from a Saskatoon Star-Phoenix advertisement that had 

the names of almost 400 construction firms in the province that 

raised their concerns on Friday, June 16, 1995. And the 

headline reads: “Government union preference tendering to cost 

$100 million this year.” 

 

And I would like to read this into the record because I think it’s 

extremely important that the concerns that have been expressed 

over the last months about this issue are read into the record so 

that there is a public discourse in this whole issue: 

 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement (C.C.T.A.), 

negotiated by the Government with the Building Trade 

Unions, is illegal in that it violates the rights of both 

workers and contractors according to Saskatchewan labour 

legislation. The government has delayed since March 29, 

1995 an application to the government appointed Labour 

Relations Board which would declare the C.C.T.A. illegal 

and strike it down. 

 

Second point: 

 

The C.C.T.A. is a betrayal of the government’s 1991 

election promise of “fair and open tendering of all 

government contracts, with equal opportunity to all 

businesses based on merit.” 

 

Third point: 

 

The C.C.T.A. discriminates against the employment of 

local workers and contractors, with preference going to 

union hall workers in Regina and Saskatoon and to big city 

union contractors. 

 

Fourth point: 

 

The C.C.T.A. will decrease competition and unnecessarily 

inflate government construction costs ($100 million this 

year) and results in more tax and utility rate increase and/or 

more cut backs in health, education, municipal grants, . . . 

 

And it goes on to list the 400 companies that say the following 

firms are opposed to this costly and unfair Saskatchewan union 

preference policy and believe they have a responsibility to tell 

all Saskatchewan citizens the true facts about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concern has been echoed in many formats and 

by many people who have expressed their concern about this 

policy. I quote again from the Leader-Post and I know that 

members opposite regard the Leader-Post in high regard in 

terms of its reliability for quotes. 

 

This is from the Leader-Post, March 4, 1995 an article in a 

column by Bruce Johnstone. And the question is, he poses, and 

he says, and I quote: 

 

When is a Fair Wage Policy not a fair wage policy? 

 

When it’s the NDP government’s Fair Wage Policy, which 

is anything but. 

 

And he goes on to copy the concerns that are there and I would 

like to raise some of them. 

 

In reality, the Fair Wage Policy is fair only to unionized 

contractors and tradesmen. It’s patently unfair to everyone 

else, including non-unionized contractors and tradesmen, 

who represent the majority of the construction industry in 

this province. 

 

The Fair Wage Policy is also unfair to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and Crown corporation ratepayers, who must 

foot the bill (ultimately) for the NDP’s promise to give 

construction trade unions preference in government 

projects. 

 

Why is the Fair Wage Policy unfair? It’s unfair (Mr. 

Speaker) because it tilts the playing field for government 

work clearly in the direction of the construction trade 

unions and their employers. 

 

It does this by forcing all contractors, including non-union  



236  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

ones, to pay union scale when bidding on construction 

projects of more than $50,000 in urban areas and more 

than $150,000 in rural areas. 

 

Aside from increasing the cost of government projects, the 

Fair Wage Policy requires contractors to hire union 

tradesmen almost exclusively. 

 

The rules require that three out of four employees hired 

must be union members and that the non-union contractor 

must collect union dues from all employees, whether union 

or non-union. 

 

The agreement also sets up a fund, which skims off 21 

cents an hour of employees’ wages (union or non-union), 

to “create, support and promote programs to continually 

enhance the unionized construction product.” 

 

What this gobbledegook means is anybody’s guess, but it 

sounds better than “union slush fund,” which is probably 

closer to the truth. 

 

And I go on to quote further: 

 

Where’s the fairness in dictating union scale as the 

minimum wage for construction projects, regardless of the 

going rate in the industry (today)? 

 

Where’s the fairness in giving three out of four jobs on 

government projects to union members, who represent the 

minority of the construction trades in this province? 

 

Where’s the fairness in preventing non-unionized 

contractors from using all but a handful of their regular 

employees when working on government projects? 

 

And where’s the fairness in squeezing out experienced, 

skilled, non-union tradesmen from all but a few jobs on 

government construction projects? 

 

For non-union contractors and their employees, the 

government’s Fair Wage Policy isn’t fair at all. “It’s really 

fraud,” said one non-union contractor. 

 

In fact, the NDP’s Fair Wage Policy has nothing to do with 

fairness and everything to do with the union movement’s 

cozy relationship with the NDP. 

 

And it’s fair to say the policy is nothing more than 

pay-back for the unions’ past support of the NDP and a 

down payment on the next five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a number of other articles that go on to 

outline the same kind of concerns that have been quoted in the 

newspapers, from the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix to the 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald, and they outline similar concerns. 

 

(1545) 

 

This whole situation has resulted in such outrage by the 

contractors that we ended up in a situation in Yorkton where  

actually the local contractors boycotted a project that was put 

forward. And again I quote Mr. Bruce Johnstone from the 

Leader-Post article on August 5, ’95, and I quote: 

 

Putting your money where your mouth is, is easier . . . (to 

say than it is to do). 

 

But that’s exactly what contractors in small-town 

Saskatchewan are doing to protest the government’s 

pro-union policy on Crown construction . . . 

 

Twice in as many weeks contractors have refused to bid on 

construction . . . (projects) for Crown corporations. 

 

Why are contractors turning down Crown projects worth 

millions of dollars? Are construction jobs so plentiful that 

contractors and workers . . . (can’t afford the) work? 

 

The answer to the first question is: The Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement, which was imposed 

. . . earlier . . . by the NDP government. 

 

So what we have here is a situation that in rural Saskatchewan 

we end up with contractors who refuse to bid on government 

contracts because they don’t want to comply with the 

outrageous kind of conditions that there are in this agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is obviously something that is so wrong to the 

people of this province that I know that the government and the 

members opposite will realize that something fundamental has 

to change in this whole issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout the debate over the last couple of days 

on this issue, it seems that people are very much confused as to 

how this all works. What we tabled today is documents that 

outline on one particular project how this program goes off the 

rails. 

 

In the one section of the project, from the river to Wakaw, in 

the Humboldt-Wakaw water pipeline project, the tenders called 

for the contractors to meet all the requirements of the CCTA 

agreement. And that was largely done, except one contractor 

from Alberta had the courage to bid it with non-CCTA 

compliance. And his contract, which was rejected out of hand 

because it didn’t meet this outrageous sort of conditions, were 

exactly shown in the documents tabled to represent a savings to 

the people of this province of $1.6 million on this one phase of 

this project alone. Thirty per cent of the cost could have been 

saved on that one component. 

 

And so when you say, how do you calculate the savings of these 

numbers globally, it is really quite simple mathematics. If you 

realize that Crown construction projects over time in a province 

cost somewhere in excess of $500 million, a 30 per cent saving 

of that amount by abandoning this outrageous CCTA agreement 

represents over $100 million. That’s a saving that could be 

realized. And this saving then could be applied to meet 

priorities that the government undoubtedly has  priorities of 

health; priorities of education; priorities of child poverty; the 

priorities of the food banks  priorities that are there. 



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

Daily we hear in the House that the members opposite say our 

problems are linked solely to the problems that we’re inheriting 

from the federal government. They have got problems as well. 

This government faced problems four years ago in dealing with 

their fiscal situation that they inherited from the Tories, and 

everybody understood that you had to balance your budget. And 

that is a commendable thing that had to be done, but it is 

impossible to tell me that that wasn’t done without severe 

cut-backs imposed on further levels of government. Everyone in 

this province had to tighten their belt and to help with this 

project. Similarly everyone in this country now has to help the 

federal government balance their books. And what we have to 

do is do our part as citizens. The Finance minister said that 

what he was trying to do was be fair right across this country, 

and Saskatchewan has been treated as fairly as any other citizen 

in this country. 

 

What we’re pointing out here, Mr. Speaker, is a way that this 

government, that is totally part of this government’s policy, by 

changing the CCTA agreement could save in excess of $100 

million each and every year. And, Mr. Speaker, I say this 

without recrimination or anything else. We simply must admit 

that that is an important priority that we have to do. 

 

It’s necessary so that we can meet the other very essential 

programs that are needed in this province. We simply cannot 

afford, in this day and age, to have a policy that preferences one 

group of people at the expense of taxpayers, at the expense of 

people that are going hungry, at the expense of education 

cut-backs, at the expense of health cut-backs. We simply cannot 

afford this money, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’ve asked 

that we consider this motion today  that we simply have to 

admit that a mistake was made. 

 

We understand you mean well. That’s not the point of this 

debate. We understand that you’re trying. But you simply have 

missed the boat on this one. You simply did not estimate the 

magnitude of the costs that were going to occur by the changes 

in these policies that are outlying. We have demonstrated to you 

one simple example where it’s 30 per cent. Now in other 

projects, it might be less. But even if it’s half that amount, we 

can’t afford this. We simply cannot afford it. The people of this 

province can’t afford it; the taxpayers of this province can’t 

afford it. And you know, members opposite, that programs that 

are priority for the needs and the essential items of this province 

can’t afford this policy. 

 

So we simply ask that this policy be reconsidered; that you 

admit that this thing has not worked out the way that you 

thought, and that we go to fair and open tendering and that the 

policy and principle of the lowest bid that qualifies without the 

CCTA kind of preconditions is what is in the best interest of all 

of the people of this province. And we urge the members 

opposite to not only support the details of this motion, but the 

spirit of what it is intended to say. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I very proudfully, in closing, move the 

motion, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek, and I 

ask this Assembly to please consider this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a honour to join 

in the debate by seconding the motion presented by my 

colleague from Melfort-Tisdale regarding the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why I chose to run for election 

in this House is because I believe the taxpayers need a 

government that will use their money wisely and for the benefit 

of all taxpayers, not just a preferred few. The Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement fails on both of these 

counts. It fails to provide value for money, and it fails to benefit 

all Saskatchewan people equally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, estimates are that this policy will cost the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan anywhere from 15 to  we’ve 

heard today  30 per cent more for each contract awarded by 

the Crown corporations involved. These corporations, including 

SaskTel, SaskPower, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), STC, Sask Water and Sask Forest Products, offered 

hundreds of millions of dollars worth of work in 1995. It leads 

to a much increased burden on the taxpayer. This, Mr. Speaker, 

means the taxpayers are not getting the best value for their 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recent months we’ve heard a great deal of 

whining from members opposite about a reduction to their 

overall transfers for health, education, and social services from 

the federal government. They whine about this even though the 

dollar figures they use are very small in proportion to their 

overall spending. The members opposite complain about cuts 

from the federal government even though they go on and tell 

the federal colleagues that they should cut their own deficit. 

The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, want to have the best of 

both ways. Not only do they want to have it both ways, they 

insist on continuing to blame everything on someone else. 

 

In the last four years it was on the Tories who are now the third 

party. With that record getting pretty well worn out, they needed 

a new scapegoat. Instead of bashing the Tories around, this 

government is trying to pick on the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker. The problem with the strategy of blaming is that this 

government avoids doing something about things that are under 

its own control. 

 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement is one of those 

things that they could act on. Instead of blaming someone else, 

Mr. Speaker, the government could rescind this wasteful policy 

and ensure that any inflationary effects it may have are 

removed. Removing the policy could also ensure that taxpayers 

are getting the best value for their money. 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, that taxpayers would like an answer 

to is why would this government continue to keep a preferential 

and wasteful policy in place. The answer to this question can be 

found in the actions of this government. 

 

Over the last several months we’ve learned that this government 

has no care or concern for wasting taxpayers’ money. They 

figure it’s okay to continue to waste money and blame other 

people for their problems. In the last few months they’ve shown 

their commitment to this by expanding the size  



238  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

of cabinet and the numbers of political staff. They’ve added a 

department and another deputy minister. They introduced a 

wasteful review process in SaskPower and another for 

SaskEnergy. In both cases these reviews were useless because 

the government already knew what it was going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are not interested in ridding 

the taxpayers of a wasteful policy because they just happen to 

like this sort of waste. They know it’s easier to waste money 

and blame others instead of cleaning up a mess and taking 

responsibility for their own decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement fails to provide equal benefit for all 

taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure other people in this House 

would agree that the policies of our provincial government 

should benefit everyone equally because we all pay for them to 

the best of our ability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many small contractors, some of whom are in my 

constituency, are concerned that this policy will work against 

small businesses like theirs. Mr. Speaker, this policy requires 

contractors bidding on Crown projects with eight or more 

employees to have 75 per cent of them unionized. This includes 

subcontractors. Many small firms who get work on these jobs 

are small firms who are not unionized. While they have no 

qualms against paying a fair wage, this tendering policy will 

hurt them in other ways. 

 

Local contractors in rural areas cannot afford to be unionized 

because they do not live by government work alone. They must 

bid for smaller jobs in their own communities and neighbouring 

towns. These local jobs will not bear the prices charged by 

union contracting. The Crown tendering agreement puts them 

between a rock and a hard place. They need government work, 

but they need private work. They must be unionized to get 

government work, but they can’t afford to be if they want to 

continue to get the work they need locally to survive. 

 

One of my constituents put the situation this way, Mr. Speaker, 

and I can quote from an article in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald 

where he said: “You have to be unionized to get a Crown 

corporation contract, but your regular customers won’t pay 

union rates. We’re not big enough to do either/or.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem which will arise if this tendering 

policy is not changed is that local contractors will leave. If they 

can’t make it, they’ll do what they have to do to survive. The 

loss of local contractors will mean a loss of jobs in rural areas 

and our urban communities as well. Mr. Speaker, a few short 

weeks ago we heard this government tell us that jobs were their 

number one priority. If that is the case, then the solution to this 

problem is simple: tear up this agreement and help preserve 

jobs in this province. 

 

The contractors who say they are caught in a bind are 

understanding people. They have every bit of respect for the 

people who work for them. In short, they believe that people 

deserve a fair wage for fair work. One of my constituents 

suggests that this government should have a fair wage law that 

sets standards. It would be a lot better if I knew when I bid on a  

job that I’m not up against some guy who’s paying half what I 

am. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these contractors are worried about this, and they 

are offering solutions. These are solutions that my colleague, 

the member from Wood River, alluded to some months ago. 

This government promised to review how well this policy was 

working this month. They should now know from the boycotts 

that their policy is hurting Saskatchewan people, and it fails to 

benefit everyone, and it is time to change. So this is why I 

second the motion. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

congratulations for your first opportunity to take the chair. 

 

I won’t get into too much on what my colleagues have touched 

on already because they’ve done an excellent job of laying out a 

case as to why the Crown construction tendering process is in 

fact flawed, unaffordable, and really something that the people 

of Saskatchewan aren’t wanting; aren’t needing, and it really 

sets us back into the Dark Ages, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I won’t get into that, only to say that the cost of having an 

extra $115 million or more tacked onto projects in this province 

at a time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we need roads and we 

need schools and we need hospitals, and we need to take care of 

the kids that live in poverty and take care of children that don’t 

have enough to eat on their way to school, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

. . . that’s the kind of stuff we should be spending the money on 

if there’s going to be money spent in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

In fact, you know when I think back a few months ago when in 

fact I was the critic of Labour and we were dealing with the 

Crown tendering . . . because it seems like it’s been around for 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re just dealing with it 

almost on a daily basis now. It’s just one of the sore points that 

the people of this province have with the government. But I 

look back to a release that I did on September 8, 1995, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and it is not that the people of the province 

aren’t trying to make some of the policies of the government 

work . . . of course they are. And that’s why the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, . . . in fact president of that 

association at that time was Mr. Jim Chase. And they had a 

proposal of coming out with a fair-wage policy. 

 

Now the preferred route of the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association, our own caucus, I think most of the people in this 

province, is to not have a policy. Go with the policy that was 

promised us going into the ’91 election and again the ’95 

election, and that is that the lowest bidder that’s filling all the 

requirements of the job . . . which aren’t preferential treatment, 

the lowest bidder would get the job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But in fact the Saskatchewan Construction Association took a 

view that if the government felt that they had all this extra 

money to spend, then so be it. Can we at least have a policy in 

place that’s giving a level and fair playing-field to all the firms 

of the province? That’s not being outrageous. That’s being very  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

common sense. So of course they brought forward a proposal of 

a fair-wage policy which was supported by our caucus, not the 

preferred route, but it was an option, and it was an alternative to 

a very bad and costly policy of the government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would rather touch on today is, in 

fact, what some of the people of the province feel about this 

policy. You know the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talks 

so much about going out throughout Saskatchewan and being 

on these consultation tours. It doesn’t matter if they’re talking 

about the budget or the future direction of Crown corporations 

or the direction of government as a whole. They’re telling us 

they’re consulting. 

 

Well if they really and truly are consulting . . . and in fact the 

very reason why they’re bringing down legislation which I 

think, in the end is only to force amalgamations of the rural 

municipalities . . . because a few hundred people at a 

budget-hearing process, you know, suggested it as an 

alternative. And yet 70,000 people trying to save the Plains 

Health Centre doesn’t seem to be a consulting process. 

 

But what I have here today . . . I phoned out to my constituency 

assistant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I asked my assistant, I said, 

you know, I know we’ve gotten quite a few letters lately  and 

I’m talking within the last month  on Crown construction 

tendering policy only. And could you let me know how many? 

Fax a few letters up, whatever we have, so I could bring them 

forward to the government and that we may be able to let this 

government know exactly how some of the RMs . . . 

 

And I’m going to deal today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just with 

rural municipal governments, their feeling towards the Crown 

tendering policy, the letters that have been sent to my office in 

Shaunavon, in constituency Wood River. So Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’ll go through a few of these. The first one comes 

from the rural municipality of Pinto Creek, no. 75. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m going to quote from a few of these letters, and it’s 

regarding provincial government’s Crown construction 

tendering policy: 

 

Please be advised that the council of this municipality are 

not in favour of this program. They believe that it will 

discriminate against workers and companies that are 

non-union and certainly won’t help to create work for 

small companies that can’t afford to hire union wage 

employees. 

 

That is from a community in my constituency of Kincaid, Pinto 

Creek. 

 

The next one I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the village of 

Meyronne, is only a few miles to the east of Hazenmore in the 

RM of Pinto Creek. The village of Meyronne, the response here 

is: 

 

The council of the village of Meyronne disapproves of this 

agreement. Council feels that the additional tax dollars it 

will cost cannot be put onto the people of Saskatchewan . 

As well, it will obviously not be good for the non-union 

workers and companies. 

Going further, we have the town of Willow Bunch on the 

eastern edge of my constituency: 

 

Council strongly disapproves of the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement. They feel that the Crown is being 

very discriminating in its policies in their dealings with 

non-unionized companies and workers. All companies and 

workers should be treated equally by their government, and 

not just a select few. 

 

These are the feelings of the people out there in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Going on, we have the RM of Lac Pelletier in . . . (inaudible) 

. . . and most of . . . well I guess all of that RM is within the 

boundaries of the Wood River constituency. They write . . . and 

I’m only going to take one or two lines out of each letter, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, for the sake of time because I will table this 

later, and I’m sure all the government members are going to be 

most enthused to get copies of this and read through it and try 

and get some feeling of what the people out there really do feel: 

 

In response to your request, the council would like to 

indicate that they are not in favour of the current Crown 

tendering policy. 

 

That’s from the RM of Lac Pelletier. 

 

Here we have the Rural Municipality of Stonehenge, no. 73. 

And this is in Limerick: 

 

Council disapproves of the whole idea of a 

union-preference policy. Increased labour costs will result 

in fewer jobs being tendered as there will always be only 

so much money designated for construction. As well, any 

small-town contractor who cannot afford to hire union 

workers will not be able to compete for subcontracts, and 

this will hurt our rural economy. 

 

That’s really what they’re concerned about, Mr. Speaker: the 

cost to the province, also the cost of jobs in their own areas. 

There’s a whole list of problems. 

 

The Rural Municipality of Old Post, no. 43. This is in the 

community of Wood Mountain, still in my constituency, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

Council has instructed that I write you and inform you that 

it disapproves of this agreement. 

 

We’re going to go through many of these where in fact they’re 

disagreeing with the government policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Here we have the village of Limerick: the council of the village 

of Limerick opposes this tendering policy and cites the lack of 

bidding on contracts in Swift Current, for an example, as an 

indication of how much opposition there is across the province 

to this agreement. The provincial government has obviously 

gone too far this time in trying to impose their will on the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is interesting is how  



240  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

strong the feelings of some of these councils. And you can’t say 

they’re politically biased one way or another. Some of these 

councils have a mayor, a reeve, 8 or 10 councillors, aldermen, 

and so a significant amount of people. And it is just not that 

they’re all leaning one way; probably most are non-partisan. 

But they’re having to deal with government policy and they’re 

really concerned about this. The rural municipality of 

Auvergne, no. 76 in the community of Ponteix . . . and the 

members opposite would know the community of Ponteix 

because that was one of the first hospitals that they chose to 

close and shut the doors of that community’s hospital: 

 

Please be advised that the council of the RM of Auvergne, 

no. 76, passed the following resolution at their September 

8, 1995 meeting. 

 

And it goes on that the RM of Auvergne, no. 76, advised Glen 

McPherson, MLA, that this RM  it’s a quote, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker  does not approve of the government’s Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. I could see why that 

community would be concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

perhaps if we didn’t have these kind of wasteful policies, then 

the government, you know, would be able to keep some 

semblance of health care in a community such as Ponteix. 

 

We go on to the rural municipality of Mankota, basically the 

same. They’re concerned about the construction policies of the 

government. At the regular meeting of the RMs of Mankota, no. 

45 and Glen McPherson, no. 46 . . . and again, Mr. Speaker, the 

RM of Glen McPherson, it’s not named after me, although if 

for the record we would like to say it is, I’ll accept that. Both 

councils expressed a great deal of concern with the allegations 

made by President Chase, a union monopoly, when it comes to 

government contracts, is not acceptable. 

 

I’ll try and hurry through some of these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but as you can see, the list is getting quite lengthy here. The 

town of Shaunavon, my home town: 

 

Please be advised that council does not approve of the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

It is their general feeling that it is adding extra costs to projects 

and that it is not fair for companies that are non-unionized. 

 

The village of Cadillac, a little bit to the east, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

 

Council would like to inform you that they totally disagree 

with the provincial government’s Crown tendering agreement 

because of the discrimination against non-union workers and 

companies. 

 

On and on and on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next one comes from, well the rural municipality of Hart 

Butte: 

 

The point of our letter is that the construction costs will be 

forced to be higher due to the requirement of unionized 

labour. 

I could really take up a lot of time, I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and you can see that I’m passing by many of the letters that I 

have here: 

 

The council wishes me to advise that they are opposed to 

any policy which would require union-only contractors 

bidding for provincial contracts including Crown 

corporations. All bids should be awarded to the lowest 

qualified bidder for contracts using public funds. Possibly 

it is time for the provincial government to take a page from 

the local government when looking for a fiscally 

responsible government body to emulate. 

 

I see I have a letter from the town of Assiniboia, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. An open letter here from CFIB (Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business) sent to the former minister 

responsible for Crown corporations: 

 

CFIB has received hundreds of calls, petitions, signatures, 

and letters from small and especially rural non-union 

construction industry players. 

 

City of Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

City council at its meeting last evening agreed to formally 

oppose the new agreement proposed by the provincial 

government, and this position will be conveyed to the local 

MLAs as well as to the provincial government. 

 

(1615) 

 

And that I find interesting because I don’t recall at any time that 

the MLAs representing the area of Prince Albert  there would 

be two constituencies there and one or two surrounding  I 

don’t recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at any point where these 

MLAs brought forward any concerns regarding the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. Perhaps they were going to 

and it just perhaps missed their mind, but in fact they have 

today that they could bring forward those concerns as the rest of 

us are: 

 

Council formally passed a resolution opposing the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and shall forward 

letters opposing this agreement to our local MLA and 

provincial government officials. 

 

And they have that one also, Prince Albert . . . Oh sorry, that is 

from the city of Yorkton, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That would be 

the member or the minister now in charge of SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). And I don’t 

recall the minister, in fact not today in any debate, bringing 

forward any concerns from the city of Yorkton. And obviously 

they got concerns, otherwise they wouldn’t have taken the time 

to deal with it at their, you know, regular meetings and take a 

position against the government policy. 

 

That’s really not a common practice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

you would almost think that in fact if there were these kinds of 

concerns passed on to the MLAs of Yorkton or the MLAs of 

Prince Albert, that they would bring these concerns forward. 

 



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

From the city of Weyburn, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Weyburn City Council still have strong concern over the 

implementation of the new provincial Crown construction 

tendering policies. The city council have a serious concern 

of the effect that the policy will have on contractors 

located in the city of Weyburn. City council unanimously 

request that the policy be rescinded, and more specific, the 

mandatory union hiring hall formula. We are of the 

unanimous opinion that this policy is not acceptable. 

 

Well the member of Weyburn, there again I don’t recall 

anything being brought forward from the member of Weyburn 

in regards to Crown construction tendering policies. But I’m 

sure that this would be a perfect opportunity today for these 

MLAs to bring forward their concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Northern Lakes School Division . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I want to bring it to the 

member’s attention in Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, page 152, 

rule 496: 

 

A Member may read extracts from documents, books or 

other printed publications as part of a speech . . . A speech 

should not, however, consist only of a single long 

quotation, or a series of quotations joined together . . . 

 

I would ask the member to please refrain from using single 

quotations and get on with . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I believe I 

. . . Well once the heckling stops, I’ll go on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The very fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am giving 

a speech and I am giving the concerns of rural people, of rural 

local governments, and I’m only picking one or two lines. And 

I’m not questioning your ruling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I am 

picking one or two lines out of documents of which the MLAs 

opposite were asked by local governments to bring forward the 

concerns, you know, from the councils, the reeves, the RMs in 

Prince Albert . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  What is your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I have been watching this for some 

time not wanting to interfere with what was a brilliant 

dissertation on the subject, your truly brilliant dissertation on 

the subject., It is however . . . it seems apparent however that 

the member is using an exhibit. He pretends to be reading 

letters; what he in fact is doing is unfurling a very long 

document for the benefit of the cameras to indicate how many 

letters there are. To me, the member is using an exhibit. 

 

Those letters did not come all one by one. Patently the member 

has run them through a fax machine; you get a long document 

which he can then use in the House. This is an exhibit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I take the point of order and I would 

like to caution the member not to use the document as an 

exhibit. I caution the member not to use the document for an 

exhibit. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

that case I will table the letters and the documents today. I have 

no idea how many there are. If we can’t table it . . . I’d like to 

table this. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as you can see by the . . . I 

don’t know how many letters I would have tabled today as I 

wasn’t able to go through them all because of some 

gamesmanship of the members opposite, but there are perhaps a 

hundred; perhaps more. But now, if in fact there was really a 

group that wanted to consult with rural Saskatchewan, I think 

this was a perfect time. 

 

I wasn’t reading or quoting from letters of Liberal Party 

members or people that only had a narrow concern. I was 

quoting letters from governments, from local municipal 

governments; from cities, from cities and governments within 

your own ridings. The member from Weyburn, the members 

from Prince Albert, the member from Yorkton  if you can’t 

stand up and speak for your people, why are you stopping 

others? A bunch of foolishness. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the display in here by the 

members opposite today was absolutely shameful. And with 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I will let them enjoy the rest 

of the debate because I’m sure they have letters that they would 

like to table from their own ridings and from their own towns 

and from their own RMs. Somebody that you should be sticking 

up for and you aren’t. All you defend is your union friends. 

That’s all you’re defending. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

exactly. Where is your courage? Why not take a trip out to rural 

Saskatchewan and see what they think. Right there. Come and 

read the letters and you’ll have a good view of what people 

think of your policies. 

 

The reason you’re afraid to go out there is because you’ve 

closed down every hospital. You’re closing down schools. 

You’re threatening to gravel the highways. Now you have a 

chance to see what people think, take charge of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

delight to finally have an opportunity to shed a little bit of light 

on this situation. I just want to say that if the Liberal Party facts 

were anywheres, anywheres in the same universe to reality, 

anywhere in the same universe to reality, I would be sending a 

fax to the member for Wood River. But the only fax he’s got is 

tabled. And I don’t care how you spell fax. 

 

The Liberal Party in this motion is clearly saying that the 

Government of Saskatchewan has last year, since the Crown 

corporation tendering agreement came into force, that the 

province of Saskatchewan has spent $118 million extra, above 

and beyond what we would have had to spend on Crown 

corporation tendering. Well I invite the Liberals not only in the  



242  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

legislature but everywhere, to just pay attention to a little . . . 

perhaps an error. And, well before I share the number I want to 

invite the Liberal media, province-wide  I dare them to finally 

print something that is close to reality. 

 

The reality I’m talking about is on the one hand we have got a 

Liberal Party that is out beating the drums, trying to leave the 

impression that the Government of Saskatchewan through its 

Crown corporations is spending in excess of $100 million a 

year extra  $100 million a year extra. You’re on the record 

today. I recognize all of that. 

 

Now what’s the reality? What’s the truth that the Liberal papers 

should be printing? What’s the truth that the Liberal members 

. . . and I expect these Liberal members will go out into your 

respective constituencies. I expect the member for Wood River 

will respond with the truth to those people, those municipalities 

who sent a fax to the member for Wood River. 

 

I expect that the Liberal Party will show some of the integrity, 

Mr. Speaker, that they spoke so eloquently of in the last election 

campaign. The integrity . . . and I’ll use the quote rather loosely, 

but the former leader of the Liberal Party would say, what we 

need is integrity, so much integrity that we’ll stand up and 

admit when we’re wrong; so much integrity we will apologize 

when we’re wrong. 

 

I expect all of those members to have signed on with that same 

former leader, signed on to that code of ethics. This will be a 

test of the Liberal caucus to find out whether in fact they meant 

it when they signed their name or not. The Crown corporation 

tendering agreement . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like you to rule 

on whether or not the member is dealing with the topic of the 

motion. I see no semblance in what he’s talking about and what 

the motion is. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I have taken the ruling into 

consideration, and I ask the member to get on to the subject at 

hand. 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason for what 

has been going on is the Liberal opposition saying that the 

Crown corporation tendering agreement is costing $118 million 

extra in the past year according to their figures. They admit it 

may be marginally wrong. I suspect we could even push them, 

and they might even admit they might be as high as 10 per cent 

out. 

 

The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that in the first year that the Crown 

corporation tendering agreement was in effect  I invite 

members to pay close attention  in the period from March 

when the Crown corporations tendering agreement came into 

effect until November ’95, there was 47 projects tendered and 

awarded under the terms of the Crown corporation tendering 

agreement. The total value of these awards, Mr. Speaker, was  

$15,077,647. Fifteen million total value of all of the contracts 

awarded under the Crown corporations tendering agreement. 

Somehow from a $15 million total in 47 contracts, the Liberal 

Party has got it that we have overspent by $118 million in a 

year. Well . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  The member opposite was quoting from 

some documents, and would he now please table the documents 

which he’s quoting from. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  On your point of order, private 

members are not obliged to table documents in their speech. 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can 

very much understand the embarrassment of members opposite 

having this being their first private members’ opportunity and to 

have come forward with a motion for this Legislative Assembly 

that amongst other things . . . Well it says: 

 

. . . this Assembly demand the government repeal the 

unfair Crown Construction Tendering Agreement which 

has since its implementation cost the taxpayers of this 

province $118 million last year alone and will continue to 

cost this province in excess of $110 million annually. 

 

(1630) 

 

I can understand the embarrassment when the total covered 

isn’t even a fraction . . . It’s one-eighth the amount that this 

motion claims it was  one-eighth. The total that was spent 

under the Crown Corporation Tendering Agreement is 12.5 per 

cent of the amount of money that the Liberals opposite are 

claiming we overspent. 

 

Well I have difficulty even explaining it because the numbers 

are so goofy. The numbers are so far . . . The credibility is just 

gone. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, where is the credibility on other 

issues if you can miss on this one by so much and with so much 

self-centred self-assurance that you’ve got your numbers right. 

 

I feel very sorry, Mr. Speaker, for our province. I don’t think 

that we’re served well by let’s pick a number. I think the days 

of let’s make a deal, I thought they ended in October of 1991 

with the defeat of the former premier, the former member of 

Estevan. I thought those days of let’s make a deal or let’s pick a 

number were gone, but apparently not. Because under the 

Crown corporations tendering agreement, we have an 

opposition that is wilder in their numbers than the former 

premier in his wildest heyday could ever had been. And I just 

. . . I don’t feel that any of us are served well by that. 

 

I said as I started, that if the $118 million that the Liberal Party 

claims was overspent, the extra cost, if that was real, I would be  



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

sending faxes; I would be writing letters; I would be standing 

up in this legislature  I would have certainly stood up in 

caucus, long time ago. But the harsh reality is that the 118 

million  and I keep referring to that because that’s the 

number that the members of the opposition have used  the 

118 million is just wrong. 

 

The member for Wood River, Mr. Speaker, said it was time to 

get  and this is a direct quote  “time to get out of the dark 

ages”. That was how the member for Wood River started his 

speech. He said it was “time to get out of the dark ages”. And 

indeed I do invite all members to pay attention to reality; to pay 

attention to things going on in our province; to recognize that 

. . . I mean how on earth could you have possibly missed the 

mark so much? 

 

Earlier this day I heard one member of the Liberal Party saying 

that the Crown corporations tendering is 5 to $600 million a 

year. I simply pointed out that under the Crown corporation 

tendering agreement, the total expenditure in the past year was 

$15 million. It’s almost to the point where you don’t know how 

to bring the truth. 

 

The Liberal Party seems to be operating under the premiss that 

if you say something often enough, sooner or later it’ll catch 

and some people will believe it. The member for Wood River 

may think that that’s the way to proceed, but I can assure you, I 

hope that you do continue to proceed that way, because I 

guarantee it’ll be your last term in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  The voters, be they from Wood River, Regina 

Coronation Park  name your constituency, any constituency 

 the electorate deserve honesty, the electorate deserve 

fairness, the electorate deserve your and my and our collective 

considered wisdom. The electorate expect it, the electorate 

deserve it, and they will get it. 

 

From time to time, perhaps some of us don’t utilize the 

opportunity as well as we should, and the electorate catches up. 

But the Crown corporation tendering agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a serious matter that affects literally thousands of trades 

workers through Saskatchewan. 

 

The motion that the Liberal opposition brought forward shows 

their utter contempt for working women and men in 

Saskatchewan. They are clearly on the record, with this motion, 

utterly in contempt of working tradesmen and tradeswomen 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

You’re proposing that we eliminate the Crown corporation 

tendering agreement and your sole hook, sole argument, is that 

workers are getting fair pay. Fair pay for workers is the major 

difference between the Crown corporation tendering agreement 

and the former, looser — much looser — rules. Fair pay is what 

this is about. 

 

The Liberals, joined by the former official opposition, the 

Tories, have stood up and voted. They have spoken out. They 

have voted against progressive labour legislation in this  

legislature since before we formed government in 1991. Both 

parties are on record as opposing The Trade Union Act, The 

Labour Standards Act, The Workers’ Compensation Act, and 

now the Crown corporation tendering agreement. An 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, that is just that; it is an agreement that 

is a tripartite agreement. 

 

It is an agreement that isn’t something that just fell out of the 

sky. It took well more than a year of discussion, of consultation, 

of talking with people across the province. We talked with 

contractors. We talked with trades people. We talked with some 

municipalities and other levels of government. We certainly 

talked with the Crown corporations. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

delighted that the Crown corporation tendering agreement did 

come into effect. The results of it have been very good, by and 

large. 

 

Yes, there are some problems with the Crown corporation 

tendering agreement. I have talked with some friends of mine 

who tell me that there are still a minority, a minority, a very few 

— and I want to stress this to all contractors. You know if it’s 

you I’m talking about. And if you are wondering, then that’s 

who it is — but a very small minority of contractors that will do 

everything they can to circumvent the Crown corporation 

tendering agreement. This very small minority of contractors 

create 90 per cent of the problem in the monitoring of the 

Crown corporation tendering agreement and in the delivery of 

it. 

 

They escalate costs because, as you know, Mr. Speaker, you 

will have projects of varying sizes. But clearly when I talk of 47 

different projects all around this province that were tendered 

and let at a total cost of just slightly over $15 million, you have 

to know that by definition many of these projects were fairly 

small, fairly small projects. 

 

And yet if a contractor chooses not to report the number of 

employees that contractor has on site or if a contractor doesn’t 

report so that the contractor needn’t submit fair wages to them, 

needn’t submit the pension benefits and the health benefits for 

those workers that they receive while they’re on that job, if a 

contractor chooses to hide employees  I’ll describe it that way 

 hide it from their organizations, from the unions; then that’s 

simply the way it is. And the unions have no choice but to try 

and go out and monitor the situation. 

 

And they’re trying to implement this Crown corporation 

tendering agreement with a great deal of diligence and 

understanding, particularly for local contractors. They have a 

very keen interest in attracting new people into the trades. The 

reason for that of course is every year that goes by, what 

happens is we all just get a few more grey hair, and we’re just 

one more year closer to retirement. It’s no different in the 

trades, and that shouldn’t surprise any of us. So you have to 

keep bringing younger tradespeople in as older tradespeople 

retire. 

 

This Crown corporation tendering agreement does a wonderful 

job. It does a great service for the working tradespeople of this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, I am very much enjoying seeing 

. . . because you really have to be here to see the reaction of the  



244  Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1996 

Liberals. They’re taking great joy when I say that the Crown 

corporation tendering agreement is doing a great service to 

working people. 

 

They’re taking joy because they’re going to continue, I believe, 

they’re going to continue to haul coal to Newcastle. They’re 

going to continue to claim that the Crown corporation tendering 

agreement is costing an extra hundred and eighteen million or 

some other fictitious number that they pick out of the air. 

 

I wish I had more confidence that members opposite had the 

integrity that they signed for when they agreed to become 

candidates for the Liberal Party. With that integrity, this whole 

matter goes away, and we can talk seriously about how we can 

make the Crown corporation tendering agreement work better. 

 

We can talk seriously about how it is that the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Crown corporations and the people of 

Saskatchewan cooperating, working together, can continue to 

provide the much needed services at the best level we can using 

the Saskatchewan way. The Saskatchewan way is not the 

Liberal way. Clearly not, clearly, by this motion on the Crown 

corporation tendering agreement, not . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I keep struggling for words to describe how out of 

touch with reality this motion is. How can you possibly have 

spent an additional $118 million, an additional $118 million in 

the past year at the same time that all 47 contracts covered by 

the Crown corporation tendering agreement . . . the total of 47 

contracts was fifteen million, seventy-seven thousand, six 

hundred and  I think it was forty-five, but don’t hang me on 

the forty-five dollars. Fifteen million, seventy-seven thousand, 

six hundred-and-some dollars. 

 

The credibility of the Liberal Party is on the hinge here, and I 

submit to you, Mr. Speaker, the credibility of the Liberal press 

is on the line here too  the Liberal press that continues to 

print, continues to fuel this debate in a scurrilous manner that 

continues to mislead the people of Saskatchewan, continues to 

decry the extra cost of the Crown corporation tendering 

agreement. They do so . . . it’s a great disservice not only to this 

Legislative Assembly, but to the million-plus people that 

collectively we represent. And it certainly does a huge 

disservice to the tradespeople. And I submit to the Liberal Party 

that you’re doing a grave disservice to the contractors by taking 

up a cause with your facts so far wrong. 

 

Come at us with correct facts; we can have an argument about a 

difference in philosophy. Pick a number out of the air, and 

frankly there’s no defending numbers that are picked out of the 

air. That’s why we use very real numbers  $15,077,647, the 

cost of the Crown corporation tendering agreement, all 47, as 

opposed to 500, 600 million total cost, total cost that the 

Crowns have tendered. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, you can get a small minority of 

contractors who want to compete outside of the Crown 

corporation tendering agreement. I know that one of the 

members opposite suggested that there was a one and a half  

million dollar savings on a pipeline contract, one and a half or 

$1.6 million savings, that they estimated on that portion of the 

pipeline represented a 30 per cent saving over the successful 

low bidder. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the contractor that bid that low was from 

Alberta. I was listening very carefully. The contractor was from 

Alberta. The contractor was clearly not prepared to follow the 

same rules that Saskatchewan contractors were following. As a 

result, that contractor knew that that contractor was not going to 

win that bid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure everybody here that if we have a $10 

million contract bid and I’m qualified to bid on it but I know 

I’m not going to win that contract, you bet your bottom dollar 

that my bid is going to be something ridiculously low. I might 

bid $3 million and not get it. Why? Because I have no history in 

contracting. I have no work force to back me up. I certainly 

don’t have the fiscal, the financial resources to make a go of it. 

The place where I submit my tender would of course know that 

of me, so it doesn’t matter what my bid is. But using their logic, 

they could claim any amount of savings. The point is you can 

bid whatever you want especially if you know you’re not going 

to win the bid. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Another way of putting this is . . . I remember 

working in Outlook for the Wheat Pool Farm Service Centre . . . 

And 2,4-D ester 128, our price was at that time something like 

$50 a pail. And there was a couple of places in Outlook that 

sold it as a lost leader off of their truck, and they would sell it 

for about $30 a pail, a five-gallon pail. Well we always knew 

when the two other places were out of this 2,4-D because 

farmers would start coming into our shop and would say we 

want the 2,4-D. 

 

I’d list the price, and they’d say oh I can get it for $20 a pail 

cheaper across the street. My response was always, go there. 

Invariably the farmers would respond, well I can’t; they’re out 

of it. They have no more product. My response was . . . doesn’t 

matter, When we’re out of it, we’ll sell it for $10 a pail. When 

we are out of it, our price will be $10 a pail instead of a fair 

price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporation tendering agreement, as is 

well known . . . certainly Liberal opposition know it. Certainly 

members on the government side know it. Certainly people 

involved in the construction industry know it. The Crown 

corporation tendering agreement is being reviewed. When it 

was implemented, when it was implemented  signed in 

February of last year; agreed to start the implementation, I 

believe, was very early March last year  that after the 

construction season, it would be reviewed. 

 

That review is happening as we speak, but I don’t want to hold 

out any false hope to the Liberals that based on some fictitious 

numbers that they care to share or pick, that somehow that’s 

going to have any effect on the review because, frankly, the 

Crown corporation tendering agreement is being reviewed in a 

very fair manner. 



March 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

The Crown corporations are involved. The contractors are 

involved in the discussion as are the trades unions also 

involved. The three-party agreement is being reviewed by those 

three parties. The view is to make sure that the Crown 

corporation tendering agreement is as fair as it possibly can be, 

as effective as it possibly can be with easy administration and 

always, always guaranteeing fairness for Saskatchewan 

contractors for Saskatchewan tradespeople. 

 

Fairness  and fairness includes fair wages. It includes some 

benefits like pension, like paid health plan benefit. And it also, 

Mr. Speaker, will make sure that we continue to have a fairly 

straightforward set of criteria for the Crown corporations’ 

tendering. 

 

The rules must not only be fair; they must be seen to be fair. 

They must be demonstrably easy to administer. And they must 

avoid . . . One of the things we want to always avoid is for 

Crown corporations to let tenders go to one of those very small 

minority of contractors whose only way of competing is by 

paying less than fair wages, by not providing pension benefits, 

by not providing health plans, by not providing health and 

safety and basic benefits for Saskatchewan workers. We’re not 

allowing . . . we don’t want contractors that are going to treat 

their workers in a less than fair and less than honourable 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the Liberal opposition to quit blaming the 

working people of Saskatchewan for your imaginary woes. I 

invite the Liberal opposition to quit inventing numbers. I invite 

the Liberal opposition to show some backbone, to show some 

spine, to do what you promised you would do in the last 

election. I invite you to stand up and admit you made an error. 

There is no shame in admitting you made an error. There’s no 

shame in that. The shame for you is if you continue, continue to 

defy logic, continue to steadfastly stick your head in the sand 

and say, oh no, our numbers are right; our numbers that we 

picked out of the air are right. 

 

And I just want to point out to the member for Thunder Creek, 

who’s also the Finance critic, your credibility, sir, rests on this 

 your credibility. You cannot on one hand ignore that the 

total expenditure . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. I want to draw 

attention of the member to rule 28 in the rules of the Assembly. 

And if I may just quote it to the member, the point will be 

obvious: 

 

Every member desiring to speak is to rise in his place, 

uncovered, and address himself to the Speaker. 

 

I have listened this afternoon carefully, and there have been 

some examples of members directing their comments directly to 

members on opposite side. And I do want to urge, for the House 

to preserve the dignity of debate that is deserving of this House, 

that comments are most appropriately directed through the 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you for that ruling, Mr. Speaker, and I 

invite . . . How do I phrase this properly? Mr. Speaker, it is  

patently obvious to me  and I hope that through my remarks 

that I make to you, patently obvious to all others  that Liberal 

credibility is going to be tied to this very issue. 

 

On the one hand, Mr. Speaker, they cannot ignore the reality 

that 47 contracts in the first year of operation, which is the only 

year of experience we have under the Crown corporation 

tendering agreement, the 47 contracts let under that, Mr. 

Speaker, totalled $15,077,647 . . . total value of the contracts, 

that’s the fact. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition claiming that 

somehow they can spin that 20  pardon me  that $15.077 

million into $118 million or even more. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

has less credibility than the Liberal election platform, their 

election card, their election promises that required at least at a 

minimum double-digit growth in the Saskatchewan and 

Canadian economy for each of the next eight years to pay for 

their election promises. 

 

Credibility is what is at stake for the opposition in this debate. 

Their credibility, Mr. Speaker, is at stake. I am trying to do 

them a favour by urging that the Liberal Party be accurate, be 

clear, be concise, that they stop beating upon the working 

women and men of Saskatchewan. Don’t blame working people 

for ailments. Don’t blame working people for wanting to earn a 

living. Don’t blame working people for what’s going on in the 

Liberal Party. Instead join with us to make this Crown 

corporation tendering agreement work. Join with us to make it 

work. It will work very effectively, not only for the Crown 

corporations, not only for the tradespeople that I very much care 

about. It will also work in the benefit of the contractors  the 

benefit of the contractors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ever mindful of the time and having thoroughly 

enjoyed myself for the last five or six minutes, I move that this 

debate be adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................215 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................216 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................216 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................216 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................216 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................216 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................216 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................216 

  Flavel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................216 

  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................224 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Congratulations to Thomson Meats 

  Flavel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................217 

 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Convention 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................217 

 Saskatchewan Maple Syrup 

  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................217 

 Potential Federal Jobs Transfer 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................217 

 Schools’ Energy Conservation Program 

  Murrell .......................................................................................................................................................................................218 

 Training Program at 15 Wing Moose Jaw 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................218 

 Shared Services in Saskatchewan’s Rural Municipalities 

  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................218 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................219 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................219 

 Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................219 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................219 

 Wildlife Damage Compensation 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................220 

  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................220 

 Patronage Appointments 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................220 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................221 

 Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................221 

  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................222 

 Casino Regina Tenders 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................223 

  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................223 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 11  An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Appointments Review 

Committee/“ARC”) 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................223 



 

 Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact consequential amendments 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................223 

 Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The Department of Social Services Act 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................223 

 Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................223 

 Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................224 

 Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................224 

 Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 

  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................224 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Lorje ...........................................................................................................................................................................................224 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................224 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Opposition to Amalgamation of Rural Municipalities 

  Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................224, 233 

  McPherson .........................................................................................................................................................................226, 233 

  Whitmore ...........................................................................................................................................................................227, 234 

  Sonntag ..............................................................................................................................................................................229, 234 

  McLane ..............................................................................................................................................................................230, 233 

  Murray ...............................................................................................................................................................................231, 233 

  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................233 

  Recorded division ......................................................................................................................................................................234 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................234 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................235 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................237 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................238 

  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................241 

 

 


