
















































March 4, 1996 Hansard


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  35 

   March 4, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I again 

have petitions here regarding SaskPower and I’ll just quickly 

read the prayer for you: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present those today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Gull Lake, Pennant area of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; Punnichy, Southey, Cupar, across 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 

petitions to present to the Assembly. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility process in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by individuals from the communities 

of Eston and Kerrobert and along the west side of the province. 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I read: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it 

with a fair tendering policy which awards all government 

contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 

non-union, with no union-hiring quotas. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed all from Hudson Bay. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

petitions today on behalf of folks from the Yorkton area and 

from the city of Regina here; also some from D’Arcy: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it 

with a fair tendering policy which awards all government 

contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 

non-union, with no union-hiring quotas. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I’m happy to present these, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province humbly praying that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates. 

 

Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may 

be pleased to immediately repeal the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement and replace it with a fair tendering 

policy. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Nominating Committee 

 

Clerk:  Ms. Bradley, as Chair of the Special Nominating 

Committee appointed to prepare lists of members to compose 

the standing committees of the Assembly, presents the first 

report of the said committee, which will be printed in today’s 

Votes and Proceedings. 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the first report of the Special Nominating 

Committee be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 



36  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower, regarding 

vice-president and general manager of transmission and 

distribution, Mr. Roy Yeske: (1) could you confirm that 

Mr. Roy Yeske used a government plane on August 19, 

1995 to fly from Regina to Saskatoon; (2) could you 

provide details regarding the purpose of this trip; (3) did 

anyone else accompany Mr. Yeske on this flight; (4) what 

was the total cost of this flight? 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Salvation Army Fire 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  The Salvation Army in Saskatoon needs 

help after a devastating fire destroyed hundreds of tons of 

donated clothing at their collection depot. 

 

Donated clothing were sorted, cleaned and recycled at this 

depot and now all of that is gone along with hundreds of tonnes 

of clothing for the needy. The clothes which were lost in the 

fire had an estimated dollar value of $200,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Salvation Army in Saskatoon now has the very 

difficult task of trying to replenish the huge supply of clothes 

and get back on track, this worthwhile operation. 

 

True to form, the people of Saskatoon have shown their 

generosity by coming through with donations of clothing, and 

slowly but surely the supply is increasing. But there is still a 

long ways to go, Mr. Speaker. The mall at Lawson Heights, and 

Market Mall, both in Saskatoon, have set up drop-off depots for 

people donating clothing. 

 

And I am told that the office at the radio station, Hot 93 FM, 

has been filled every day with donations of clothing, as they are 

doing their part to help out. Other media have helped out as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have a long tradition of 

helping people in need. And that is why I ask today for the 

public’s support in helping the Salvation Army, which has 

enriched the lives of the less fortunate throughout our province 

for so many years. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Losses at Saskatchewan Newspapers 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, it is with surprise and sadness 

that I heard of last Saturday’s announcement of job losses in 

Yorkton, Saskatoon, and Regina at the newspapers recently 

acquired by Hollinger Inc. Nine employees at Yorkton This 

Week & Enterprise, as well as 84 at the Star-Phoenix, and 89 at  

the Leader-Post, will be dismissed as of May 25. 

 

It is especially disheartening that Hollinger’s decision was at 

least in part based upon the business environment here in this 

province. Many of those affected are long-term employees. A 

decision such as this must have been an agonizing one to make 

for management. 

 

I take notice that they are immediately putting in place, through 

Deloitte & Touche, a comprehensive job placement program. 

We can only hope that these people are able to find comparable 

employment opportunities in our province. 

 

I also hope that the employees at Yorkton are extended the 

same job placement services as those from Saskatoon and 

Regina. Changing jobs at any point in one’s working life, 

although stressful, can lead to exciting new careers. Many 

people in this day and age can attest to this, so please remain 

optimistic. 

 

I wish the employees affected the best of luck in finding 

rewarding new careers through the program extended by 

Hollinger, or by any other means, very soon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday I was 

pleased to rise in this Assembly and mention the good work that 

the Kinsmen and Kinette organizations do in our province 

regarding Telemiracle. Today on behalf of my colleagues in the 

Assembly I would like to congratulate all of the organizers of 

the telethon which was held at the Centre of the 

Arts/Saskatchewan Centre on Saturday and Sunday. 

 

Congratulations should also go to the participants and 

volunteers, and a special thank-you to Saskatchewan businesses 

and residents who donated money to this worthwhile cause. 

More than $2.3 million was pledged during the 20-hour 

telethon  no small feat for a province with a population of a 

million people. 

 

Telemiracle has earned the respect and attention of everyone in 

the province, and the money raised in Telemiracle 20 will 

benefit Saskatchewan people who are physically or mentally 

challenged and those who have special needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each year it is a delight to witness the caring, 

compassion, and generosity of Saskatchewan residents who 

support Telemiracle. These values reflect the true nature of 

Saskatchewan people and will ensure the future success of this 

telethon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Condolences 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

city of Saskatoon, our province, and our nation lost an 

outstanding citizen. Alice Molloy was an individual of  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  37 

exemplary character, inspiring determination and a gentle yet 

remarkable strength. Her work as a caring social worker, devout 

mother, wife, and friend, enhanced the lives of all who knew 

her. 

 

She was a national vice-president of the Liberal Party of 

Canada; a member of the National Council of Welfare; the 

Family Service Bureau of Canada; the Lieutenant Governor’s 

Committee for the Employment of the Handicapped, and the 

senate of the University of Regina; Chair of the Volunteer 

Committee of the Saskatoon Conservatory and Mendel Art 

Gallery, and a member of the boards of directors of the Mental 

Health Association, Saskatoon French School, Cosmopolitan 

Industries, the Idylwyld Community Association, and Bridge 

City Group Home. 

 

Alice was someone who wanted to make her country better, her 

community healthier, and a very good home for her husband, 

Tom, and her four daughters. And she did just that. It is most 

appropriate for this Assembly to acknowledge the amazing life 

and work of the young and dynamic Alice Molloy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Responder Program 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last session the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood reported on the brave 

actions of a group of first responders in his constituency. Their 

quick response to a heart attack victim saved a life. In a sense 

that was heroism in action and in another it was simply all in a 

day’s work. 

 

The first responders groups which are being established around 

our province are trained to do just that  be the first care 

providers on the scene of an emergency. We will hear more 

stories like this. We might hear them from the village of Edam 

and the RM (rural municipality) of Britannia, both in my 

constituency. Both have first responder groups made up of 

dedicated volunteers from within the community. Both have 

received the intensive training in emergency first aid and each is 

now linked by ambulance dispatch to the nearest hospital. 

 

In her speech on Friday, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife 

talked about people, especially rural people, taking charge of 

the programs that affect them. This is a perfect example, and I 

am happy to see that other communities in my constituency are 

beginning their own first responders programs. 

 

My congratulations to the 15 trained volunteers in Edam, the 

seven-member group of the Hillmond-Britannia responders, the 

trainers, ambulance operators, and health districts. 

 

People looking after people is one more way of defining the 

Saskatchewan way. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I would also like to recognize another  

tremendously successful year of the Kinsmen Telemiracle. Once 

again the people of Saskatchewan have come through with 

exceptional generosity. The 20th edition of the Telemiracle 

raised over $2.3 million. 

 

Over the past 20 years Telemiracle has raised over $35 million. 

It set a record in 1988, with two and a half million dollars being 

raised. The generosity of Saskatchewan people over the past 20 

years has earned us a spot in the record books. People in 

Saskatchewan give more per capita than anywhere in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been a member of the Kinsmen Club of 

Invermay for the past 24 years and I have played an active role 

in organizing fund-raising events in the area and volunteered to 

work at many Telemiracles in the past. So I have witnessed 

firsthand the caring and giving of the great people of this 

province. 

 

Even when times are tough, Saskatchewan people continue to 

amaze. They put their own financial concerns aside and open 

their wallets for their fellow citizens who have even greater 

needs. Over the past 20 years we have truly witnessed miracles 

happen, with all the money staying right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most astounding aspects of Telemiracle 

is its massive volunteer effort. Thousands of volunteers across 

Saskatchewan work hard and donate so much time. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask that all the members of this Assembly join 

in extending their congratulations for another year of miracles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to bring 

the members’ attention to an important week. March 4 to 10 in 

Saskatchewan and across this country has been designated 

Social Work Week. I am pleased that this province is actively 

recognizing the hard work and dedication of the many 

committed individuals working in this field. 

 

As a member of the government’s health, education, social 

policy and justice committee, I am well aware that often hard 

work and sacrifices made in the social work area seem to go 

unnoticed. Too often the thank-you’s are far and few between. 

By setting aside a week each year to pay tribute to social work 

and social workers, we publicly acknowledge the valuable role 

social workers play in today’s world. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers has focused 

this year’s activities around poverty. A number of activities 

have been planned right across our province, such as training 

sessions on poverty and association members serving meals to 

the poor. 

 

As a member of a government committed to improving the 

well-being of Saskatchewan children and families, I am pleased 

to see the association has profiled poverty and its effects on 

individuals. We know that poverty can be one of the most 

debilitating factors in the healthy development of children, but 

no one group can address poverty in isolation. If we are to truly  



38  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

address poverty, we need to work together  communities, 

agencies, individuals, and governments  and we’ve begun 

that process. 

 

I want to commend the association for its commitment to low 

income children and families and for its work with government 

in developing programs and services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in paying tribute to 

the valuable role social workers play in our communities. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

much has been said about the cracks that have developed in 

Saskatchewan’s health care system since the NDP(New 

Democratic Party) government came to power. 

 

As a result of this government’s so-called restructuring of 

health care, we now have a system in which economics rate 

above the personal well-being of our residents. And in fact this 

government’s own polling indicates that the people of 

Saskatchewan are more concerned about their health care 

system than any other single issue. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Health. Does 

the Minister of Health consider our health care system to be 

safe and reliable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 

the question. And not only do I think that the health care system 

is safe and reliable, but the survey that the member refers to, 

which was taken in December, shows that over 90 per cent of 

the people who use the health care system rate it as excellent to 

good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Now in fact, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the 

fact that the member likes to complain about the health care 

system at every opportunity, the fact of the matter is that we 

pioneered in this province one of the best health care systems in 

the world, and it’s the aim of this government to keep that 

health care system good and excellent, notwithstanding the 

efforts of the member’s party in Ottawa which is cutting back 

on health care, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what this 

government is going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll let the 

Minister of Health know that his government, what they’ve 

pioneered in health care, they’re going to pay for severely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past I have brought to the attention of this 

House many cases that demonstrate the shortfalls which exist in 

our rural health care system as a result of this government’s 

so-called restructuring. However these same problems also exist 

in the urban centres  in the urban centres that the minister 

lives in, in fact. 

 

One such case is detailed in the February 23 edition of the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, and I’d like to table that now, Mr. 

Speaker, if I may. And could you send a copy over to the 

Minister of Health as well? 

 

In this news item, a Shellbrook area woman, Julie Walker, spent 

three frustrating days waiting to have a broken leg tended to. 

Will the Minister of Health explain how, under this 

government’s so-called new and improved health care system, 

that this can happen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member knows that the 

health care system in this province is run at the community level 

by the district health boards. 

 

But I want to say to that member, Mr. Speaker, that we believe 

in the community. And in fact the Saskatoon Health Board 

recently had a poll conducted by the Conference Board of 

Canada. And not only is the health care system in Saskatchewan 

considered good and excellent by the people that use it, but the 

Saskatoon Health Board received very high marks, Mr. Speaker, 

from those using its system. And I want to say to the member 

that according to the Conference Board, a high percentage of 

respondents rated services good, very good, or excellent. 

 

Is it perfect, or are there not the occasional problems? Well 

there are occasional problems, Mr. Speaker, but we have a very 

excellent health care system, notwithstanding the fact that the 

party with which that member is associated, namely the 

Liberals, is cutting back on health care spending across the 

country. But notwithstanding that, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

maintain the best health care system in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, obviously the Minister of 

Health should have contacted Julie Walker and told her she was 

doing nothing but complaining, if that’s what he feels people 

are doing. Mr. Speaker, we know there are hundreds of cases 

such as the one involving Julie Walker that are not brought to 

the attention of the public. In fact she indicated to me in a 

telephone conversation, if she had not contacted the media with 

her concerns  a move that prompted immediate attention  

there is no telling how long she would have waited. 

 

Will the Minister of Health tell this House how it is that one 

must go through the media to receive the health care that they 

deserve? And will he personally involve himself in this 

problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  39 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that this patient 

doesn’t need me to personally involve myself in her medical 

care. And nor does that patient need the member making 

politics out of her personal medical condition. 

 

The member raises the media, Mr. Speaker. I want to say that in 

the Maclean’s magazine, July 31, 1995, Allen Backman who is 

a health policy specialist says that our model of health reform is 

a model that all provinces should move towards if they want the 

greatest efficiencies in the way they spend their health dollars. 

 

What I would say to that member is, is that we’re rapidly 

approaching the 21st century. And by the time we get there, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope that we’re able to bring this member into the 

20th century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health is 

wondering why people get involved with these issues and make 

politics of them. But when people come forward to our caucus 

with issue after issue after issue where you people have let them 

fall, well I think we’ll continue to bring them forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our health care system is meant to meet the needs 

of all the people of Saskatchewan. When a case falls through 

the cracks, the reasons should be investigated and addressed. 

Unfortunately, these cracks are getting wider, and more people 

are falling through. Julie Walker was understandably frustrated 

at the level of service provided at the Royal University Hospital, 

stating, and I quote: 

 

You break a leg; you get it fixed. This is Canada. Our 

health-care system is supposed to be the best in the world. 

 

Miss Walker is right. Can the Minister of Health explain why 

Saskatchewan’s health care system is in such a sad state? And 

will he take immediate action to correct the problems instead of 

trying to be the clown in the House today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, you know I’ve been 

sitting here listening to the member, and I’m wondering what it 

is about his association with the Liberal Party that most 

impresses the member. Is it the Liberal elimination of the Crow 

rate for the farmers, or is it the Liberal cuts to post-secondary 

education, or is it the Liberal cuts to health care? 

 

And I say to the member that if that member is really concerned 

about health care in this province, what that member should do 

is join with this government and with all other members in the 

legislature in saying to Ottawa that we don’t agree with their 

cut-backs to health care. 

 

And if that member will get on side with this government, 

which is committed to our medicare system, then I say to that 

member that we’ll have a much better chance of retaining the 

excellent health care system we have than if we let the Liberals 

in Ottawa get away with the agenda that they’re pursuing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, we are all very upset to hear of the 

massive lay-offs at the Leader-Post, the Star-Phoenix, and the 

Yorkton Enterprise and how these jobs losses will hurt the 

individuals and families involved. 

 

However I found it remarkably hypocritical to hear the Minister 

of Intergovernmental Affairs condemning these lay-offs when 

the NDP just finished laying off and firing 214 Crop Insurance 

employees. 

 

I think we all recognize from time to time that large employers, 

both in government and in the private sector, are going to be 

forced to downsize. The responsibility of government, however, 

is to build a healthy economy so that when jobs are lost there 

are other jobs that those people can go to. That simply isn’t 

happening in Saskatchewan because of the high tax and 

regulatory regime of the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Premier, when is your government going to accept some 

responsibility? When are you going to get some job creation 

strategies going in this province instead of spending your time 

trying to blame others? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to respond to the member because what he’s saying 

bears very, very little resemblance with the fact, especially 

when you compare it to their last term in government between 

1986 and 1991. 

 

I have some StatsCanada information that tell us that in the 

period when his government was in power from 1986 to 1991 

the population of this province went from 1.033 million to 

1.004 million, or a reduction of 31,000 people. That’s at the 

same time, at the same time as they were spending us into a 

debt of $15 billion in the so-called name of job creation. They 

lost 30,000 jobs. 

 

I’m proud to say that the business people, not government, in 

our first four years in operation have created 10,000 new jobs 

and the population has increased from a million four to a 

million seventeen. 

 

Now you can talk about your record if you want, but I can tell 

you it’s a dismal failure and is the reason why you have five 

members in opposition after that kind of a job record and will 

be a long time before people will trust you to create jobs in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, why 

don’t we talk about some recent statistics from StatsCanada. In 

January of this year, there are 5,000 less jobs than there were a 

year ago January. That’s your record, Mr. Minister. In fact in 

the last two weeks there have been over 400 people laid off  



40  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

from two major organizations here in the province, and no new 

jobs have been created for them. 

 

In today’s paper, U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 

economist Eric Howe says “. . . the NDP government is choking 

business.” “’The pedal is . . . to the metal, but we’re only going 

five miles an hour,’” he said. That’s because the NDP has its 

other foot on the brake, and that’s what you have. 

 

And rather than addressing the problem, rather than dealing 

with the issues of high taxes and over-regulation, the NDP is 

spending its time trying to blame, first, the previous 

administration, then the federal government, or anyone else 

who happens to be available to them at the moment rather than 

talking about their dismal job record. 

 

When is that going to end, Mr. Minister? When are you going 

to take your foot off the brake of the economy of Saskatchewan 

and the job creation strategies here in Saskatchewan, pro-

employment policies? Why don’t you look at some of those that 

we introduced on Friday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 

when he talks about the job creation record of his government, 

fails to talk about the statistics that show that about 30,000 

people left the province, or the population went down by about 

30,000 in their last term of office while they were ramping up 

the debt faster than anyone else in Canada. 

 

But I want to respond to your comment about the economist 

Eric Howe who, some say, was one of the strategists with the 

Liberals’ ill-fated attempt to gain power, and the member from 

Greystone will remember the name. He’s denying as well that 

he had anything to do with the Liberal campaign. Nobody wants 

to admit that they had anything to do with it. 

 

But I want to point out one of the inconsistencies in his 

statement, and I’m quoting from the Leader-Post. It may be 

accurate, it may not, but I’m going to quote it at any rate. It 

says: 

 

He maintains the government is still interfering with 

business when it tries to bolster certain industries the way 

it did in last year’s budget by cutting the aviation fuel tax. 

 

He says his solution is: “But businesses don’t have a chance to 

prosper in Saskatchewan . . . ” because the taxes are too high. 

 

Now that kind of an economist advising the Liberals got them 

what we see over here. I’d advise you, sir, to find someone else 

to back up your economic strategy because it’s no better than in 

the 1980s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grant to Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it would 

almost sound like the Economic Development minister is laying  

out a challenge and wants to lay some bets. Well maybe he 

should start; you might be surprised how soon this member 

from . . . the Leader of the Third Party may move over to the 

Premier’s chair. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, recently the government gave a grant of 

$130,000 to the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations) to fight what they said was federal offloading. Mr. 

Minister, or Mr. Premier, whoever would like to answer the 

question, there are many groups who are being hurt by 

offloading from both the federal and provincial governments  

groups such as hospitals, schools, universities, municipalities. 

Yet none of these groups received any grants. 

 

We would like to know what were the criteria for this grant and 

why was the FSIN singled out to receive $130,000 of taxpayers’ 

money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 

thank the member for his question. 

 

When the federal government tabled their policy on 

self-government in the previous year, it was very clear that part 

of their strategy was to offload as much of their constitutional 

responsibility as possible for first nations people onto the 

provinces across Canada. In fact, a recent meeting of 

representatives of the various governments have gotten together 

to discuss what we’re going to do about this problem. It’s clear 

that it has a more significant impact in this area than probably 

any other fiscal area of government. 

 

For example, last year when the federal government arbitrarily 

decided that they were going to disallow the one year 

off-reserve policy for social service recipients, that one measure 

alone cost the province $40 million. So if through the 

expenditure of $130,000 we can save this province millions and 

millions of dollars in federal offloading, we are going to work 

with first nations to see that done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, a further question to the minister. 

Madam Minister, this grant seems to go directly against the 

findings of your government’s recent public consultation 

program. Mr. Speaker, this government asks Saskatchewan 

people to tell them what areas they think government should 

stop funding. Right at the top of the list was grants for things 

like cultural organizations. Yet this government ignored this 

advice and went right ahead and gave FSIN $130,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one ever got a grant to fight the NDP every 

time they offloaded on hospital boards, school boards, and 

municipalities. Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, why are 

taxpayers’ money being given to the FSIN to wage the NDP’s 

political battle with Ottawa? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

member for his second question. I would have to remind you 

that first nations are not a cultural organization. They are a  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  41 

group embodied in the Constitution of Canada and that the 

federal government has a very clear and historical obligation, 

relationship, and constitutional commitment to this group of 

people. 

 

In keeping with the way this government approaches all of its 

dealings, we try to get the best financial arrangement for the 

people of Saskatchewan and we try to make sure that we do not 

allow the federal government to escape its responsibilities that 

have been in place, I might add, for the past hundred years with 

this particular first nations group in Canada. 

 

The research that needs to be done so that we all have the 

information we need to walk into this discussion with our eyes 

open is work that they require financial and other people within 

their organization to do to assemble this. 

 

So I think this is money well spent and I look forward to 

working together with first nations to make sure that Ottawa 

doesn’t dump a whole bunch more of their responsibilities  

their constitutional responsibilities, I might add  on the 

provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Former SaskTel President’s Contract 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

minister in charge of SaskTel. As everyone in the House is 

aware, this government went to great lengths to try and ensure 

the details of a contract to the former SaskPower president 

George Hill and many others were not only made public, but 

attacked and broken as well. 

 

Can the minister explain why she is now choosing to hide the 

details of a contract involving former SaskTel president Fred 

Van Parys? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for his question. As I understand, the freedom of 

information request was made to SaskTel last week. And on the 

basis of section 19(1) of the freedom of information Act which 

addresses the interests of a third party, which in this case it is a 

contract with a third party, that the consent of the third party has 

not been given. For the time being the terms of the contract 

have not been released, but I will be continuing to consult with 

officials and legal counsel, and in the spirit of open and honest 

government, we will release any details that are pertinent to the 

public interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of 

SaskTel is refusing to provide the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

with the details of a one-year consulting contract to Fred Van 

Parys because of a confidentiality clause in his separation 

agreement. 

 

Can the minister confirm that Mr. Van Parys was actually fired  

over the SaskTel re-engineering fiasco and that Mr. Don Ching 

is now in line to become president of SaskTel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I think that the member 

opposite should know better. First of all, there is not a 

separation agreement with Mr. Van Parys. Mr. Van Parys 

resigned, and the contract that exists between SaskTel and Mr. 

Van Parys is a continuing service contract for consulting 

services. 

 

This is the difference between the newspaper reports which 

drew a parallel between the situation of a former president of 

SaskEnergy and the CEO (chief executive officer) for SaskTel. 

The one in SaskEnergy was a severance contract with a 

continuing clause for consulting services. This one is a 

resignation and pursuant to the . . . or after the resignation, a 

separate consulting contract is entered into. The two situations 

cannot be compared. 

 

Then I want to quote, in terms of the re-engineering, a letter 

from Symmetrix that was printed in the Leader-Post, which 

says, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Bjornerud’s characterizations of re-engineering have 

gone beyond wrongly defaming my company. He has 

deeply . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, many people will suggest that 

the one-year consulting fee provided for Mr. Van Parys was 

nothing more than a way of avoiding a messy courtroom battle 

after Mr. Van Parys was removed as a head of SaskTel. Can the 

minister confirm that this consulting contract was simply a way 

of avoiding a wrongful dismissal suit? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as minister I can confirm 

no such thing. The barnacles on the ship of state . . . and 

members opposite can say whatever they like, can think 

whatever they like. Mr. Van Parys resigned. He served SaskTel 

for three years as the CEO. In that position he had continuing 

relationships with Stentor, which is the CEOs’ association of 

telecommunications companies in Canada. That is a very 

valuable role to play in the highly competitive environment that 

SaskTel finds itself into and that all telecommunications 

companies are in in 1996. 

 

So this is a contract to continue to use that expertise to the 

advantage of SaskTel. That’s what it is. 

 

Social Worker Case-loads 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 

Social Services. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 

has designated this week, March 4 to March 10, as Social Work 

Week in Saskatchewan. And I’d like to commend the hon. 

minister for doing so. 



42  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

In the news release which makes the announcement the hon. 

member states that he wants, and I quote: 

 

 . . . to officially recognize all the very important and 

difficult work being done by social workers across this 

province,” 

 

The minister further states that those who work in the human 

services field, and again I quote: “. . . are under a lot of pressure 

to make changes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I too commend the social workers of this province 

for their efforts to work under this government. They are under 

increased pressure with increased welfare rolls, decreased 

resources, and a high level of uncertainty concerning defined 

roles and procedures. 

 

I ask the minister today, do you have a plan in place to alleviate 

the stress and pressure social workers feel due to increased 

case-loads? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for her 

question and for raising the important issue of the work of 

social workers in our province. And as the member from 

Weyburn earlier today recognized in this House, this is Social 

Work Week and I think all members would want to join in 

congratulating these public servants. 

 

Now the member, Mr. Speaker, mentions the case-load on the 

social workers. She mentions the challenges that we are all 

facing. She should readily admit in this House that if it were not 

for her Liberal cousins in Ottawa downloading on the 

provinces, if it were not for a Liberal government in Ottawa 

withdrawing massively from social service support across 

Canada in such a way that would threaten the national fabric of 

our nation, then her question may be a little more credible in 

this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, in 1991 the Premier pledged to 

eliminate child poverty within its first term of office. Here we 

are of course, four years later, and only now the Minister of 

Social Services claims that the very important first step in 

eliminating child poverty is to, and I quote: raise public 

awareness. 

 

Let me reassure the minister that the public is acutely aware of 

poverty in this province. One in five children feels the sting of 

poverty every minute of every day. It appears, Mr. Minister, that 

this government is out of step. So let me help you, Mr. Minister. 

If your first step is to raise public awareness what, Mr. Minister, 

is your plan for step no. 2? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as the member well knows, 

and I hope all members of our caucus would well know, we 

have advanced a redesign of Social Services paper across this  

province. That member, Mr. Speaker, in her own local paper 

says it’s a very good idea  says it’s a very good idea and she 

supports us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask her: will she support us further, and will her caucus 

support us further instead of the deafening silence that we’ve 

heard from the Liberal caucus and the Liberal Party in this 

province in regard to the offloads by Ottawa? Instead of that 

deafening silence, Mr. Speaker, will that caucus today, will that 

member, will her temporary leader, will they today write 

Ottawa? Join with us in fighting the download on the provinces 

of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Student Summer Employment Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it pleases me to inform the 

House that Partnerships, our student summer employment 

program, will be continued in 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is good news for employers and for 

students. Even though our province faces great challenges as a 

result of the federal cuts, support for employer, student, and 

government partnerships that enhance jobs or job creation 

continues to be a priority. 

 

Through a wage subsidy, Partnerships ‘96 will assist employers 

such as businesses, farms, municipal governments, and 

non-profit organizations needing extra summer help. The 

subsidy will help them hire students needing income to 

continue their studies. 

 

The program is expected to create 2,000 jobs between May 1 

and September 30 for students who want to gain work 

experience while earning money to finance their continuing 

post-secondary education. Employers should apply now so they 

can finalize their hiring plans in time for May 1 when most 

students are available for summer employment. Employers must 

apply by April 15 to qualify. I encourage all interested 

employers, both urban and rural, to consider the program. I 

especially urge them to consider the opportunities they may 

provide to students who are of aboriginal ancestry or who have 

a disability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the value education, 

training, and economic development have to this province. 

Through the collaboration of students, employers, and 

governments, Partnerships ‘96 will continue to provide job 

opportunities which benefit all partners. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Hear, hear, Mr. Speaker. On this particular 

statement that we have, we understand that there’s definitely a 

need for students to have all the money they possibly can so  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  43 

they can end up continuing their education. And I suggest that 

on some of these issues that those people that were notified and 

were involved in this program in previous years would also 

receive a notice, that they are aware this program is in place, so 

that they’ll be able to make use of the program to the best of 

their ability and for the benefit of those students. 

 

The other question that I have and I would like to know is how 

many dollars are actually available to this? Is there enough 

money there to make it significant? When we’re looking at the 

job opportunities and job creation, are these particular jobs that 

are going to be taken away from other individuals, or are these 

new jobs that are only for students, or will other people be 

unemployed because these students have had a special priority 

given to them because of this program? We need to know some 

of that information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to 

the announcement by the minister responsible for 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. But what we’re 

looking for in terms of informing students and making sure that 

the availability of jobs is there is quite essential. 

 

Students have been under a lot of pressure in terms of being 

able to finance education. We are hearing that the loading of 

tuition fees, the possible increases might occur, and the fear of 

course is that the jobs availability will take away from the facts 

that the tuition fees will also go up. 

 

So I look forward to discussing this further with the minister 

responsible for Post-Secondary. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

comment to the ministerial statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

with great pleasure that I received the minister’s statement 

today. I wish to thank him for gracing me with a copy of his 

ministerial statement and to congratulate both him and the 

government for choosing to focus on something that has been 

of great concern to people across the country. 

 

As you know, in Saskatchewan we have faced a particular 

problem with out-migration of young people and that one of the 

things we have to do is to do anything that will focus on 

curbing a problem of people not having opportunities for 

employment, and in particular people who we want to continue 

with their post-secondary education and training. 

 

So I’d just like to congratulate once again the government for 

recognizing this issue and it’s one small step toward perhaps 

making a dent in a very serious problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I’d like to make a 

further statement regarding the point of order raised by the hon. 

member for Moosomin. 

 

On Friday, March 1, 1996, the hon. member for Moosomin 

raised a point of order with respect to the method under rule 

88(3) by which this Legislative Assembly elects its Deputy 

Chair of Committees. 

 

In response to the member, I did point out that it has been the 

long-standing tradition of this Assembly to elect its presiding 

officers by motion which, of course, differs considerably from 

the secret ballot process more recently instituted with respect to 

the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 

 

Because of those differences, for the benefit of all members, I 

would like to take a moment to elaborate about what is meant 

by the term “election” in rule 88(3). 

 

Before 1991, the three presiding officers of this Assembly were 

all elected by the same process of candidates being identified 

and proposed for the respective positions — Speaker, Deputy 

Speaker, and Deputy Chair of Committees — by way of 

substantive motions. This followed the custom of the House of 

Commons in Ottawa which in turn adapted it from the British 

practice at Westminster. 

 

In the case of competition for a presiding officer position, the 

name of another candidate could be proposed, not as 

amendment to the motion but as a separate motion. The 

question on the initial motion would then be put. And if the 

majority decided in favour of that motion, the candidate 

identified in the motion would be declared elected, and the 

other motions dropped. Consequently, the term “election” was 

defined to mean the majority will of the Assembly as expressed 

by voting in favour or against the motion. 

 

I also point out that the tradition was that the Premier would 

propose these types of motions. The traditional process of 

course was superseded by the secret ballot procedure which was 

devised initially for the Speaker and then extended to the 

Deputy Speaker. As members are aware, the secret ballot 

process is not applicable to the Deputy Chair of Committees. 

Therefore the Deputy Chair of Committees continues to be 

elected upon motion and not secret ballot. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murrell, seconded by Mr. 

Thomson. 



44  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My remarks are 

going to be somewhat brief this afternoon because I don’t want 

to, in any way, upstage the throne speech. And we know the 

importance of these things, Mr. Speaker, having sat in and 

listened to four, five, six of them now and knowing really what 

comes of them, you know, and I can only think back to the 

thrust of the throne speech a few sessions ago where in fact 

co-generation was going to revive rural Saskatchewan and then 

in fact the president of SaskPower, Mr. Messer, phoned up the 

Premier and said: listen, you run these things by me before you 

get up and say anything in the throne speech because I may just 

have to shut you down. And he did that. And I think the 

Premier can avoid a lot of embarrassment in the future in fact if 

he’d just run them by Jack initially, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I had said the other day, there’s a mount of choices that this 

government is making, and it claims to be preparing to make for 

today and tomorrow, it says. And I touched on a few things 

about the choices they made in the past and that’s what’s going 

to in fact get them in a lot of trouble with the people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In fact I notice on page 2 of the throne speech, they talk about a 

lot of consultations. Actually all throughout the throne speech I 

see the words consultation and partnership. It shows up quite 

often. And to me that would, you know . . . I assume that the 

government’s talking to people and really and truly going out 

there and getting their opinions on issues of the day. But the 

problem is when I see where they’re consulting with business, 

on page 2, I would have to ask the question: what has business 

been telling them about the Crown tendering? Has business out 

there been saying we really do appreciate unionized preference 

policies in the province? I don’t think so. I don’t think that’s 

what they’re hearing. 

 

The member from Regina South, the other day, he was talking 

about consultations. He was saying what they hear, what he’s 

been hearing at these, I guess it’s the budget meetings, 

pre-budget meetings, was in fact people asking for tax relief, 

lower taxes. And, Mr. Speaker, just around the dull roar of the 

members opposite, if I could draw your attention to that. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. The member is finding it 

somewhat disruptive, the noise in the House. And I will ask the 

members to cooperate, to allow him to present his debate in a 

non-interrupted fashion. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I know how 

difficult it is to bring them to order. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. The member is not a new 

member and does know that it’s not proper to comment on the 

Speaker’s rulings. Now let him proceed and get to his important 

debate. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The businesses, 

I’m sure, that they’re out consulting are actually telling them 

yes, we do want lower taxes. I think the member from Regina 

South was absolutely correct. And they do want labour laws 

that don’t hamper them. They don’t want Crown tendering. And 

we don’t really have to go out and consult much more in  

groups, because I know that the government opposite is 

receiving the same kind of calls and meeting with the same 

groups  or at least I hope they are  that we are. And it’s a 

daily message we’re getting, Mr. Speaker, about what the 

people of this province really and truly want. But in fact if all 

you’re ever going to do as a government is say, well we’re out 

there consulting, but never do anything more than that, well 

that’s where the problem comes in. And it shows itself in so 

many ways. 

 

I recall when the first Health minister, the lawyer that . . . the 

first lawyer that they had as a Health minister, Mr. Speaker, in 

fact she had a consultation process. But it happened after they 

closed 52 hospitals and kept downsizing. And one of the 

members opposite were talking about first responders today. 

Well that’s what you get instead of hospitals and front-line 

health care workers in rural Saskatchewan — first responders, 

people with less than 40 hours training. And you’re proud of 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well that was quite a consultation process 

because that lawyer, that minister of Health, closed the 

hospitals and then made a trip around the province to see what 

the people thought of it. Let’s go out and consult. 

 

Well I was at some of those meetings. I know what they told the 

minister of Health, the lawyer of the day, was that in fact that 

was not the appropriate process that should have been put into 

place. But what do we see today? Today we are having crop 

insurance meetings, starting today. And that’s after the Minister 

of Agriculture announced that they are going to be closing. Is 

there a chance that the people of the province could get you to 

go out and consult them before you shut them down? Could you 

do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Reading on — and, Mr. Speaker, like I 

said earlier, I don’t want to give this throne speech more than it 

deserves — but reading on, I see that this government opposite 

is bringing forward a four-year financial plan to ensure 

balanced budgets, further reduction in public debt over the life 

of this legislature, prudent management of public finances. 

Well that sounds great; it sounds like they have a plan in place. 

And yet what we find out though is in fact time and time again 

the investments that they are making are coming back to haunt 

them. 

 

And I want to know, I would like them to stand in their place 

today and tell us, if some of the actions that they have taken, 

some of the actions that the member from Thunder Creek has 

raised on several occasions, in fact some of the monies that they 

have put at risk, public monies that they have put at risk in deals 

such as HARO Financial and some of the court cases that 

eventually come from that, Mr. Speaker, is that part of the plan? 

 

Well I don’t know but I think that perhaps should have been 

right in the throne speech. They should have had to answer to 

that. That’s a major amount of money. You can’t hardly have a  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  45 

plan if in fact you’re putting hundreds of millions of dollars at 

risk with the other hand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I notice also on the bottom of page 2 they’re talking about 

exports. You know I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, where we’re 

having an increase in exports because jobs are still the problem. 

The only thing that I do know as far as exporting is the fact that 

we’re losing our youth, and this was raised only a few days ago 

in the House. We’re losing our young families, the ones that 

keep the schools going out in rural Saskatchewan. Those young 

professional families that, in fact, if the jobs are here, they’ll be 

here, they’ll raise their families here. And that’s how we’ll get 

the taxes paid. 

 

We also see the professionals, the doctors and the nurses that 

are leaving this province because of actions . . . because of the 

policies of the government. That’s all we’re exporting, Mr. 

Speaker, are the young and the professional . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well you know the member from Lloydminster 

 I think that’s where that member is from  she can heckle 

from her seat. But why didn’t she stand up, instead of giving a 

first responder statement today about how great it was to shut 

down hospitals in her constituency and train somebody for 20, 

30, 40 hours to replace them, you know why doesn’t she 

address the fact that I’m sure there’s people in her constituency 

having to move out of province because they can’t get jobs 

either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  I see another . . . you know, and here’s 

really a theme that I see emerging from the government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. On page 3 they talk about 

community-based organizations. Everything’s community-

based  community-based health  but yet nobody’s getting 

health. 

 

We see the Deputy Premier today with a cast on his arm. He 

said it took him one hour to get his cast, and yet in question 

period I raised the case of Julie Walker who waited three days 

and only after went to the media did she get any health care. 

That’s what community-based health is. So I can only wonder 

what community-based organizations would be. 

 

Obviously bigger is better. That’s the theme; that’s the one they 

want to go with. And that’s why of course they would want to 

start REDAs (regional economic development authority). Huge, 

huge masses of towns and RMs. We had a system in place with 

the rural development cooperatives. In most cases I think it took 

in, you know, 10 to 15 towns and RMs, and it was of a size 

where if projects come up you could have it managed 

somewhat. You know, people would get involved more from a 

community level. 

 

Well in a REDA I don’t know if we’re going to have this Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve got concerns if we’re going to work on a, say, a 

tourist project. Are the people in Leader going to feel as 

strongly about a tourist project in Ponteix, hours away? Because 

that’s where it’s going. Bigger is not always better,  

Mr. Speaker. 

 

On page 4, I find it interesting. We have a small blurb about 

agriculture. Now I find that . . . you know, being that it’s well 

into the speech already  and not much of a speech it is, Mr. 

Speaker,  that agriculture would finally surface here. Let me 

quote some stuff from there, what they’re saying about 

agriculture: “. . . only a step towards a long-term national 

package.” 

 

Well you know, I remember them talking about national 

packages, and you will recall it also, Mr. Speaker  what?  

five years ago. I know I’m getting on the line there, Mr. 

Speaker; I won’t bother you. But five, six years ago they were 

talking about a national package. Well since then they’ve  

what?  changed the program, changed the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) three times. They’ve made crop 

insurance unaffordable for people. They’ve got the coverage so 

that really I don’t think . . . Well I know in the south-west very 

few people are belonging to crop insurance any longer. It’s not 

worth it. It’s not worth it. 

 

But yet they have enough nerve to talk about the fact that it’s 

going ahead, I guess. But do you know what the people see? 

They see headlines like the ones . . . well was it January 17, I 

guess: NDP breaks promise over the GRIP program. That’s 

what people recall, Mr. Speaker  the fact that they’re 

breaking promises while in fact that they’re letting on that 

they’re doing something for the farmers. We’ll get into this 

many times throughout the next 70-80 days, and I won’t hold it 

up any longer than necessary here today, Mr. Speaker. 

Another point that I found interesting on page 6 of the throne 

speech . . . and the member from Humboldt raised this today, 

and I’m glad our member did raise it because I’m not so sure 

that they would have gotten back into it, Mr. Speaker. 

The fact that it was  what?  four or five years ago we heard 

how the government was going to address child poverty, child 

hunger, poverty as a whole in the first session of their 

government’s mandate, you know. Where’s it at today? The 

food bank lines are longer. There’s more hungry kids. There’s 

more people in poverty. There’s more people moving out so 

that they don’t have to join those lines. That’s what you should 

have been putting in the speech. 

 

The fact of the matter is how much you’re failing at what you 

should be doing for the people of this province. The 

government should be ashamed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Page 7 of the speech talks about a little 

more coverage. There’s more coverage for families and 

supplementary health care coverage for children; that sounds 

good. But I can only think back to what they’ve done. It’s one 

thing to say something, that they’re going to provide something 

or do something different, but the fact of the matter is they took 

a drug plan, they took our drug plan with a dispensing fee and 

turned it into a $1,700-a-year plan. That’s what reality is. It’s 

one thing to say that we’re providing more, but you’re 



46  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

providing people with more debt, with more bills, with more 

heartache. That’s what you’re providing them with. 

 

And what about the senior care? You know how many seniors 

that I have, on a daily basis that get a hold of me, saying we 

have no idea what to do? The government is shutting down 

nursing homes, they’re shutting down the services that we need 

as elderly out in rural Saskatchewan, and these people have no 

answers. That’s a shame. That’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Midway down page 7 it talks about a few things that the 

government intends to do in the justice . . . And I don’t want to 

sound just, you know, completely negative. I think that some of 

the things they have here, the changes to the justice system, I’ll 

give them some credit. And you see, whenever you do 

something that I . . . (inaudible) . . . people, or the people of 

Saskatchewan, and our caucus feels you deserve credit for, 

we’ll give it to you. But on the other hand, when you keep 

messing up the way you do, then you’re going to have to accept 

the heartache that’s going to be placed upon your shoulders for 

doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on and on about changes to the health 

system. And I don’t think it even warrants comment after the 

Minister of Health today standing up in this House and talking 

about, you know, people raising health care issues solely for 

political reasons. I think that’s disgusting, and I hope that the 

Minister of Health will phone up Julie Walker from Shellbrook 

and apologize. You don’t have to apologize to me because I’ve 

seen your behaviour before. But I do think that Julie Walker 

deserves an apology for being accused of playing . . . being 

played politically for someone’s game. This is a first . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  This is a person that only wished to have a 

broken leg fixed. Laid for three days. Had the fears of 

becoming, perhaps, addicted to morphine. Or gangrene. Who 

knows? A lot of fear. And I think the Minister should place that 

call today. I will let her know that she could expect it, in fact. 

 

It says at the top of  where am I at?  8 that the government 

is placing control of health in local hands. Well we’ve heard 

that song and dance for some time. But you know what controls 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 

noticed an entrepreneurial couple from my constituency have 

just arrived in the east gallery  Tony and Pat Birchall. Some 

members may recognize Pat Birchall’s name from the little 

company that they’ve established called Re-Wear Clothing and 

they’ve joined us in the Assembly today. I trust they’re finding 

this educational. 

I think they’re also looking for the fact that while FSIN received 

$130,000 in money, they’re trying to get their little company up 

and running too and so they’re looking to the Economic 

Development minister. I’d like the members to join me in 

welcoming the two individuals. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I’d just like to remind all members of the 

House that when introducing guests it is improper to engage in 

debate and I’ll ask all members to cooperate with that. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Page 8 talks 

about placing control of health in local hands. And we’ve heard 

this song and dance for a while but still what we see is the 

government making decisions and handing those decisions 

down to the people, especially in rural Saskatchewan, with no 

options. 

 

And this is really starting to show itself more and more each 

day when in fact the government controls the funding and 

they’re controlling the projects. It’s coming out in a 

project-funded basis. So they can say we’re going to give you 

all the control you want. In fact they can say, you know, here’s 

the decision; you can either build this facility or not. Because if 

you don’t, we might close down the one you have now. That’s 

what they did in Plains health care. 

 

If that’s handing control to the local people, I’d hate to see what 

they’d do if they said, no, we’re taking control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Further down I see that they . . . and of 

course, this is going to be the theme of the government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. We all know that they would like to 

blame everything on the federal government. All the problems 

of Saskatchewan are to do with the federal government. 

 

And I think some of the back-benchers actually believed it. You 

talk about the front-benchers selling something that the back 

ones believe. And that wasn’t always the case, as we know, Mr. 

Speaker, but it sure is now. Because I’m sure we’ll hear this in 

just about every speech. 

 

But they’re talking about the federal government creating a 

two-tiered health system. I’m amazed that they would say that. 

Because what we have had, what we have seen in this province 

in the last few years, is the creation of a two-tiered health 

system. 

 

If you think there isn’t a difference between having health care 

in the rural areas versus urban, or even Regina versus Saskatoon 

. . . well, maybe there isn’t health care in Saskatoon  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  47 

because the lady I talked of this morning, Julie Walker, was 

from the Minister of Health’s home town and he didn’t seem 

concerned about that. 

 

Now obviously the Minister of Economic Development had a 

cast in an hour so maybe this is the town with health care. I 

don’t know. I guess that’ll come clear. 

 

At the bottom we see frugal and effective government, a 

subtitle. And I for one, but maybe I’m just cynical, I for one 

don’t think that they’re after a frugal and effective government. 

 

Because if they were, if they were, would then we have had 

headlines such as in the Leader-Post, Tuesday, January 23, 

where deputy ministers and staff, there’s 42 new staff, 42 

political staff, right here, cost of $62,000 each. And I’m sure 

that the new member from Regina South knows exactly what 

I’m talking about because I think he used to be one of those. 

And you know, does that sound like somebody that’s going to 

be frugal and effective? To me it doesn’t, but perhaps I’m just 

not fully appreciative and aware of what some of these political 

hacks do in those offices. I’m to be proven wrong, so please do 

so. 

 

More ministers in charge. We have now a minister in charge of 

Post-Secondary Education. I think there’s a minister in charge 

of what? Just SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation)? Not to say that it’s not important; it’s just that 

I’ve yet to see opposition caucuses actually say well, you’re in 

charge of only, you know, this, SPMC or Post-Secondary 

Education. So I don’t know why the government would put the 

importance to it that in fact others wouldn’t. 

 

In conclusion, I guess I can only say that this is perhaps one of 

the weakest throne speeches I’ve ever seen. But then as I said in 

my opening remarks, I didn’t expect a lot because I’ve seen 

other speeches where I thought were actually fairly good and in 

the end they didn’t have to live up to it anyways. 

 

So I don’t support the thrust of the government. You know 

really, if you really and truly were able to canvass the 

back-benchers over there, I’m not so sure they do either. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start my 

speech this time first off with some congratulations to you on 

your election as Speaker. I and I know the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood are very much looking forward to 

working with you and will be seeking your advice from time to 

time. I just want to tell all members that if I ever err while I’m 

in the Chair there, it’s because Mr. Speaker may have provided 

ill advice. And I think that’s probably the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now the hon. member is a veteran 

member of the House and knows that he should ought not to be 

involving the Speaker in the debate, and I’ll ask him to avoid 

doing that. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you. I ask for leave to . . .  

We had a miscue and in fact I shouldn’t be on my feet at this 

stage. The Leader of the Third Party should be. I ask if there’s 

. . . I ask for leave of the House to be able to sit down and rise 

again. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Members will know that it has been a 

long-established principle of the House that once a member has 

taken his place in debate and gives up his place in debate, that 

he gives it up and cannot return. 

 

However, having said that, because it is early in the session I 

would be willing to make an exception if the House grants 

leave, but clearly on the understanding that this is not the 

establishment of a precedent. So with that understanding, I’ll 

put to the House the question. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate that 

from the member, as well as your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and we 

trust that as you have said that that won’t set any future 

precedent in the Assembly here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I wanted to take the opportunity to 

congratulate you once again on your election as the Speaker in 

this Assembly, a very historic, as you know, occasion where 

members have now had the opportunity to, in a democratic 

fashion, make a decision about who they would like to see in 

the Speaker’s chair as well as the Deputy Speaker’s chair. We 

would also congratulate the member for . . . in regard to his 

election as Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate all new members 

to the Assembly. I certainly recall the first opportunities I had to 

speak in the Assembly. As you pull up out front here  I’m 

sure you all felt the same way I did the first time  it’s a fairly 

imposing and formidable building and nevertheless I’m sure 

everyone will, over time, will begin to gain some . . . a feeling 

of welcome at the Assembly here and my heartiest 

congratulations to all who were elected for the first time and 

indeed re-elected, as many, many members were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I as well would like to congratulate and thank, 

pardon me, thank the people of the Kindersley constituency for 

placing the trust in myself in electing me once again in the 

Kindersley constituency. 

 

I like to think of it as the best constituency in the entire 

province of Saskatchewan. It’s certainly a constituency that has 

helped in the economy of Saskatchewan a great deal over the 

years, Mr. Speaker. It is a constituency that I’m very proud to 

represent. It’s a constituency that the Progressive Conservative 

Party has held for six consecutive elections now, and we’re very 

proud to be able to continue that tradition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, getting down to the business at hand here today, 

it’s a pleasure finally to have the opportunity to stand in the 

Assembly and discuss decisions and actions regarding the 

government and what the government has done in the last nine  



48  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

months since the election. It’s an awful long time to have some 

of your questions go unanswered, Mr. Speaker, and I hope we 

don’t have to wait too much longer into the future to have a 

number of concerns that the people have addressed to us 

brought up. 

 

There are many questions that members opposite haven’t given 

Saskatchewan people answers for. Why this government 

promised tax relief during the election and immediately raised 

SaskPower rates by 12 per cent on households around 

Saskatchewan is one question. Why Don Ching has received an 

undisclosed severance package for work he didn’t do and 

without any kind of a signed contract. Why this government has 

gone all out expanding gambling in the province without 

listening to the wishes of families, even though the 

government’s own polls show that the people don’t like the 

direction the government is taking on this issue. 

 

Oh, they say they listen to the people of Saskatchewan. They 

say they are caring for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. But 

the members know full well that this is not the case. What they 

have been taking care of, Mr. Speaker, is their political agenda, 

and that’s it. 

 

A list of the government’s broken promises, of questionable 

decisions, is a very, very long one. And so we are going to take 

several . . . it’ll take several months, I’m sure, to bring up all of 

the issues that the public has addressed to us. That’s why it is 

necessary, Mr. Speaker, that I will be moving an amendment at 

the end of my address here this afternoon, an amendment to the 

motion. At the end of my remarks I’ll be doing that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throne speeches are supposed to lay out the future 

direction of the government, to give a clear idea on the direction 

the government is taking a province. It’s supposed to provide a 

concise plan, a tangible plan with deadlines and goals and 

targets for the future. And that’s why we all thought the Premier 

was going to provide us with that when he had his $30,000 

televised infomercial. 

 

Unfortunately, instead of providing a clear direction, the 

Premier used his half-hour infomercial to bash the federal 

government and a hint to top government cuts like his cutting 

his cabinet, and little else. 

 

That $30,000 could have been much better spent than providing 

the NDP with a medium for spreading their political 

propaganda. In fact the half-hour should not have been paid for 

by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan; it should have been paid for 

by the NDP themselves. Either that, Mr. Speaker, either that or 

change the way the throne speech is delivered. 

 

In contrast to the way it was done here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, in Alberta Ralph Klein went on television and before 

the session outlined specifically to Albertans what they can 

expect from his government in the upcoming months. Very 

specific. And yes, in that case the taxpayers of Alberta paid for 

it. 

 

However there is a big difference, Mr. Speaker. In Alberta,  

Premier Klein’s address replaces the throne speech. So when 

the elected members reach the Legislative Assembly in Alberta, 

they get right down to work. That’s the way they did it in 

Alberta this time around. 

 

Here we spent $30,000 on the Premier’s infomercial, in 

addition to spending about $35,000 a day that this Assembly 

spends as it responds for six days to the throne speech  a 

significant difference. Way, way better done in Alberta than it is 

here in Saskatchewan, without question. There needs to be 

reforms in this area, Mr. Speaker, and I urge members opposite 

to consider how much money we could save the taxpayers of 

this province by changing things right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We were prepared, Mr. Speaker, to get down to work on the 

very first day of this Assembly. That’s one of the reasons we 

presented that emergency motion on the very first day of the 

Assembly  to clearly demonstrate to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we were prepared to get down to work 

immediately the way they did in Alberta after Mr. Klein’s 

government went back in their latest session. I could bring up, 

and I will bring up, a number of examples of how this 

government can learn from other governments today and later 

dates as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I must congratulate, however, the members opposite on one 

thing. They are good at getting their message out. They’re good 

at telling the people exactly what they want them to hear. 

They’ve always been good in that regard. Unfortunately for all 

of us, that’s about where it ends, Mr. Speaker, because while 

the members are good at telling people what they want them to 

hear, they are not good at fulfilling their promises and being up 

front about their dealings. 

 

And there are a number of examples of this, Mr. Speaker. For 

instance, the NDP promised tax relief to Saskatchewan families 

while they were sitting in the opposition benches. And what 

have we seen from these same individuals? Mr. Speaker, any 

government can restrain taxpayers by hiking every tax and fee 

and utility rate in sight. But it takes a responsible government to 

restrain itself  something that the members opposite have not 

done. 

 

According to the 1995 summary financial statements, total 

government revenues increased by 9 per cent  over $700 

million during 1995 alone. Revenues have climbed a total of 18 

per cent over the past four years to the government coffers. 

 

What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that as a result of the members 

opposite raising every tax and fee available to them, last year 

alone the government took in over $1.3 billion above what they 

brought in just four years ago  1.3. That’s a lot of money, Mr. 

Speaker; that’s about 20 per cent of the entire cost of running 

this government. 

 

The additional tax grab from the members opposite in the last 

year alone means that the families of Saskatchewan now shell 

out 5,300 additional income tax dollars that are being taken 

away from them on a family of four. That’s what this 

government considers as tax relief. That’s the kind of tax relief 

we’ve had from them. So when the members opposite speak of  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  49 

tax relief for families, their promises ring very, very hollow. 

 

In another example, it’s with jobs. Since the very first throne 

speech delivered by this government, there’s been the promise 

of jobs, jobs, jobs, thousands and thousands of jobs. On one 

occasion, one of the speeches from the throne, it was 30,000 

jobs would be created. Sixteen thousand another time. Several 

thousand here, several thousand more, what difference does it 

make? 

 

All together, Mr. Speaker, over 50,000 new jobs have been 

promised by this government since the beginning of 1992. 

That’s your record in job creation  50,000 jobs have been 

promised. Between 1995, January of ’95 and January of ’96, 

Saskatchewan, in the latest StatsCan’s information, says that 

5,000 fewer people are working here today. We’ve lost, we’ve 

actually lost ground, Mr. Speaker  5,000 less jobs in that 

year-over-year statistics. 

 

Now if you compare that, for example, to our neighbouring 

provinces, our closest provinces to the west of us and to the east 

of us, I think there’s some interesting comparisons. In Alberta 

there’s been 13,900 jobs created in that same time frame. In 

Manitoba they’ve increased by about 11,500 in that same time 

frame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite have the most dismal job creation record 

in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. And they can 

look directly at themselves as one of the reasons why. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government promises jobs to people. The 

members raise the hopes of families who desperately need jobs. 

But just look at their record. They passed a policy that forces 

contractors to hire 75 per cent unionized employees, the Crown 

construction policy, increasing cost to taxpayers. In the last 

session it was clear that that was the case. 

 

And it was demonstrated many, many times, example after 

example. They passed legislation tying the hands of business 

and squelching job creation through The Labour Standards Act, 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, and The Trade Union Act. And at the same 

time, in the latest throne speech, Mr. Speaker, the government 

is talking about reducing bureaucracy by 25 per cent by the year 

2005. 

 

Your record is anything but a good example of what you plan to 

do in that regard because you have added layer after layer after 

layer to the bureaucracy of this government, and while the 

members opposite refuse to accept responsibility for their sorry 

job creation strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite are truly concerned about 

fulfilling job promises, they had better start looking at other 

provinces and our caucus’s agenda for some help, because they 

certainly need it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Another promise broken by the members 

opposite was health care reform. The throne speech promises  

more of the same. Well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, 

Saskatchewan people better brace themselves for the worst. 

 

The Premier promised his government’s reforms would 

improve health care services to rural Saskatchewan, rural 

people. Improve it, is what they said. Instead we have rural 

areas with no health care services at all. 

 

They promised local autonomy on health boards. They forced 

communities into the districts, and then appointed every single 

health board member, Mr. Speaker. That’s their record. That’s 

what this government likes to call local autonomy. 

 

You can bet the same kind of thing will happen with 

amalgamations of school divisions and local governments in 

this province. And we’ll, I’m sure, be seeing more of that in the 

very near future. The heavy-handed NDP will say, well I guess 

the local communities can’t decide for themselves so we’ll have 

to show them the way. That’s been the example in health care 

and I expect that will be the example again. That’s how this 

government works, and we all know that that is the case. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, is this government’s promise to 

cut government spending. That’s what you promised in 

opposition. Time after time after time they made that 

commitment. I remember the Premier, when he was the leader 

of the opposition, saying $4.5 billion each year is enough 

money to run this province. He said that anybody who couldn’t 

run the province of Saskatchewan on $4.5 billion couldn’t and 

shouldn’t be in government. Well, Mr. Speaker, by his own 

admission he must certainly need some help in that area as well 

because his government took in over $5.7 billion  closer in 

fact to $5.8 billion  in direct taxes, fees, transfers, natural 

resource revenues in the ‘94-95 fiscal year, according to the 

Public Accounts. That’s a far cry from $4.5 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

And there’s no end in sight. Taxes continue to escalate. 

Families all over the province of Saskatchewan continue to feel 

the tax bite of this government. So when the NDP in their 

throne speech mentions cutting government spending from the 

top down, Saskatchewan people have to be a little bit cynical, to 

say the least, and they have every right to be. 

 

When the NDP was the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, they 

promised to eliminate poverty in their first term. Imagine that. 

That was the lofty goal that they put before the people of 

Saskatchewan in 1991. They were going to eliminate poverty. 

There would be no need for food banks, and every child in 

Saskatchewan would have a full stomach. 

 

And one of the members talked about poverty here today in 

question period, and all we got from the Minister of Social 

Services was some vague commitment to look at it once again. 

 

Well the deadline has come and gone, so let’s take a look at the 

facts. Welfare numbers have hit record heights in 

Saskatchewan. Numbers of people relying on food banks have 

hit all-time records, and child poverty is still with us. That’s  



50  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

your shameful record with respect to ending poverty, which was 

what your promise was in the ’91 election campaign. 

 

The most recent promises of the Premier are also, one, to cut 

the size of his cabinet, Mr. Speaker. At least he alluded to that 

in his televised infomercial. But when questioned about it later, 

the Premier had no time frame. He threw out possibly 18 

months, 24 months. I suspect it will be a lot later than sooner 

with that regard, Mr. Speaker  perhaps just in time for the 

next election campaign. Try and gain a few votes, a favour, 

back from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I recall seeing an editorial here recently where they’re even 

speculating that the Premier may consider taking a jump to the 

federal scene in terms of a political change in his approach to 

governing. That would be an interesting change for the people 

of Saskatchewan, to say the least, Mr. Speaker, to see the 

Premier take a shot at federal politics in Jean Chrétien’s 

national unity cabinet that’s being bandied around these days. 

We’ll be watching that with great interest to see whether that 

happens or not. 

 

And I suspect he probably has a few more political favours that 

he has to take care of, like the Minister for Advanced 

Education, good old buddy that he is of the Premier. You can’t 

kick him out of cabinet; we all know that. Long association 

with the Premier; been in business with him; all of those kinds 

of things. And you don’t want to do something like that in the 

last days of an administration, or especially when you’re 

thinking about jumping to the federal scene. Take care of Bob; 

take care of the minister. That’s for sure what you would want 

to do in that regard. 

 

A cabinet that the Premier said he was going to reduce, we’re 

hopeful that would be the case. And I would suggest he could 

maybe start with the Minister of Agriculture because he hasn’t 

done much of a job for farmers, and we all know that. 

 

They probably know that they have broken their promises in a 

whole host of regards. The Crown corporation review is one 

that they broke their promise in as well. But at least they’re 

doing it now. At least they’re suggesting that they’re going to 

have this Crown corporation review. 

 

And we understand, Mr. Speaker, that the dreaded P-word is 

even considered now, something that they might look at  

privatization. I never thought I’d hear it roll off the lips of one 

of the NDP cabinet ministers, but we finally have, Mr. Speaker. 

It hurt; it certainly did. And particularly when Barb Byers said 

that they had gained assurances from CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) officials that that was not on the 

table. And now we find that it is on the table, and we 

congratulate the government for looking at privatization as an 

option. 

 

The envelope is moving constantly, Mr. Speaker. Before long 

the Premier will be out-Conservating the people that are over on 

this side of the bench . . . on this side of the House. 

 

It seems incredible. In fact I had one gentleman tell me the 

other day that he heard . . . that he thought Grant Devine had  

slipped into the Premier’s skin somewhere along the summer. 

But I don’t think that that’s the case because he’s still got the 

union tendering policy; he’s still got the Crown tendering 

policy; he’s still got the trade union labour standards Act; he’s 

still got a whole host of things, Mr. Speaker, that he needs to 

address before he could call himself a Conservative, even 

though it appears that he desperately wants to. 

 

However there are conflicting reports about the Crown review. 

Barb Byers says that she’s gained assurances that that won’t 

include privatization. Well excuse me, Mr. Speaker, but 

somebody has to be straightforward with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Somebody has to, in the front benches of that 

government, stand up and say whether or not everything is on 

the table in this Crown corporation review, including 

privatization. 

 

What’s the point in spending a bunch of money on a pretend 

study to review Crowns if indeed privatization isn’t an option? 

Maybe it’s just so the members opposite can run around and 

say, well we talked to people about it, and we don’t want to do 

it, and they assume that that’s the case. 

 

They will neglect to mention that privatization wasn’t a topic 

considered or even discussed in any way, shape, or form during 

the election campaign. Nowhere was there a mention of 

privatization during the ’95 election campaign. 

 

And it’s too bad because I think a lot of people of 

Saskatchewan are looking at it. They realize in this age of 

deregulation that that is an option that you people are going to 

have to look at. Whether the back-benchers like it or not, I think 

the Premier is going to do some privatization initiatives. 

 

And we’ll be watching with great interest to see when 

something . . . one of the Crowns, like SaskTel, is put on the 

privatization chopping block . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well they only come in Saskatchewan in terms of another one 

being formed in the throne speech or setting up another one. 

And the member knows full well that that’s the case. 

 

In Saskatchewan we never talk about reducing the number of 

Crown corporations; we only add to the list. And at the same 

time this government is the one that says they’re going to cut 

down the amount of bureaucracy, and at the same time they set 

up another Crown corporation. Where is the savings for the 

people of Saskatchewan with regard to that? 

 

You don’t seem to have any regard for what you’ve said during 

the election campaign or any time in the past. And the members 

opposite know that that’s the case. Even though, as another 

example, you promised the people of Saskatchewan that you’d 

be consultative during the gambling expansion, we have seen 

anything but that. Anything but that. Another broken promise 

along the way. 

 

Another promise that they made, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

election campaign was that the schools and universities here in 

Saskatchewan could and would receive a 2 per cent increase in 

funding, promised by you, the government opposite. And now 

all bets are off. Once you get elected it doesn’t matter what we  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  51 

said during the election campaign; doesn’t matter what we 

committed to; doesn’t matter what we promised to; we’re going 

to do whatever we want now because we’re back in 

government. That seems to be the direction that you’ve taken. 

 

It wasn’t so long ago that the Premier, when he was the leader 

of the opposition, said education would be the top priority of 

the NDP government. That was what he said then. He didn’t 

stop there either, Mr. Speaker. He said to the people of 

Saskatchewan, don’t let anyone tell you there isn’t money there 

because it is, because there is. He said it was just a matter of 

priorities. That’s what he said. 

 

Well in this case it’s a matter of priorities, Mr. Speaker, and the 

members opposite have their priorities very twisted with respect 

to this. And they think it’s fine to say that you can make a 

promise and then weeks later say all bets are off. They think it’s 

okay to blame the federal government for their actions, and we 

all know that that just seems to be the latest excuse that they 

have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite across the way like to think 

that it’s fine that they took $188 million out of the GRIP 

program last year to balance the budget, even though for years 

they promised better coverage, more security, lower premiums, 

and better pay-outs to Saskatchewan farmers. The truth is, what 

this government has done to Saskatchewan farm families is 

unforgivable. They got elected in 1991; they passed retroactive 

legislation which broke 60,000 contracts with Saskatchewan 

producers. 

 

That in itself is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately it 

hasn’t stopped there. They went on to drop coverage, to change 

the program so that farmers in Alberta and Manitoba received 

the benefits of GRIP while Saskatchewan farmers were on the 

short end of the stick once again. 

 

If that isn’t bad enough, Mr. Speaker, this government’s blatant 

disregard for our province’s number one industry and the 

people who make it work, but once again it didn’t stop there. 

Now after all of this, the NDP slapped farmers in the face once 

more and they’re doing it once more again. Forcing producers 

to repay funds to the GRIP program as a result of the provincial 

government’s retroactively changing 60,000 contracts is both 

unacceptable and unethical, and every member opposite knows 

that that’s the case. 

 

The Premier and his cabinet colleagues promised on several 

occasions, farmers would not have to repay the money. 

Everybody fully expects if there’s an overpayment you have to 

pay it back except, Mr. Speaker, when there’s a promise from 

the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of this province that 

that wouldn’t be the case. In fact last year in this Assembly, the 

Ag minister said no, we will not be collecting that $115 million 

overpayment from farmers; if we collect it, then we’d be legally 

obligated to mail it back out to them  Hansard, March 31, 

1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 3 of ’95, the Leader-Post quotes the 

Agriculture minister as saying: farmers will never be asked to 

pay back the GRIP overpayments  never. That’s what he  

said. 

 

And during the election campaign, if you recall, Mr. Speaker, 

when people were all out across the province of Saskatchewan 

campaigning, we said that at that time, that the government 

would be at some point saying to the farmers of Saskatchewan, 

you’re going to have to pay this back. We’re going to send you 

a big, fat bill. And I recall, and it was recorded by CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) TV, June 2, 1995, in the 

height of the election campaign. The Premier went on to say 

that my prediction was “totally false.” That’s what he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the surplus from the federal contributions to GRIP 

in 19 . . . pardon me, through the years, has been $356 million. 

Some of this is being used to fund the new safety net programs, 

but $200 million of it has gone back into government coffers. In 

addition, Saskatchewan’s government surplus of $188 million 

was used to balance last year’s budget, not to fund GRIP as was 

originally intended. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, even though the government has transferred 

hundreds of millions of dollars away from the GRIP program, 

farmers are on the hook to repay overpayments they don’t 

rightfully owe because the government promised that they 

wouldn’t have to pay it. The Agriculture minister said last week 

on this issue that it’s a done deal and there’s nothing more to 

discuss. 

 

Well he knows better than that, Mr. Speaker. He stood in his 

place when he was opposition critic to Agriculture and 

promised farmers more money, better safety nets, better 

programs for farmers, and the NDP would come through for 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Well I recall after the election in 1991, the Premier loaded up a 

plane of people, said he was going to go down to Ottawa and he 

was going to grab some money away from them and bring it 

back and distribute it to farmers. And what did we get, Mr. 

Speaker? We got a $100,000 bill for the plane fare. That’s what 

we got from this government for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

We didn’t get one dime from you people that you promised in 

’91 after the election campaign. We didn’t get one dime from 

you people for farmers in 1995 after the election campaign, 

even though you promised it at every occasion. We got nothing 

but $12,000 . . . 12,000 farmers with bills. And the member 

right there knows that that is exactly the case. 

 

And they sit in this Assembly day after day, and the member, 

Minister of Agriculture, all the time he was in opposition, was 

going to get more for farmers across this province. And what 

was his very first act? The very first act that he did, in any 

meaningful fashion for the farmers of Saskatchewan, was send 

out 12,000 bills. That’s what he did. 

 

I spoke to one farmer awhile ago. I spoke to one farmer here 

just the other day and he was talking about the GRIP program. 

He had received a bill of $73,000 from this government. That 

was one example of a bill that was sent out by you people  

73,000, just under $73,000 was what it was . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the member opposite says, was it his  



52  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

money? If he was a farmer in Alberta or a farmer in Manitoba, 

yes, it would have been his money. Yes, he knows that that’s 

the case exactly. Exactly. The farmers in those provinces 

benefited from the program, and in Saskatchewan we got a bill. 

That is the kind of thing that this government is famous for, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. The Speaker is pleased to see 

great enthusiasm for the debate in the response to Speech from 

the Throne, and all members will have their time. It’s getting a 

little difficult to hear the Leader of the Third Party, and I’ll ask 

you to allow him to proceed. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, interest is 

already accruing on those bills to the Saskatchewan farm 

families; it started March 1. Interest now is accruing as we 

speak in this Assembly. 

 

Well we think, Mr. Speaker, that what should happen with 

those bills is, first of all, the NDP government and the Minister 

of Agriculture should be paying the principal, and the Liberals 

should be paying the interest. 

 

It is because of their irresponsible actions of the member from 

Arm River, who suggested that the farmers send them the bills 

in the mail and they would take care of it. Well what have you 

done to take care of it to date, sir, I would ask you. You haven’t 

presented one of them yet. You haven’t done anything with 

them yet. Interest is piling up daily on the bills to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. And at the same time, at the same time, those 

members irresponsibly suggest that people send them their bills. 

What are you going to do with them when you get them? 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. I will ask the hon. 

member to direct his debate through the Chair and proceed. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask you what the NDP is planning on doing with regard to this 

program and what the Liberals are planning on doing with 

regard to the interest charges that are accruing on farmers these 

days after their irresponsible actions. And every one of us 

knows that that is irresponsible to suggest that they don’t pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time the NDP started treating Saskatchewan 

farmers with the respect that they deserve. It’s time the NDP 

started really listening and acting on what people have to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, GRIP Bills aren’t a done deal. And neither is rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because our caucus will continue 

to stand up for rural Saskatchewan and all other people across 

this province; will continue to fight for our rural communities. 

We will continue to bring forward viable, common sense 

solutions to what the members opposite have done to this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve just stated on numerous occasions that the 

role of opposition, the role of opposition is to stand up in 

question period and criticize the government  yes. 

 

But another role of opposition is to present alternatives. It’s to 

present different ways of doing things. It’s to say to the people 

of Saskatchewan, here’s a better way. It’s not to . . . as in the 

Leader-Post the other day, when the House Leader says his 

responsibility is only to criticize. I would say to that member 

and all members in this Assembly, your responsibility is for the 

protection of tax dollars in this province. That’s what it’s for  

not just simply to criticize but to present alternatives as we did 

in 15 Bills on Friday last, Mr. Speaker; 15 Bills that we brought 

before this Assembly that we think can make a difference for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Right here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. That is 

the role of opposition. And I would ask the members . . . And, 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members of the Liberal Party that 

it’s time that they stood up for the people of Saskatchewan 

rather than just standing up and saying I want to be the Leader 

of the Opposition in their upcoming election. That’s what it’s 

time for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, it is the part of government. It is the 

role of government in job creation as we’ve talked about many, 

many times. We think that they are failing in that regard. It’s 

just important, Mr. Speaker, in these last few pages I have here 

to talk about what I think is the proper course for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

We think that there is some changes that need to be done. We 

think that the 15 pages of legislation that we introduced . . . the 

Crown tendering, repealing of that; allowing farmers the 

opportunity to have more marketing choices; a plebiscite. We 

think that the right to work in Saskatchewan should be the right 

of every individual whether they belong to a union or don’t 

belong to a union. We think that there’s things that need to be 

done in terms of health care reform. There’s a whole host of 

things that this government needs to be looking at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over the course of the next few months, our caucus’s agenda 

for the people of Saskatchewan will be clear. It will be a vision 

based on our plans to build a better Saskatchewan for the 

people of this province. We’ll be discussing these initiatives at 

every occasion that we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the broken promises and the dismal 

record of the members opposite, the government, and for the 

failure of the federal throne speech to . . . or of the throne 

speech to truly outline anything more than political fluff from 

the NDP, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 

member from the Rosthern constituency, that the following be 

added after the word session and in the last line it read: 

 

But regrets that the provincial government has betrayed 

Saskatchewan families through its failure to create jobs, its 

attacks on the business community, its destruction of the 

health care system, its unfair tax policies, its expansion of 

gambling against the will of the people of Saskatchewan, 

its massive increases in utility rates, and particularly, its  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  53 

betrayal of 12,000 farm families through the breaking of its 

solemn vow not to send out GRIP bills. 

 

So moved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I start my 

speech to the throne, if we could have leave of the Assembly to 

introduce a guest, please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud and 

happy, and we’re privileged today to have the president of the 

Saskatchewan health care auxiliaries with us today. She also 

doubles as the mother of my two children and my wife, Mrs. 

Beverley McLane. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  With leave, I’d like to also introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, along with the member from 

Arm River, I’d like to welcome also his spouse, who is the 

president of the hospital auxiliary association, and commend 

her and her colleagues for the very good work they do in 

partnership with other health care organizations for health care 

in our province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to introduce 

students from Preeceville School and from Forestville School in 

Quebec. They’re exchange students. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I’d like to introduce the students that are here 

from Preeceville School and also exchange students from 

Forestville, Quebec school. A special welcome to them and to 

our province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you would permit 

me, sir, to add my voice of congratulations to you, and from 

those of the constituents of Arm River, upon your election as 

Speaker of this Assembly, the twenty-third Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. Our sincere congratulations. 

 

Your election is yet another example of the democratic freedom 

we enjoy in this great country and attribute to the service that 

you have rendered over many years to your community and to 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The task before you is an enormous one, but I, along with my 

colleagues, have every confidence that you will exercise your 

responsibilities in a manner that will bring credit both to the 

office and to you, sir. It is my profound hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

you will preside over a House that will demonstrate a great 

measure of civility, a civility that can be achieved even in the 

height of philosophical debate if each of us, while diligent in 

our efforts, seeks to preserve the dignity that the magnificence 

of this Chamber commands. 

 

To this end, sir, I commit my efforts with the hope that we, by 

example, will help to restore the public confidence in elected 

representatives in this institution of democracy with its inherent 

rights and freedoms. 

 

I would also like to take the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

congratulate the Deputy Speaker as well on his election to the 

post. And being that the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood is married to my first cousin, I’m certain 

that he will be more than fair when he’s sitting in the chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  The people of Arm River are anxious, as am 

I, that we all do within our power to reduce the level of 

cynicism that the general public currently has for politicians in 

general. In my quest for elected office, the message I received 

was: continue to be yourself. 

 

Each one of us, as we serve in this great institution, are on a 

journey towards our dreams. As I prepared for this time, I could 

not help but think of the words of Robert Louis Stevenson 

when he wrote: be what you are and become what you are 

capable of becoming. Each and every one of us has the ability 

to reach out, to grow, to change for the better, to set our goals, 

and to begin travelling in the direction of our dreams. All we 

have to do is believe in ourselves and begin. 

 

I would be less than honest if I did not confess a feeling of great 

awe as I stand today in this forum. I cannot help but feel a sense 

of gratitude to those who have gone before us, those who, in 

their own way in this Assembly and in their communities, have 

contributed to the growth and the greatness of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think of the service of premiers from Charles Dunning to 

Jimmy Gardiner, from James Anderson to Billy Patterson, from 

Tommy Douglas to Ross Thatcher and Allan Blakeney, to name 

but a few, and feel how fortunate we have been to have them. I 

also call to mind, with a feeling of gratitude, the great numbers 

of men and women of all political persuasions who, over the 

course of our history of 90 years, have sat in this Chamber and 

who have made their contribution to the people of  



54  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

Saskatchewan and who have served their constituents to the 

best of their ability. 

 

The good people of Arm River over the years have sent 

representatives to the seat of government who have served with 

great distinction. The Hon. George Scott, a Liberal, was the first 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) elected to 

represent the Arm River constituency. He was first elected in 

1908 and went on to be successful in the subsequent elections 

of 1912, 1917, and 1921 for a total of four terms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Scott’s able work as a legislator received merited 

recognition from other legislators when, on November 27, 

1919, Mr. Scott was chosen to fill the chair that you now 

occupy, Mr. Speaker, as Speaker of the House. In the 

publication “Saskatchewan and its people”, it is written: Mr. 

Scott’s thorough knowledge of parliamentary law and long 

experience in political life has enabled him to preside over the 

deliberations of that body efficiently and with becoming dignity 

so that the business is conducted in an orderly thoroughgoing 

fashion and at the same time with the least amount of delay and 

unnecessary friction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I have confidence that you will emulate the 

example set by the Hon. George Scott. 

 

The Liberty-Imperial district is the area of my constituency 

from which I come. Imperial, which has long been noted for 

many things including its determination to ensure excellent, 

safe health care to the residents of the district and who were 

successful in achieving the first hospital accreditation for a 

hospital of its size in Canada, sent another Liberal to the House 

in 1928 in the person of its local doctor, Dr. Thomas Frederick 

Waugh. 

 

Duncan Selby, a Conservative, followed Dr. Waugh, but it 

wasn’t long before another Liberal, the late Herman Danielson, 

was elected. Mr. Danielson was elected in 1934 and went on to 

be elected not only in 1938 but in 1944, 1948, 1952, 1956, and 

1960. Mr. Danielson served a total of 30 continuous years, from 

July 24, 1934 until dissolution on March 16, 1964  the 

longest membership in a Saskatchewan legislature of any 

person, I believe. 

 

He served long and well and won recognition as an effective 

representative of the constituents of Arm River. With all 

humility, Mr. Speaker, it my intention to emulate the electoral 

success of this great Saskatchewan man. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  In 1964 our people elected Martin Pederson 

of the Conservatives, and he served one term until  well you 

guessed it  another Liberal in the person of Wilbert McIvor 

was given the responsibilities of representing us in this 

Assembly. 

 

In 1971 our constituency elected a New Democrat, the 

Reverend Don Faris. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McLane:  Who served until the election in 1978 of Mr. 

Gerald Muirhead, a Conservative . . . at that point in time 

reflected by many of the people in Arm River . . . will not do 

that again for awhile. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. McLane:  And Mr. Muirhead was subsequently 

re-elected in the general elections of 1982, 1986, and 1991. Mr. 

Speaker, I want at this time to extend a word of appreciation on 

behalf of the people of Arm River to Mr. Muirhead. Regardless 

of political persuasion, the residents could approach Mr. 

Muirhead with their concerns, their problems, and their ideas. 

And in Mr. Muirhead you would find a representative who 

would go to bat for his people. 

 

In June of last year, the new constituency of Arm River returned 

to its roots of liberalism with the election of another Liberal. 

And today I want to extend my appreciation to all the residents 

of Arm River for the confidence that they have shown me in 

electing me to serve as their member of the Legislative 

Assembly. Hopefully they elected me as most of your 

constituents have elected each of you  because they felt we 

had honesty and integrity. 

 

Our task is to ensure that each of us live up to their 

expectations. Mr. Speaker, I was humbled to see the support 

that I received from people of every persuasion, from every 

corner of my constituency. Today I want to say that this new 

member of the Legislative Assembly from the constituency of 

Arm River has dedicated himself to be the representative of all 

the citizens of Arm River. And in the greater context of the 

expectations of the people of Saskatchewan, I hope that I will 

be able to demonstrate an ability to serve and to debate in a 

manner that serves the greater good of our province. 

 

Let me for a few minutes speak about my constituency. Arm 

River is a sprawling constituency encompassing a broad 

expanse of rural Saskatchewan, running from just west of 

Lumsden to an area south of Central Butte, following along the 

beautiful South Saskatchewan River on the west to Haultain 

road on the north. It then winds south-easterly to the community 

of Imperial and follows the western shores of Last Mountain 

Lake to its point of origin, past my farm, and then down just 

east of the beautiful resort community of Regina Beach. 

 

No other constituency in this province provides a broader 

picture of Saskatchewan life than does the constituency of Arm 

River. Our landscape and geography depicts agriculture at the 

cutting edge. Grain farming, mixed farming, irrigation, specialty 

crops  they all flourish. Small industry including 

manufacturing and tourism is dominant. 

 

The location of Arm River provides my constituents with a 

deep insight into the amenities of rural life, and we have 

learned to enjoy those benefits. Over the years I have 

volunteered at the community level to enhance the quality of 

rural life, and if I have only one promise to make and that one I  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  55 

plan to keep, it is to continue that struggle on behalf of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  To introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, the group of students that you 

see in your gallery is about to leave, and I would like to also 

introduce them, Mr. Speaker, to all the members of the House. 

 

A fairly large contingent of students are now seated in the 

gallery, and I would like to introduce 20 grade 10, 11, and 12 

students from Forestville, Quebec. These students arrived in 

Saskatchewan, I believe, on Friday. And as part of a student 

exchange, they will be spending a lot of time in Saskatchewan, 

most of that of course in east-central Saskatchewan. They are 

accompanied by Yvonne Beaudoin, I believe. And I would ask 

the students to rise, from Forestville, Quebec, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Also, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is a 

group of students from the Canora-Pelly constituency. They are 

from the Preeceville School, and they are from grades 10, 11, 

and 12. They are accompanied by their teacher, Sheila 

Ivanochko, and bus driver Pat Paterson. Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask all members to recognize this fine group of young 

Canadians and their teachers. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To continue, I make 

no apology to anyone in stating unequivocally that my purpose 

in this Assembly will be to speak for rural Saskatchewan within 

the context of what is important to the hopes and aspirations of 

Saskatchewan’s people. 

 

Governments in this province have for too long paid lip-service 

to rural Saskatchewan during election campaigns, then have 

proceeded to stand idly by while community after community 

suffer neglect. Rural Saskatchewan must be more than dying 

towns with just enough VLTs (video lottery terminal) to feed 

the general revenue pot. 

 

I feel it fortunate that the people of Arm River have the 

opportunity to examine rural values while being completely  

aware of urban challenges. All my life I have chosen to support 

rural initiatives because I understand that our urban centres 

flourish when rural Saskatchewan thrives. Regina and 

Saskatoon are great cities because their strength and enterprise 

is directly related to the motivation derived from a rural 

personality. 

 

So it shouldn’t come as a surprise to anyone, particularly those 

who know me well, if you hear me loud and clear, speaking for 

the farmers of Saskatchewan and other enterprises represented 

in rural Saskatchewan. Please understand, Mr. Speaker, that my 

prejudice to rural Saskatchewan is based on my certain 

knowledge that the cities of this province only do well if the 

farm constituency prospers. 

 

While I have acknowledged, Mr. Speaker, that my 

responsibility as a member of this Assembly is to all my 

constituents and indeed to all the citizens of this province, it is 

important to clearly establish the personal agenda I plan to 

follow during the years that I will be privileged to serve. 

 

My reasons for seeking office were based on the aspirations of 

the people I sought to serve, which should not, Mr. Speaker, be 

much different than those of other people of the province. The 

people of Arm River want less government; they want less 

government interference in their lives. They, with thousands of 

others, have long realized that government and elected officials 

come and go, and all too often with this reality unfortunately 

has developed an attitude of we know best. 

 

We need only look at the coming of the GRIP program and the 

going of GRIP. Who in the final analysis suffers? The 

agriculture producer. It matters not how well intentioned the 

motives might be. When programs are designed with the I know 

best philosophy, those who have been targeted for protection 

become the victims who are hamstrung by regulation upon 

regulation and left damaged by resultant fall-out for which 

government seems unwilling to accept responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers are at the mercy of government. Farmers 

cannot function as effectively as they could because of all the 

regulations that have been imposed upon them. Look, if you 

will, at the analogy of a freely flowing river, a river that moves 

unimpeded briskly and effectively until a beaver constructs a 

dam and all goes haywire. Has that not been the case with 

agriculture? 

 

People have told me that agriculture programs have to meet the 

needs of people and have to be free from political interference. 

The farm community does not want to be subsidized, Mr. 

Speaker; the farm community does not want hand-outs. 

 

The farm community expects only to be able to market its 

product for a fair market price. And it becomes imperative that 

each of us in this Assembly work to foster a greater 

understanding with all our people that grain payments from the 

Canadian Wheat Board are not hand-outs, but those very 

payments are payments from the sale of the producer’s grain. 

We must quit leaving the impression that initial payments, 

interim payments, and final payments are nothing but what they 

really are  money paid to the farmers for the sale of his or her  



56  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

grain, pure and simple. 

 

The plea of my people, Mr. Speaker, is leave us alone with the 

least of regulatory influences. When agriculture issues are front 

and centre, it will be the member for Arm River who will be 

speaking for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Arm River want assurances that 

their tax money is being spent effectively. They and I want to be 

sure that our money is being spent on programs that we need, 

and I make special reference to health and to education. 

Wherever people are, whenever they get sick, they want to 

know that the resources will be available to look after them. 

 

Nowhere is this more important than in rural Saskatchewan 

where we have a greater proportion of senior citizens. Seniors 

in the years that they have lived have ensured through their 

diligence, their money and voluntary effort, a health care system 

that has met their needs and given them a great sense of 

security. 

 

When it comes to protecting the health care interests of rural 

Saskatchewan in this province, Mr. Speaker, the member for 

Arm River and his counterparts in the official opposition will 

be speaking loud and clear for rural Saskatchewan and ensuring 

that further loss of quality health services to rural Saskatchewan 

will not happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  The people of Arm River want assurances 

that an education system will be such that our children and our 

grandchildren in rural Saskatchewan will have the same 

opportunity that all children throughout the province must have, 

and that is access to a first class instructional and learning 

environment that will equip them to take their place in our 

society. 

 

The people of Arm River and I want to see jobs for our children 

and grandchildren that will enable them to use their talents and 

the education that they have received. We are tired of the 

rhetoric and the broken promises of more jobs. If government 

continues to tax and to spend, there will never be incentives and 

means for business and industry to create meaningful 

employment opportunities. 

 

I had hoped to see in the throne speech, evidence of a plan to 

encourage private individuals to make an investment in our 

future. I have great concern that not one worthwhile program 

appears to be in the works that will in fact create new jobs for 

young people in rural Saskatchewan, let alone our urban 

centres. 

 

Can we continue to refuse to recognize that Saskatchewan 

cannot continue to pass up opportunities to move ahead? This is 

the question my constituents and I ask. We have a province that 

has enough potash reserves beneath that rich wheat land to meet 

the anticipated needs of that industry for the next 100 years. We 

have a province that has developed assets above and below the 

ground that gives us the opportunity for present and future 

wealth. That should truly be the envy of an entire world. An  

advanced uranium industry would have a dramatic impact upon 

our province, but we now see Ontario reaping the potential 

benefits in jobs and revenue. 

 

Even in these somewhat difficult economic times, we have 

every reason to be confident in our future and to hold out hope 

for that future. But, Mr. Speaker, my constituents and I ask a 

simple question: what good are all those resources if we cannot 

create jobs? Must our young people continue to be forced to 

leave home without even the hope of return? We say not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I sought elected office because I believe, as do my 

constituents, that we could continue to build upon the strengths 

of our tourism industry  an industry that has significant 

precedence in the constituency of Arm River, and which enjoys 

a multitude of resort and hunting areas that are second to none. 

These resources and resorts continue to attract tourism from 

across North America and beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this industry will suffer if we do not protect and 

preserve the transportation roadway networks that enable the 

tourist industry to flourish, and the few jobs we have for people 

could be jeopardized. This member for Arm River will speak 

out loud and clear in ensuring that gas taxes and monies 

earmarked for highway preservation and upgrade are indeed 

expended for the intended purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents have asked that we address the 

issue of high taxes. They and I had hoped to see an indication 

of some tax relief for all of us. It is not too late to address this 

critical issue in the budget that is to be brought down in the 

near future. The people of Saskatchewan deserve no less. And 

if we are to create an atmosphere of hope, Mr. Speaker, then the 

government must act now and urge the members opposite to 

press for tax relief. 

 

If I hadn’t already recognized the major problem for small 

business, the constituents of Arm River sure have, and are sure 

quick to bring their concerns to my attention. Business is 

over-regulated and in many instances is forced to compete with 

government enterprises. All business asked is for a level-

playing field, a working environment free from over-regulation 

and government interference, and the opportunity to compete 

fair and square. 

 

The people of Arm River and I recognize that progress and 

change are inevitable and often welcome, but progress and 

change cannot occur without proper planning and foresight. 

 

Government must take great care when proposing change and 

making decisions to bring about change; that these decisions are 

not made solely for short-term economic or political gain, and 

that the long-term effect of these decisions are thoroughly 

researched and communicated. 

 

Changes to grain marketing and transportation must be 

researched to keep our agricultural industry alive. The value 

added processing of farm commodities will play an important 

role in the survival of our agriculture community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that careful planning is absolutely essential  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  57 

in redefining our road and rail systems. All three levels of 

government, together with the rail and elevator companies and 

the communities, need to sit down together to make decisions 

on where the rail lines and the heavy roads will be located. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all that we do and undertake, we know that we 

have to change. But more important is how a change is 

managed. 

 

(1545) 

 

In this session, let us learn from the mistakes that have been 

made. Let us become the agents of positive change and not the 

victims of careless change. We must insist that change is 

managed with sensitivity and done in the context of what is best 

for the greater good and not for political or any other 

expediency. 

 

Having made my decision to work with and for my constituents 

and the people of Saskatchewan, in discussion with my 

83-year-old dad who simply said to me, when you go to Regina, 

just take with you a good dose of common sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that in all that we do in this Chamber 

and beyond, that all of us will temper our debate and decision 

making with common sense and sensitivity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am unable to support the motion of the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

I want to start by thanking you for your rulings. The wisdom of 

the election that took place for the Speaker is already being 

shown repeatedly in this legislature and I know that you will do 

a very, very good job, and all members look forward to your 

continued wisdom and guidance from the Chair. 

 

I want to start by talking a little bit about Regina Coronation 

Park, my constituency, which is boundaried by the pipe line 

running north of Walsh Acres, north of Argyle Park; Albert 

Street forms the east boundary, and the boundary follows down 

Albert Street to the Canadian National Railway line where it 

proceeds west to McIntosh Street; straight north on McIntosh 

Street to the northern limit of that street. 

 

So I’ve got a nice compact, relatively square constituency that is 

largely residential. There’s working people throughout the 

constituency. The housing is a mix of single family dwelling 

units. There’s some duplexes; a fair number of apartments on 

the east part primarily, bordering on Albert Street and along 

near the southern border. There’s also some special housing in 

it  a Salvation Army nursing home and some other special 

housing units. 

 

Regina Coronation Park residents, or constituents, if I may refer 

to them that way, work for government, work for IPSCO, work 

in retail  either as owner-operator or as paid staff  with 

restaurateurs, real healthy restaurant industry in Regina 

Coronation Park. We have some professional services now and  

just a real good, healthy mix of just about everything that urban 

life has to offer. 

 

And of course I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention we do have 

some active farmers who obviously are farming their land 

outside of the constituency but who reside in Regina 

Coronation Park. So it’s a real good mix, if I can describe it, of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The concerns of my constituents are, not surprisingly, not that 

much different than the concerns of many members on both 

sides of the legislature. Jobs and job security is overall the 

biggest concern  it tops the list. Taxes and the economy are a 

concern, and the people that I am blessed to represent regret 

that taxes can’t be lowered faster; although they are very 

pleased, generally speaking, with last year’s $75 reduction in 

the debt reduction surtax, followed by this year when we 

doubled that reduction to $150 per tax filer, reduction in the 

debt reduction surtax. 

 

We’re all happy about that. But at the same time the general 

impression of the constituents in Regina Coronation Park is we 

have an inherent understanding that government is simply the 

collection of all of us in Saskatchewan, all 1 million of us. We 

band together, pool our resources to do together what we cannot 

do alone. 

 

Together we’ve created a first class health care system There’s 

been some ongoing dialogue and debate on that in the 

legislature today. Together we have developed a highway 

system that includes more miles of paved highway per capita 

than anywhere in the known universe, anywhere in the world. 

And we’re charged with maintaining more miles of pavement 

per person than anywhere  a huge geography. It’s a 

wonderful opportunity, and Saskatchewan is just a fabulous 

province to live in. 

 

The United Nations has recognized Canada as the best nation in 

the world to live in, and then they went one step further and 

recognized that Saskatchewan is the best province in Canada to 

live in. And that’s based on some things like life expectancy, 

the ability to access certain required services like health care  

I’ve mentioned that  and like educational opportunities for 

primarily our young people, although education is fast moving 

from the stage where education used to be a K-12 feature, and 

some went on to post-secondary. It’s fast evolving to the 

situation we have today where education is a lifelong part of 

our lives. So it’s really a treat. 

 

Regina Coronation Park residents, I’ve talked a little bit about 

their understanding of provincial government need for money 

 need for tax revenue, to put it as bluntly as I possibly can  

to fund hospitals and home care and nursing homes, day 

surgeries, prescription drug plan, educational services, be it 

K-12 or the various SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) locations including the one in Regina, 

or the one of the two universities or both of them, including the 

very good University of Regina. 

 

And Social Services requires funding, all good social 

programing. I know in the previous legislature, Mr. Speaker, I  



58  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

spoke very proudly a couple of times of one of the initiatives 

that our government had in the first term. And that was the 

initiative of funding the early childhood intervention program 

so that the real, effective wait list was zero as opposed to four 

years or some other number. It actually at one time varied right 

across the province, but it could be up to four years. And by 

directing some well-placed dollars  I don’t want to minimize 

the dollars, but I don’t want to overstate them either; many 

hundreds of thousands of dollars would be the way I would 

describe it  by doing that we were able to effectively 

eliminate that wait list and really make an investment in all our 

collective future. I’m very, very proud of that. 

 

My constituents in Regina Coronation Park understand that 

interest payments of $860 million a year are just huge. They’re 

immense. They’re so huge that it represents the third largest 

budget item of the province of Saskatchewan. My constituents 

want lower taxes; I’ve mentioned that, but more importantly, 

we all want government-funded and -delivered services to be 

effective. That’s really what government is all about, is making 

sure that our services are effective. 

 

So some historical perspective, Mr. Speaker, may be useful. 

How did we get the situation where the province of 

Saskatchewan’s got a $14 billion-plus debt? 

 

Well I don’t want to beat the thing to death but I do want to just 

remind everybody how it is that we got to where we are in 1996 

so that we can look to the future. 

 

We fought largely a rearguard action against the former 

government and we watched them privatize the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan and Saskoil, Sask minerals, 

Prince Albert Pulp, Sask computer corporation, and a number 

of other things. 

 

We saw some major changes in our highways operations. For 

example we all remember the $40 million of highways 

equipment that was sold for $6 million. Many of us will know 

that SaskPower’s natural gas wells were thrown into the deal 

when the former government privatized Saskoil. And that had 

an ongoing and very profound effect on us to the point where 

now SaskEnergy is simply a price taker. 

 

They go to the producers of natural gas, negotiate the very best 

deal they possibly can on an annual basis. But we’re price 

takers as opposed to the halcyon days of the past, when in fact 

SaskEnergy could have decided that it was going to pump its 

own natural gas, sell it to itself for less money than it could sell 

that same gas to somebody else. That ability is simply gone. 

 

We saw a number of other problems during the former term of 

government. Again I don’t want to spend much time in 

highlighting that but we saw expenditures of 250 million on 

NewGrade Upgrader, similar amount on the Lloydminster 

upgrader, 249 million taxpayers’ dollars into a Cargill fertilizer 

plant. Weyerhaeuser wound up getting a pulp mill given to 

them. That cost just over $230 million. 

 

We even had some rather interesting little ventures that the then 

government entered into. Remember Promavia, the jet  

manufacturer? We’re still waiting for one of those jets to swish 

down on us. Of course it was a scam and it wound up costing 

the taxpayers some money. 

 

We remember Supercart. We remember High R Doors. We 

remember GigaText, that fabulous thing where they were going 

to use obsolete computers to translate English to French. And of 

course Saskatchewan was going to become just wealthy beyond 

imagination through the model . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

through the GiggleText as one of my colleagues calls it, but 

GigaText. 

 

Those are some of the things that brought us to the situation 

where the government changed, Mr. Speaker, in 1991. There 

was much that needed to be done. We were into a situation 

where the provincial treasury was in annual deficit, more than 

$1 billion per year. That represents about 20 per cent of the 

total budget of our roughly $5 billion budget; 20 per cent of that 

was simply over expenditures. And we all  members on both 

sides of the House  readily understand. We know at a gut 

level that you cannot over-expend your household income year 

after year after year without getting into very, very significant 

trouble. 

 

The former government overspent its annual budget year after 

year after year after year. There was 10 consecutive deficit 

budgets. There was a litany of bad deals. I’ve outlined just a 

very few of them in passing just to help bring us in a historical 

sense up to date to where we are. 

 

Well that couldn’t continue when we formed government. 

Simply put, our ability to continue to borrow huge hundreds of 

millions or billions even of dollars, that ability was gone. It was 

done. We were a province right at the edge of our borrowing 

ability. 

 

I cannot even begin to describe how . . . I can say it now 

because we’ve backed away from that precipice, but I can’t tell 

you how terrifying it was in those early days knowing that we 

were just teetering on the very edge of bankruptcy, knowing 

that Saskatchewan was in incredibly tough shape, knowing that 

we had to make some choices. 

 

Choices that just wrenched at us but choices that simply had to 

be made for our province to continue. And if we didn’t make 

those choices  this is the other bad part of it  if we didn’t 

make those choices the federal government had a transition 

team in place. They would have callously made the choices 

from Ottawa. It would have been done. They’d have handed us 

back a province with almost as much debt but with a hugely 

reduced ability to do absolutely anything other than tax and pay 

for bills from the previous government. 

 

(1600) 

 

We’ve moved a long, long, long ways from there, and now as 

we enter this first session of this term of government, we have 

to continue, Mr. Speaker. This government must continue to 

focus our collective efforts on job creation and economic 

development. We must work to create the conditions for job 

growth, for economic growth. We recognize that Saskatchewan  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  59 

has gone from a low of 451,000 employed people with a 

40,000-person unemployment rate at the same time, we’ve gone 

to 460,000 people employed and 34,000 people unemployed. 

And that’s according to StatsCanada as reported in the labour 

report, fourth quarter for 1995. 

 

We also know, on this side of the House, that that record of job 

growth is simply not enough. It is not fast enough. It is not 

enough. And that’s why the Premier and the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade and all other members on 

this side are saying we must focus our efforts on job creation, 

economic development and growth this term just as we focused 

on eliminating the annual deficit and working to reduce the 

long-term debt in the first term of government. That’s the 

commitment we have. That’s what we plan on following. 

 

I have very, very high hopes, Mr. Speaker, that in this term of 

government we will see even stronger job growth, even stronger 

economic development. And part of this, what I know for 

members opposite will seem like a grand leap of faith on my 

part, but part of that leap of faith is I’m part of a team that has 

gone through some of the most traumatic times that any 

government or any province could ever hope to go through. 

 

We did it. I couldn’t be prouder of the team on this side that 

helped set the tone. This team set the tone. One million people 

in Saskatchewan came along for the ride, many willingly  

fortunately for us, the majority willingly. As a result, we’re 

back for a second term of government, along with a good, 

healthy smattering of brand-new faces so that the process 

rejuvenates itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  But whether a Saskatchewan resident was in that 

majority that clearly supported the actions of the government or 

in the minority that did not, they were all part of the solution, 

and I want to take my hat off, Mr. Speaker, to all 1 million 

Saskatchewan people who have willingly, in most instances, in 

some instances not so willingly, but have all participated in the 

fabulous turnaround of our province. We went from a more 

than $1 billion annual deficit to the last two budgets were 

balanced; modest surpluses in each of the last two budgets. As I 

mentioned before, that’s a 20 per cent annual turnaround or one 

dollar out of every five that we’ve changed from deficit to 

surplus. 

 

With that done, the second term looks to me like it should be 

relatively easier than the first term. That’s part of why I think 

our focus on job creation will pay off. We can sort of turn our 

efforts, focus our efforts on that. 

 

We also must focus our efforts on change to social programing 

to make our assistance more meaningful in today’s world. 

We’re going to be focusing our efforts on our health delivery 

system to make it even more effective than it is now. We’re 

going to be doing everything we can, including strong new 

legislation to prevent the creation of a two-tiered health care 

system in Saskatchewan. We are simply opposed to it and we’ll 

stay that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll be focusing our efforts or re-focusing our 

efforts on maintaining a frugal yet effective government  

frugal yet effective. And I think this bears some comment from 

me, particularly in light of my earlier statement. 

 

I want to share a concern and I hope that people don’t take this 

in the wrong manner. But in my discussion with constituents 

and with others around the province, inevitably it will come 

around to, well we should be reducing the size of government. 

My response, or my question to these people is, well what is it 

you’d like us to reduce? Well I don’t know, I’m not the expert. 

That’s what you’re elected for; you figure it out and you reduce 

it. That’s fair enough, except that it’s not that easy. 

 

I then push a little further and I say well, let’s see now, which 

hospital would you like us to close; which service? Maybe 

there’s some services that doctors are doing that we should, as a 

government, overrule and say, no, no, you don’t have to do gall 

bladder surgery or you don’t have to do appendectomies or 

some other service. 

 

Or I say maybe we should eliminate the more than $60 million 

that we spend on the prescription drug plan to see that the 

highest users and poorest  lowest income individuals  have 

access to the much needed prescription drugs. Well of course 

the answer is no, no, no, you can’t cut those. 

 

So my next question is, well what school or what school service 

should we reduce or eliminate? No, you can’t reduce education. 

And I agree with them. 

 

Then I say, well what highway would you like us to reduce 

maintenance on? And of course that’s a non-starter. 

 

I’ve talked already about the fabulous highway system. And I 

do at this stage want to commend the many hundreds of 

highways workers we have around the province who are just 

doing a terrific, terrific job with the limited or finite resources 

that we’re able to give to them through the courtesy of the 

taxpayers. If we could double their budget, I know they could 

do even more with the highways. But with the finite resources 

we’re giving them, I think they’re just doing a fabulous job. 

 

Well the answer to my question about what highways do you 

want us to reduce maintenance to is oh no, no, you can’t reduce 

the highways maintenance. 

 

And the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. Invariably 

what I have found is that when taxpayers or individuals are 

talking about cuts to government, what they’re really talking 

about is cuts to the Premier, cabinet, and MLAs. 

 

And I say, well that’s fair enough, that’s fair enough. If we were 

to eliminate the Premier, all of the cabinet, all MLAs, including 

opposition MLAs, if we went away from our democratic form 

of government completely, if we did all of that, there’s roughly 

$9 million could be saved on an annual basis. 

 

Well $9 million, Mr. Speaker, in a $5 billion annual budget  

$9 million, while it’s an amount of money to be reckoned with,  



60  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

when you consider the alternative and you realize that we’ve 

fought world wars over the issue of democracy, $9 million a 

year doesn’t seem to me to be that huge a price to pay for the 

maintenance of our democracy. 

 

It also  $9 million  pales in comparison to the $106 million 

federal Liberal government cut-back in established program 

funding for this year, or the additional 200 million they are 

going to cut back next year, and the additional 200 million that 

they are going to cut back the year after that if their budget 

documents are to be trusted. I almost hope they aren’t to be 

trusted, but that’s what they are clearly signalling. 

 

Now that I’ve broached the subject of the federal government 

and its transfer payments to the province of Saskatchewan, 

because that represents a very significant problem for us, I just 

want to point out, Mr. Speaker, so that there’s no mistake about 

it, what we’re complaining about is not the cut in equalization 

transfer payment from the federal government. 

 

Equalization, if you like, is a form of just that, equalization. 

When our economy grows and our ability to self-generate 

money  in this case, to be brutally frank about it, through our 

own taxation sources as our economy grows  the federal 

equalization payment goes down roughly an equal amount. And 

if our economy were to drop, the federal equalization payment 

will go up. Fortunately, we have come through a period of very 

reasonable, never strong enough, but it is stronger economic 

growth in Saskatchewan than in the Canadian average. We have 

been leaders in economic growth for some few years now, let’s 

put it that way. So we’re not complaining about the equalization 

drop in funding. 

 

But what we very clearly are complaining about is the 

established program drop in funding, where the federal Liberal 

government have outlined 106 million drop this year, an 

additional $200 million cut in established program funding next 

year, followed by an additional 200 million the year after that. 

Very, very significant money. 

 

And the established program funding, Mr. Speaker, as you 

would know, is for health, for education, and for social 

programing. The three key issues that, when we were consulting 

with the people of Saskatchewan, you say: what is it that is 

most critical to you?  they tell you health is number one. You 

must adequately fund health care. We’re very, very proud of the 

system we have. We would like to see it improved if that’s 

possible, and of course it is always possible to improve. 

 

But health, education. We in Saskatchewan have long viewed 

that we have an obligation to particularly our youth, but as I 

mentioned earlier in the ongoing, we have an obligation to all 

Saskatchewan people to see that continuing education can carry 

on. 

 

So it’s very difficult, to put it mildly, to try and implement 

improvements in programing when you get the rug tugged from 

under you. And that’s exactly the situation we find ourselves in. 

We thought we had the debt  pardon me, not the debt 

problem because there’s still more than 14 billion total debt in 

Crowns and government, although it’s going down  we had  

the deficit wrestled to the ground. And we thought our own 

economic growth could generate a little bit of running room and 

could make Saskatchewan a whole lot easier place to live in. 

 

I haven’t belled the cat, but of course I’m referring to such 

things as our civil service, which has taken virtually no pay 

increase since we formed government. They have very, very, 

very much been a part of the solution. And a very dedicated 

group of individuals our civil service is. They’ve done a 

fabulous job. Teachers throughout the province have carried 

their weight. As you know, we’ve carried our weight in the 

legislature. We’re now in our fourth or fifth year of a pay 

freeze. Cabinet ministers and the Premier took a 5 per cent cut 

in pay when we were first elected in 1991 and we immediately 

froze our pay ever since. 

 

I’m never quite sure whether I should get excited and cheer 

about that or whether I should sort of just go and talk to the 

credit union and see if I can’t get another loan again. It is 

difficult for all of us, including, as I mentioned, the civil 

service, teachers, and others throughout the province. It is 

asking a lot of people to forgo what we all feel is our just 

reward for doing a job well. And our just reward is usually a 3, 

4, 5 per cent annual increase in our income when inflation is 

running at 3 per cent. We all expect or hope to at least break 

even with inflation, and hopefully gain a little bit over the years. 

 

(1615) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many choices to be made in this term 

of government. There are choices that are going to be made on a 

daily basis; quite literally on a daily basis. I’d love to tell 

everybody that all of the choices this government makes are 

going to be perfect. I’d love to tell everybody that we never, 

ever make a mistake. That would not be exactly as truthful as 

I’d like to be. What I can say is I am very, very proud of the 

way the mechanism that . . . we do make choices on the 

government side. We get as complete information as we 

possibly can. We have very full debate on issues, and 

sometimes these debates can get fairly heated within the 

confines of the caucus. 

 

But at the end of the day, we all have our opportunity to be 

heard. We all have our opportunity to win some of those 

debates and to lose others. But collectively, it’s a fabulous 

decision-making process. The people of Saskatchewan have put 

their faith in a large number of government members  not 

quite large enough  but a large number of government 

members. For that I’m grateful because collectively we do make 

very good choices. 

 

As I said, the choices will continue, and I very much look 

forward to being a part of the ongoing process of helping make 

choices for Saskatchewan people for the good of the working 

women and men throughout the province, and I’m looking for 

even better things to come from this government in this term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment to the 

Speech from the Throne, but I will very, very, very proudly be 

supporting this Speech from the Throne. 



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  61 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure and an 

honour for me to stand in this House and represent the people 

of the new constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. It’s an 

honour to be able to make my contribution to this debate and be 

part of this parliamentary process that we all cherish. 

 

But before I begin to tell you about my constituency and thank 

the people who have placed their trust in me, there are traditions 

I am delighted to observe. My first words will then be words of 

congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, on your election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  It’s a most honoured position, and although at 

times in its long history it’s been a dangerous one, it will be 

challenging, no doubt occasionally frustrating, but also very 

rewarding. And I know that you are a most capable speaker 

with a tremendous respect for this institution, and I have every 

confidence that you will conduct this House with the necessary 

dignity and decorum. 

 

Because the hon. member from Regina Victoria also put his 

name in nomination, we had a first in Saskatchewan: the 

election of a Speaker by secret ballot. I’m so proud to have been 

part of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also want to thank the member from Regina Victoria for 

his contribution to the running of this House in the previous 

legislature when he served as Deputy Speaker. Those of us who 

were here during the last session will never forget his words 

which were spoken to a recalcitrant member, one who no longer 

serves in this House, when he said, go ahead, make my day. 

 

I also offer my congratulations to the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood on his election as Deputy Speaker and to 

the member from Moosomin for allowing his name to stand for 

that position so that again we participated in a first: the 

democratic election of a Deputy Speaker. 

 

I could not enter into this debate without a few more words of 

congratulations to the member from North Battleford-Cut Knife 

for her most eloquent and thoughtful words in moving the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Well done indeed. And also to the youngest 

member of this House, the member from Regina South. His 

candour and his wit were most refreshing when he seconded 

that motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  I’m proud to call you my friends and my 

colleagues. And. I also want to congratulate of course all new 

members and all returning colleagues to this House. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, a new 

constituency, a new name, but the same wonderful people, and I  

thank them from the bottom of my heart for electing me to 

represent them. It’s a tremendous honour and a great 

responsibility. I will work hard to earn their respect and their 

trust. 

 

And what a constituency it is, Mr. Speaker: 11,000 voters, and 

more families moving in every day, young families, students, 

single people, people who are ready to retire. There’s a lot of 

new construction going on in my constituency, so it’s obvious 

that it’s one of the fastest growing areas in the province. 

 

And when I was thinking the other day about what I would like 

to say about my constituency, I began to think about what you 

could do if you lived there. And I was actually delighted and 

quite amazed at the list. Now I couldn’t possibly tell you 

everything, but I’d like to share some of the things that you 

could do if you lived in my constituency. 

 

You could live in a variety of wonderful housing. You could 

buy your groceries and your meat there. You could go bowling. 

You could go swimming or skating in the North West Leisure 

Centre. You could play pool. You could attend any number of 

churches. You could walk or play in well-maintained parks. 

You could have pictures framed. You could do your banking 

there. You could have your oil changed or your wheels 

balanced or gas up your car. 

 

You could lie down in an alfalfa field, and you could marvel at 

the acres and acres of wheat and other grains. You could canoe 

down a river and go by some of the most productive market 

gardens in the province. You could swim in a lake. You could 

bet on a duck in the Lumsden Duck Derby. You could paint a 

grain elevator at Grand Coulee. You could shop for antiques, or 

you could watch a potter at her wheel. 

 

You could spend a few restful days at a retreat. You could ride 

a horse or a bike through what is surely one of the most lovely 

valleys in Saskatchewan: the Qu’Appelle Valley. You could 

adopt a puppy or a cat from the Humane Society. You could eat 

out at a fast-food outlet or enjoy a more leisurely meal. You can 

watch pipes being shipped all over the world from one of the 

most productive steel plants in Canada. 

 

You could attend one of the many vibrant and progressive 

schools from kindergarten to grade 12, and in the fall of this 

year you could attend the opening of the new Winston Knoll 

Collegiate. You could play baseball or soccer. You could join a 

very active community association and volunteer with the 

Guides or the Cubs. And in a few short weeks we hope, 

something some of us are looking forward to doing, you can 

play golf. There are two fine courses in my constituency. 

 

I could go on, but you know that it’s a very special place, and 

you can see why I’m so pleased and proud to represent it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne outlines this 

government’s plan for this session and our plan to prepare our 

province for the 21st century. What particularly excites me is 

that this plan, this agenda, is the result of a program of public 

consultation and cooperation on a scale never before seen in 

this province, with resources never before used. From public  



62  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

meetings to electronic town halls via Saskatchewan cable 

network, by 1-800 telephone numbers, and through mail-in 

reply cards and to the Internet  Saskatchewan people have 

been given the opportunity to have their say. 

 

And much of what they had to say, of course, is what we heard 

on the doorsteps in June and what we have been hearing from 

our constituents since then. This entire process of ongoing 

consultation makes for wiser decisions and thus more effective 

government. And everything in this plan, in this Speech from 

the Throne, is worthy of the support of us all, of all thinking 

and concerned citizens of this province. 

 

The time is right to redesign our social program. This program 

was designed for our world as it was 30 years ago. That world 

has changed, and it’s not only right but responsible that we 

should acknowledge that change and redesign our programs to 

be sustainable in this changing world; redesign them to build 

strong communities and help families move off the system. 

 

In health we have set up our health districts, set up our health 

boards, our elected health boards; and we have begun the 

second stage of health reform. We are working with the health 

boards and the health care professionals to ensure that all 

people and services work more effectively together as part of a 

wellness team. 

 

In agriculture we continue to encourage diversification and 

value added processing and to promote the ag biotech industry. 

We will put $200 million into agricultural funds over the next 

four years. It’s most encouraging to see the number of farmers 

beginning to use the resources of the Internet to access vital 

information. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I was at the university 

the other day when a group of farmers were visiting the 

computer area of the university and one of them said, well I 

suppose if you could tell me what the price of sow bellies are 

right now, I might find it useful. And the young man who was 

actually conducting them through there said, well I think I can 

do that; and he did. And you could see that his whole attitude to 

the idea of computers as a source of information changed. 

 

In my conversations with my constituents, they tell me they are 

concerned about the cost of governing. I’m always very pleased 

to be able to tell them that we have shown leadership in this 

area and that our operating costs per capita are already the 

lowest in Canada, but we’re committed to doing more. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we plan innovative changes to the administration 

of justice, tougher sanctions against drinking drivers for 

instance and their more effective rehabilitation. 

 

We will continue to be fiscally responsible with a four-year 

financial plan to ensure balanced budgets and debt reduction. 

We have expanded regional economic development authorities, 

and our Partnership for Growth will provide Saskatchewan 

with a clear, forward looking plan for job creation. 

 

Speaking as a teacher and a parent, it is the future of our young 

people that has always interested me most. Here I feel are the 

two most important elements of our plan: continuing to train 

and educate these young people and providing employment 

opportunities for them. Nowhere is the need for consultation  

and cooperation greater, I feel, than in developing partnerships 

between educators and employers, between schools and the 

market-place. Saskatchewan has always been a leader in 

education, and now more than ever do we need a well-educated 

work force. The Internet itself will require sophistication and 

skills in literacy that our education system has always sought to 

provide our students. 

 

One of the most innovative and exciting training and 

employment initiatives to date is Future Skills and JobStart. 

Last year this program created 1,560 training and employment 

positions of which almost half were with rural employers. The 

Saskatchewan film and video industry is particularly excited 

about this program. And as we all know, it is with small 

businesses that the opportunity for employment growth exists. 

 

Regional colleges, SIAST, and the universities have the 

responsibility of graduating the best trained and most educated 

of our students. And it is in these institutions that the greatest 

challenges for change in education lie. The challenge is how do 

you do what we have done and how do you do it better to 

compete in the global market-place when the federal 

government has cut $80 million from its spending to 

post-secondary education. Here cooperation, creative thinking, 

partnership and vision are essential. The leaders and the 

students of these institutions are taking up this challenge with 

energy and remarkable good will. 

 

We will work closely with these educational leaders as well as 

industry, business, and labour to improve links between training 

and jobs. And we will encourage the sharing of information and 

of resources to reduce costs while at the same time maintaining 

our standard of excellence. 

 

I do not need to say, Mr. Speaker, that if we continue to 

graduate students who are more than capable of making their 

way in this increasingly complex and challenging world, 

Saskatchewan will continue to thrive along with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Murray:  Mr. Speaker, before I take my place and in 

recognition of International Women’s Day later this week, I’d 

like to pay tribute to one strong and marvellous woman and 

through her to all women. I’d like to talk about Hannelore 

Frombach. 

 

In some ways she’s a very typical Saskatchewan woman. She 

won the heart of a bright young Saskatchewan farmer when he 

came to Germany to visit in her home town. So she left her 

family and moved with him to his farm in Edenwold, to work 

by his side. They had three gifted and beautiful daughters and 

helped each of them achieve success in their own way. 

 

But then Hannah Laura turned to her own interests and she 

began the study of psychology. She worked hard over a number 

of years and graduated with an honours degree. But that wasn’t 

enough for her. She wanted to continue; she wanted to do more. 

So she worked harder and she achieved her master’s degree and  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  63 

graduated with great distinction. In fact, her external examiner 

was the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

All the while she was studying, she was continuing in her role 

as partner and wife, mother and community leader. She was 

quickly hired as a clinical psychologist by Child and Youth and 

her sterling qualities were soon recognized. She began to make 

a real difference, not just at the clinic, but in the lives of the 

children she counselled. Her energy and her enthusiasm and her 

wisdom were much admired. 

 

Well now this wonderful woman is in the fight of her life  the 

fight for her life. She has cancer. But, Mr. Speaker, this 

remarkable woman is an inspiration to all of us who love and 

support her. She sees the joy in everything and she celebrates 

each day. And when I talk to her, she always likens herself to a 

dandelion. 

 

Now we all know that dandelions grow in people’s yards and 

gardens all over Saskatchewan, but people try and get rid of 

them. They mow them down, they yank them up, they try and 

kill them and destroy them with chemicals. But like those 

yellow dandelions, Hannah Laura will not be kept down, and 

she continues to come back sunnier than ever. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on International Women’s Day on Friday I 

shall honour her particularly, and through her, all women. I am 

very pleased to support this Speech from the Throne. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted to 

participate in this debate on the Speech from the Throne. But 

before I get into some remarks on that, I would first of all like 

to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election to the Chair. 

But given the history, Mr. Speaker, of what has taken place to 

Speakers in the British parliamentary system and the passion of 

debate that occurs in this Assembly, I want to at the same time, 

just to be on the safe side, Mr. Speaker, to extend my 

condolences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have been granted the opportunity, 

the fourth opportunity, to represent and serve the friends and 

neighbours and residents of the constituency of 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood. Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 

opportunity to express my appreciation to the people of that 

constituency for the faith that they placed in me in electing me 

last June. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, most members in this Assembly will know 

that this, the first session of the twenty-third legislature, has 

eight fewer members than the twenty-second legislature. I 

would like to point out a reduction of some 14 per cent in the 

number of members. This is a reduction in the size of 

government. And the impact, Mr. Speaker, on the constituency 

that I represented in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twenty-

second legislature was particularly dramatic. Mr. Speaker, that 

seat, the Turtleford seat, after having been represented in this 

Assembly over most of the life of the time of the province, 

simply disappeared from the map. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about that constituency 

and the disappearance of it because I believe that the people of 

all political parties that worked and lived and ran elections feel 

a loss of the Turtleford constituency. It’s a constituency that 

over time changed from being a north-south constituency along 

the Alberta border to one that went east and west, south of the 

Meadow Lake constituency. 

 

It’s a constituency that was represented over time by a number 

of all different parties  by members from all different 

partiesand at the same time represented in a manner that I 

think was very good for this Assembly in keeping this 

Assembly. 

 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the people who were in the 

Turtleford constituency and now find themselves in Meadow 

Lake constituency or the Lloydminster constituency or in the 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency will become comfortable 

with the passing of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take a moment to thank my old 

friends in the Turtleford constituency, those people who lived 

in Edam, Mervin, Turtleford, Spruce Lake. It was indeed an 

honour to have represented them and served them in this 

Assembly. 

 

Representing the new constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood 

has already proven to be an interesting challenge. It takes more . 

. . well almost three hours to drive from one end of the 

constituency at Glaslyn to the south-east corner of the 

constituency at Duck Lake. And that is in the summertime, Mr. 

Speaker, when one is not faced with the road conditions that 

force you to slow down or keep on main roads and cuts off 

some of the shortcuts that are available. 

 

When I mail out a householder, Mr. Speaker, it’s received by 

people in no less than 18 different post offices. But for all the 

differences that you would find, Mr. Speaker, my constituents, I 

believe, share a great deal in common  not just in common 

because they are rural in the nature but common in the sense 

that almost the total constituency is found in the boreal forest 

area. They are also hard-working, imaginative, and a practical 

people who believe that challenges are opportunities and that 

solutions to many of the life’s problems can be found if you just 

take the time and exercise some common sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I pledge to do all of that, all that I can  to meet 

with them in their communities and in their homes so that this 

Assembly may have the benefit of that common sense. 

 

My constituents believe that this government will meet the new 

challenges outlined in the throne speech as successfully as they 

met the challenges of protecting health care for the new century 

in the last term. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, as you know, the throne speech talked 

of the need for further reform in health care; a new role for 

nurses and other health practitioners. Most of my constituents 

reside in the Parkland Health District, where we have already 

seen a number of improvements to the system. 

 



64  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 4, 1996 

One of these changes was beneficial for the people in Big 

River. The Big River area was poorly served by ambulance 

service up until recently. Your wait could be in excess of an 

hour and a half. But, Mr. Speaker, local residents knew that this 

would not be allowed to continue, and the health care reform 

gave them the authority and the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

change this. There is now an ambulance unit stationed in Big 

River and it was established by using $50,000 from the 

provincial rural initiative fund and another 30,000 from the 

health district’s resources. And the ambulance is now stationed 

and working out of Big River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this ambulance service in the 

community of Big River has a lot of side benefits, one of them 

being that the people who formerly moved out of the 

community of Big River and area are now in a position where 

they can remain there for a longer period in their life and not 

have to move into a major centre because the type of health 

services that they had in Big River did not meet their needs. 

Today with the ambulance it does meet their needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other successes in health care reform in the 

Parkland Health District include the introduction of 24-hour 

nursing services at the Idylwild Lodge in Spiritwood, an 

increase of 50 per cent in time covered. The provision of a 

family resource coordinator in the area, something that was not 

available before, and where one would have to go to one of the 

major centres  Saskatoon, P.A. (Prince Albert), or North 

Battleford  to find. Mr. Speaker, it is these things that show 

improvement in having regional health districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move on and comment a little bit 

about some of the other communities in the constituency 

because I think it’s vital that we in this Assembly pass on the 

ideas and information of the communities we come from, so 

that when the decision-making is being done there is a wider 

spectrum of information from which to draw the information 

for making decisions. 

 

In the village of Glaslyn, Mr. Speaker, a company, L & M 

Wood Products, in the recent years has changed ownership. It’s 

a company that . . . a forest and mill operation company that 

produces rails for fences, treated fence posts, treated 

construction material, dimension and other timbers, and 

dimension lumber. Mr. Speaker, this organization employs 

some 50 people in the mill, yard, and office in the village of 

Glaslyn. And about the same number of people are employed 

indirectly through subcontracting that supplies the material for 

the mill from the forest and the other services such as trucking 

of material to its use in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular company also purchases about a 

million or more dollars worth of wood products from small 

operators in the area, giving them an outlet to a much larger 

market, combining wood from two or three different operators 

so that they can have a sale that can be economically served and 

much appreciated by them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my real reason for commenting on this 

company is not to describe the company so much but to inform 

this Assembly that L & M has made a major commitment and  

have retrofitted their mill in Glaslyn. After having toured this 

operation, what they did was almost removed all of the milling 

equipment and replaced it with new equipment. 

 

For two reasons, Mr. Speaker, two reasons I think that are 

commendable and that we should be looking at. The first one 

being to improve the yield from the material that is being 

processed to ensure that there is not a large amount of waste 

product generated but that there is . . . that all of the material 

that can be produced from that wood is produced. And the 

second one, Mr. Speaker, which is I believe equally 

commendable, is to improve the safety for the people that work 

in their mill. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, also indicates to me that the company has a 

commitment to the future. A future, Mr. Speaker, that I hope 

that we in this Assembly and the government are going to be 

able to support in providing them with material. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other areas that is being stressed and, I 

believe by the government, is tourism. And in this case, Ski 

Timber Ridge, for an example, a community-based initiative 

that has taken the advantage of a natural, beautiful hill in the 

forest fringe area is one of those particular examples. In 

addition, Mr. Speaker, Ness Creek Music Festival, which is 

held every July and attracts visitors from all over western 

Canada and which I attended last year  actually it was 

attracting some people right from Toronto  are two examples 

of things that are going on in the community to improve the . . . 

to give tourists activities that they can go to. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that other members of this Assembly will 

join me in . . . or will go to Debden this year in August as this 

village hosts the La Fete Fransaskoise, a four-day cultural and 

educational celebration of the rich heritage of French-speaking 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. I say to the Assembly 

here that for this community of about 400 people, this is a 

major undertaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, leaving aside the tourist potential and activity in 

this province, I’d like to move on to an issue that I believe is a 

significant consequence to the province of Saskatchewan and 

especially to the constituency that I now represent. Mr. Speaker, 

that is the area of first nations. I’m privileged, Mr. Speaker, to 

represent five different first nations in the 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency: Pelican, Witchekan, 

Whitefish, Ahtahkapoop and Beardy’s are the five different first 

nations that are there. 

 

They constitute something like, in the neighbourhood of 6,000 

people in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. It is not a 

small number of people and they are moving ahead in a whole 

number of different areas. The economic and social challenges 

facing these first nations are great and solving their problems 

will not be easy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the way that the problems will be 

solved will be if the people of Saskatchewan work in 

partnership with the first nations to find solutions. And that is  



March 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  65 

the key, Mr. Speaker, to a long-term solution. 

 

Some of these things have been being done and I would like to 

just comment on them. On September 15 of last year our 

government signed an agreement with Beardy’s First Nation. 

This memorandum of understanding opens discussions between 

the government and the band to develop the first nation’s child 

and family services agency, an agency to be run by the band. 

 

On November 30, Mr. Speaker, Canada-Saskatchewan Policing 

Agreement was signed with the Ahtahkakoop Cree Nation. This 

agreement provides for a police management board with local 

membership similar to police commissions in other jurisdictions 

and an elder to assist the police with their work. An additional 

officer will be hired at the end of the first year in about 18 

months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is these types of agreements and cooperation 

with the first nations which will bring about a lot of solutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while these agreements demonstrate the 

Saskatchewan way of cooperation to finding solutions to 

common problems, more work remains to be done. Further 

work is needed in the area of land entitlement, Mr. Speaker. 

Land purchases under the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework 

Agreement are still, in my mind, happening too slow. The 

transfer of land, the reserve status, I believe could be speeded 

up, and at least some of the roadblocks and problems in the way 

could be cleaned up so that we have a system in place that 

works efficiently. 

 

Treaty land entitlements have an effect on the rural 

municipalities and the local ratepayers in the area, and they 

deserve, Mr. Speaker, these local ratepayers and that, deserve a 

little more certainty and predictability in what is taking place, so 

that the community may adapt and move on to making a living 

and not be held up because things are not moving forward. 

Where you are in the position of not knowing whether anything 

is going to take place or not, decisions cannot be made. 

 

The treaty land entitlement process, as I have indicated, needs 

to be expedited. It must be one of, I believe, this government’s 

major priorities. And I pledge now before this Assembly and to 

all, that as a government member, I support the treaty land 

entitlement process and will do all I can to make it effective and 

a more speedy process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I close, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank 

those people of the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency for the 

opportunity to serve them, and I may say to my colleagues, that 

I look forward to working with you on all sides of the House to 

build a better Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the speech and I will not be 

supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, as the time is now coming close 

to 5 o’clock, I move that this debate be adjourned. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 
D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................................. 35 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 
Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 
Goohsen ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 35 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 36 
Bradley .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 36 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................................. 36 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Salvation Army Fire 

Whitmore ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 36 
Job Losses at Saskatchewan Newspapers 

Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 36 
Kinsmen Telemiracle 

Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 37 
Krawetz ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 37 

Condolences 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................... 37 

First Responder Program 
Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 37 

Social Work Week 
Bradley .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
Health Care Reform 

McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 

Job Creation 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 

Grant to Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 41 
Crofford ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 41 

Former SaskTel President’s Contract 
Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 41 
Teichrob ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 41 

Social Worker Case-loads 
Julé ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 42 
Calvert ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
Student Summer Employment Program 

Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 
Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 
Krawetz ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
Ruling on a Point of Order 

Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 
Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................... 48 
Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 48 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 48 
McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 
Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................... 58 
Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 62 
Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 64 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 47 
McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 
Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 
Krawetz ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 56  

 


