


















































May 1, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1287 
 May 1, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition are from Wood Mountain, 
Glentworth, Rockglen, Lisieux, Flintoft, Saskatchewan; and 
Weyburn, and other small towns and communities in southern 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also would like to present 
petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities these people are from, Mr. Speaker, are 
numerous southern Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Alida, 
Redvers, Manor, Maryfield, and Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Assiniboia, Pilot Butte, Cupar, Bengough, and a number from 
Roblin, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this are from Indian Head, Vibank, 
Regina, Melville, and throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names of people from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, and 
many of my friends from Lintlaw, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, too, today to 
present a petition of names from people throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by concerned citizens from 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout, in this case 
southern Saskatchewan, with respect to the Plains Health 
Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
centres like Weyburn, Moosomin, Elbow, Swift Current, 
Lancer we do have Regina on here as well  Stockholm, 
Marquis, Kipling, Mankota, Canora, and a number of other 
centres. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of thousands of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains health care centre. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they are 
from Regina here, they’re from Arcola, they’re from Moose 
Jaw, they’re from Moosomin, they’re from Fort Qu’Appelle, 
they’re from The Pas, they’re from Wood Mountain, they’re 
from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Respecting the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SGI: (1) how many claims 
has SGI received as a result of deer damage to vehicles in 
the fiscal year 1994; (2) how many of these claims have 
been settled; (3) what was the total expense to settle the 
claims made in the fiscal year 1994? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also have two subsequent series of questions 
worded identical except for the year 1995 and 1996. And with 
leave, I would present those without reading them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
have you welcome a former MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Nipawin who lives in my constituency now. So 
I’d ask everyone here to welcome Tom Keeping. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House, someone who you may even know seated in your gallery 
 Ms. Linda Friesen of Moose Jaw, who’s the event 
coordinator for south Saskatchewan first World of Women 
event. 
 
It’s an innovative trade show being held in the Regina Centre of 
the Arts from May 10 to May 12, and it’s an opportunity for 
southern Saskatchewan women to explore a world of ideas 
under one roof. 
 
Education and networking is the purpose so I ask the House to 
join me in welcoming Linda today and wishing her well with 
the World of Women event. Thanks, Linda. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today on behalf of my colleague, the member for Regina 
Victoria, to welcome a group of grade 12 social studies students 
here who are seated in your gallery. These students are from 
Balfour Collegiate here in the city and they are accompanied by 
their teacher, Ms. Pauline MacDonald. So if you’d join with me 
in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
month of May 1996 has been proclaimed Missing Children’s 
Month in Saskatchewan. Each year about 2,000 cases involving 
children are officially registered as missing by police in 
Saskatchewan. I cannot imagine many experiences in life more 
painful or heartbreaking than to be a parent or a guardian of a 
missing child. 
 
On the letterhead of Child Find Saskatchewan are the words, 
“A Missing Child is Everyone’s Responsibility.” Indeed, 
ensuring the safety and well-being of every child is a 
responsibility we all share as caring members of the 
community. Often however the public is unaware of the 
magnitude of the problem or how we can help. 
 
During the month of May, Child Find Saskatchewan, in 
conjunction with their national office, will be conducting the 
5th annual green ribbon of hope campaign. The campaign raises 
awareness of the problem of missing children, not only in 
Canada but throughout the world. Proceeds from the campaign 
are used to assist in continuing the search for missing children. 
 
I encourage each of us to take a few minutes during Missing 
Children’s Month in Saskatchewan to think about what it might 
mean to wake up each morning to the knowledge that your child 
is missing. Perhaps by thinking about this problem in a personal 
way, we can more fully understand and appreciate the words, 
“A Missing Child is Everyone’s Responsibility.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
recognize the month of May’s designation as Missing 
Children’s Month. To have a child go missing is every parent’s 
nightmare. No one could ever understand the suffering and the 
painful questions that parents with missing children experience. 
 
When a child first goes missing, there is an initial media and 
police investigation. But if the case remains unsolved, quite 
often the issue disappears from the headlines, leaving the family 
to cope alone. That’s why it is extremely important for all of us 
to think of missing children as more than a face on a milk 
carton or poster. We must think of the child and the families 
behind those faces and how we can help. 
 
I hope that these green ribbons and this month’s designation as 
Missing Children’s Month will call attention to the unsolved 
tragedies hundreds of families are coping with. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) caucus, I would like to join with my 
colleagues on both sides of the House in acknowledging the 
commencement of Missing Children’s Month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the very words “missing children” are ones  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

that send a chill down the spine of anyone fortunate enough to 
be a parent. As individuals and as a society, nothing is more 
precious to us than the safety of our children. The loss of a 
child by a family is a tragedy that can hardly be described in 
words. Any parent would agree that such a loss creates a stark 
and painful void in the lives of those who knew the child. When 
a child goes missing, Mr. Speaker, what in effect is happening 
is that we are losing an invaluable piece of our society’s future. 
 
Our caucus wants to extend our best regards and full support to 
Child Find Saskatchewan for the important work that they do in 
finding and recovering these lost treasures. 
 
On behalf of my caucus, I would urge all members to pay due 
regard to this serious cause, not only during Missing Children’s 
Month, but throughout the year. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, tourism is the fourth largest 
industry in Saskatchewan, generating $1.1 billion in visitor 
spending within our province. Tourism is also the fastest 
growing economic sector and employs some 42,000 people. 
 
The major players in the industry in Saskatchewan know that 
there is value in sharing their expertise, something the 
government is encouraging through the regional economic 
development authorities and in other ways. 
 
That is why today the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority, 
Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan, and the 
Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council will be joining 
forces to create Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
This merger will combine experience, expertise, and the 
strengths of these three groups to form one central organization 
which will be dedicated to the success and continued growth of 
the tourism industry in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by combining their efforts, these groups will be 
eliminating any duplication and Tourism Saskatchewan will be 
able to provide programs and services that will be more 
efficient and effective. As a result of this move, annual savings 
to the industry are expected to reach $300,000. 
 
I congratulate these organizations for their wisdom in preparing 
for the new century and beyond. By the year 2010, tourism is 
expected to be the largest employer in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Accomplishments of La Loche 

 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize the positive developments taking place in the  

community of La Loche. Although this community has made 
headlines recently for the deplorable conditions in its hospital, 
there are many positive new achievements in the community 
generated because of the people who live there. 
 
I would like to commend all the people working for and in the 
alcohol and drug rehabilitation centre. I’d like to commend the 
groups who have devoted so much time and money and effort 
to establish a safe house in that community for victims of 
domestic abuse. 
 
La Loche Town Council is doing an excellent job in planning 
and developing the community in both the economic and social 
sense, including fighting for a new highway to Fort McMurray. 
I’d like to also recognize the business being generated by the 
Clearwater Dene Nation in the mining sector. 
 
And although this community is well-known as a sports hotbed, 
producing high calibre athletes and teams in basketball, hockey 
and volleyball; yes, the people of La Loche do face many, many 
challenges but they often do not receive any recognition for the 
spirit and effort that they are making to meet and rise above 
these challenges. 
 
I ask all the members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing 
the positive developments of this community, and commending 
the people as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

United World College Scholarship 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
congratulate a high school constituent of mine who has just 
won a prestigious scholarship. Raynell McDonough, a student 
of Bishop James Mahoney High School in Saskatoon will, next 
September, begin a two-year baccalaureate program at Lester B. 
Pearson College. Pearson College is a United World College 
located in Victoria, British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The scholarship was granted partially on academic merit and 
Raynell’s overall average is exceptionally high, Mr. Speaker. 
And it is based on her contribution to school and community, 
which is also exceptional. 
 
This is a great honour for Raynell and a splendid opportunity 
for her to learn firsthand about the variety and complexity of the 
world we live in, beyond her local community and school. 
 
Students from over 70 countries attend the college. In each 
dormitory room there’s representatives of four continents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, United World College scholarship has a dollar 
value which doesn’t need to be mentioned; but the real value is 
in the international experience Raynell will gain in her two 
years. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

Massacre in Tasmania, Australia 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to extend my condolences to the dozens of families 
suffering the tragedy of the bloody massacre in Tasmania, 
Australia. On Sunday, a 29-year-old gunman went on a 
shooting rampage at a busy tourist site, killing 34 people and 
injuring 18 others. At least two Canadians were among the 
injured. 
 
I find this horrific event, along with the shootings in Vernon, 
B.C. (British Columbia) and Dunblane, Scotland, to be terribly 
disturbing. In all cases the victims were innocent people going 
about everyday activities but ended up being the targets of 
senseless and vicious crimes. I pray that these terrible killings 
are not becoming a deadly trend. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, I wish to extend my condolences to 
the victims’ families as they try to move on with their lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Labour Day 
 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a special day 
for working people all over the world. Today is May 1, in many 
countries, the international working person’s holiday. 
 
It is also, Mr. Speaker, a very misunderstood day. This is not 
the day to celebrate the Russian Revolution of 1919. This day 
has nothing to do with Lenin or Trotsky. It is true that today has 
more significance in Europe than in North America, and it is 
true that over the past years it has become more associated with 
eastern European countries and within many trade unions over 
here. 
 
Interestingly, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency where many of 
the original coalminers were European immigrants, May 1 is 
still actively observed. But in reality, the day began as a 
commemoration of a North American struggle, a struggle 
involving railway workers and the Pullman railway car 
company. The basis of this struggle was the eight-hour day  a 
dream then and an accepted reality today. 
 
Today we observe and honour the continuing quest of workers 
around the world for justice and equality in the workplace. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spinal Health Care Week 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week from May 1 to May 7 is Spinal Health Care Week, a 
national week that is sponsored in the province by the 
Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
During the week, the association promotes spinal health 
through education. Schools throughout the province receive 
posters and instructional materials aimed at the grade 3 level. 
Through this program, 13,000 Saskatchewan children are  

educated annually about proper posture, diet, exercise, and rest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spinal disorders such as low back pain and neck 
pain are very common in our modern sedentary society. It is 
estimated that 80 per cent of our population will have 
significant back or neck pain sometime during their lifetime, 
and that 20 to 25 per cent of the population is experiencing pain 
at any given time. Unfortunately children are not excluded from 
these figures. Children do suffer from back pain and that is 
usually caused by reduced flexibility brought on by a lack of 
physical fitness. Healthy lifestyles, physical fitness, and good 
nutrition help to prevent chronic back pain. 
 
The chiropractors’ association teaches students how the spine 
functions and emphasizes the importance of regular exercise. 
Healthy lifestyles, physical fitness, and proper nutrition should 
be promoted wherever possible and as early as possible. I would 
like to commend the association for this important initiative and 
wish them well in their endeavours this week. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be in 
competition with you, but with leave of the House what I would 
like to do is revert to introduction of guests for a short 30 
seconds if possible before question period. 
 
The Speaker:  We have had an understanding and an orderly 
conduct of the House that we would withhold introduction of 
guests after passing that until we had got to orders of the day. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason 
that I rise is that I’m sure that we would all want to 
acknowledge a special guest in the Speaker’s gallery who may 
not remain for the balance of question period. Although I’m 
quite sure that he would be fascinated by the interesting nature 
of question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you and to the members of 
the House, a former Speaker, a former cabinet minister of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. John Brockelbank, a long-time MLA 
of the Assembly for Saskatoon Westmount and for Saskatoon. 
 
If my memory serves me correctly, I think John was first elected 
in 1964, if that’s the case, and has served with great distinction, 
and comes from a very, very distinguished political family in 
the province of Saskatchewan. His father of course, J. H. 
Brockelbank, was part of the Tommy Douglas government in 
1944 and was also an outstanding civil servant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you please join me, and all the members, in 
welcoming the return and the visit of John Brockelbank. 
 



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Child Poverty 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as this 
House is aware, Sheila Copps resigned her seat in Parliament 
today. The Liberal MP (Member of Parliament) . . . this Liberal 
MP demonstrated courage, honour, and integrity by stepping 
down because she could not fulfil a promise. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. Now obviously 
the hon. member has an interesting question and is stimulating 
all kinds of desire to respond. However the Speaker is having a 
great deal of difficulty hearing the question being put, and I ask 
for the cooperation of all members. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Liberal MP 
demonstrated courage, honour, and integrity by stepping down 
because she could not fulfil a promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) 1991 election 
campaign document contained a number of promises, many of 
which have not been kept. Among these is a pledge to eliminate 
child poverty in their first term in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is now in its second term in 
office, and the problem of child poverty is greater than ever. 
The latest figures from the National Council on Welfare 
indicate that 59,000 or 22.4 per cent of Saskatchewan children 
live in poverty. 
 
Will the Minister of Social Services indicate in this House 
today that he is prepared to live up to this commitment? And if 
not, will he demonstrate the same level of honour and integrity 
as Sheila Copps and announce in this House today that he is 
resigning his seat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in response to the member 
from Humboldt, who begins her question by talking about the 
Deputy Prime Minister who has resigned today over a broken 
commitment to Canadians regarding the GST (goods and 
services tax), it would be my suggestion, and she may want to 
pass this on, that that whole federal Liberal government should 
resign on the basis of that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  And, Mr. Speaker, if that federal 
government should not resign over that issue, they should go to 
Canadians  they should go to Canadians  and explain how 
it is that a Liberal government supposedly committed to the 
benefit of Canadians coast to coast would, in this most recent 
budget, cut most significantly  most significantly  in their 
spending on health, education, and social services, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the issue that every province across Canada is facing 
with, that’s the issue we’ve faced in Saskatchewan. We’ve 
back-filled every dollar that the federal Liberal government has  

taken out of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
government has demonstrated little honour in its dealings with 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. This government has unilaterally 
cancelled GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts 
and taken $188 million from the GRIP surplus. Last spring the 
Minister of Agriculture stood in this very Assembly and 
promised farmers that they would not have to repay the GRIP 
wind-up. This is a promise that the present minister has broken, 
demonstrating once again this government’s contempt for the 
producers of this province. 
 
Will the minister indicate, Mr. Speaker, today, if he is prepared 
to honour this promise, and if not, will he do the right thing  
the same as Ms. Copps did  and resign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the problem with the Liberal members is they can’t 
differentiate the truth from something other than the truth. And 
I think this is a case for this member. 
 
What I want to ask this member, Mr. Speaker, is why he 
continues to mislead farmers in this province who, every one of 
them, will pay their GRIP bill when and if they can  every 
one of them. But why he continues to mislead the farmers by 
saying, in a writing of a letter a few weeks ago, that there was 
going to be a review of all of the cases which was not the truth; 
asking them to send his bills to this legislature; misleading them 
that they might not have to pay those bills when they know 
that’s not the truth. I ask the member to be a little more credible 
and have some respect for the farmers of Saskatchewan and quit 
trying to mislead them for cheap political purposes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before I start I want you to know this question comes right from 
my heart. Mr. Speaker, the issue of honour is something the 
minister in charge of Municipal Government could take a 
lesson in. The minister made a promise last year to return 10 per 
cent of VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues to local 
governments, a promise she also has broken. 
 
Will the minister indicate if she is prepared to honour the 
promise; and if not, will she demonstrate the level of courage 
and integrity as Sheila Copps, and announce in this House 
today, she will be resigning her seat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that 
the commitment was made to return money to communities of  



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

Saskatchewan. The money has been returned to the 
consolidated revenue fund and is being returned, Mr. Speaker, 
to the communities of Saskatchewan in spending on health care, 
education, and social services, back-filling  back-filling  
the cut-backs by the federal government in those areas. 
 
Using the money in that manner, Mr. Speaker, reduces the 
taxation at the local level and goes right into the pocket of every 
ratepayer in every community of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Funding 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province 
stated in a news item in 1990 that, and I quote: “Increased 
education is a priority for the NDP. All I can say is we simply 
have to find more money”. 
 
Since coming to power this government has cut more than $24 
million from the education budget, and they also plan to cut 
post-secondary education and job training by $10 million over 
the next three years. 
 
In addition, the Minister of Education has broken a promise to 
increase funding in the K to 12 system by 2 per cent this year. 
Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t demonstrate a commitment to 
education or a commitment to keeping a promise. 
 
Will the Minister of Education indicate that she is truly 
prepared to honour this promise and a true commitment to 
education? If not, will she announce in this House today that 
she will be resigning her seat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve indicated to 
the members opposite that our government believe that we were 
now on a sound financial footing. Mr. Speaker, we did not 
know a year ago that the federal government was going to 
remove $114 million in federal transfers for health, social 
services, and education. 
 
As a result of the inability of the federal Liberals to be 
transparent in terms of the information they provided the 
provinces, we had no alternative but to re-examine our entire 
provincial budget. 
 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that we were 
able to back-fill every single dollar cut by the federal Liberals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I find it appalling that these provincial 
Liberals  cousins to the federal Liberals  would have the 
gall to stand up in this House and ask us to resign when they 
haven’t uttered one peep on the part of provincial taxpayers that 
the federal government has cut billions of dollars to provinces 
and territories from coast to coast to coast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Providence Place 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s see the stuff 
that another minister of this government is worth, what they’re 
made of here. Mr. Speaker, you know the people of Moose Jaw 
and district put forward a great deal of time, money, and effort 
to ensure the construction of Providence Place. They did this 
because of this NDP government’s promise to fund a 
state-of-the-art geriatric unit at that facility. In spite of a written 
promise, the Health minister claims that a commitment was 
never made and is breaking a promise made to the people of 
Moose Jaw and district. 
 
Will the Minister of Health indicate if he’s prepared to honour 
this commitment, and if not, will he demonstrate the same level 
of honour and integrity as Sheila Copps and announce in this 
House today that he will also be resigning his seat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m resigned to one 
thing  I’m resigned to the sad realization that when those 
members took their oath of loyalty when they become 
candidates in the Liberal Party, that they also took an oath of 
loyalty to the Liberal government in Ottawa. 
 
I want to say to the member that we don’t believe that we’re in 
breach of any commitment to the people of Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker. And I believe that it’s well within the district budget 
that the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District receives to put some 
money into geriatric assessment and the Chair of the health 
board has expressed that wish. And I think we need the 
Providence Place and the health board to work together on this 
issue. That is much more likely to resolve the issue than the 
member playing politics in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Democratic Party Campaign Promises 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Time for a little bit of a 
recap here to examine some of the other promises that have 
been made by this government only to be broken. The creation 
of 30,000 new jobs; tax relief for Saskatchewan residents; the 
development of a fair revenue-sharing program with 
municipalities; fair labour laws; fair and open tendering for 
government contracts; the development of an energy 
conservation strategy; the implementation of a sustainable 
economic development plan for our northern people; and the 
elimination of patronage. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier stated during the 1991 election 
campaign that, and I quote: “We will make no promises we 
cannot keep.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Given the examples that my colleagues and I 
have just raised in this House, it is clear that many of the 
promises have not been kept. Given this fact, and the subtle 
encouragement for an early retirement, will the Premier now  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

stand in this House today and do the honourable thing and 
resign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I was worried I wouldn’t 
get the question because the way things are going I would have 
lost all the cabinet, and all the caucus, and I would have been 
left alone here to sit in the legislature. 
 
But I want to say if these people opposite ask these kinds of 
questions and they think they do it with credibility, they’ve got 
another sad think coming to them. This is the Liberal Party of 
the province of Saskatchewan who in the House of Commons 
here and in the legislature stands up and speaks like one voice. 
 
They defend Jean Chrétien, they defend all of the Liberals who 
are attacking our health care program, our education program, 
and they talk about resignation. What kind of resignation were 
they referring to? The kind of resignation that they imposed 
upon their Liberal leader? Is that the kind of resignation you 
have? Are those the standards that you have? 
 
We know in this province of Saskatchewan that you will never 
be elected to political office because you have never kept a 
promise that you ever made in your entire life. That’s why 
you’ve been out for over 30 years and why you’re going to be 
out for another 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Independent Prosecutor’s Report 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for 
the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, last year the former 
minister of Justice secretly referred a case involving his former 
law partner and the Premier’s former law partner to an 
independent prosecutor in Alberta. 
 
The prosecutor’s secret report was returned to the deputy 
minister of Justice right in the middle of the last election 
campaign. And nothing was ever said about it. Mr. Minister, 
what are you and the former minister of Justice trying to hide? 
Why did you never announce that the Mattison case was 
referred to an independent prosecutor, and why has the 
prosecutor’s report never been released? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
Leader of the Conservative Party for that question. The justice 
system as a rule does not announce that individuals are under 
investigation. Similarly, information that’s collected by the 
police in their investigation and then assessed by prosecutors is 
not released as well. 
 
The whole situation here was dealt with without any preference, 
without any concern. It was dealt with in the normal course. 
The police investigated. They requested the assistance of our 
prosecutors in determining this. It was further determined by 
the deputy minister that there should be outside assessment. 
That outside assessment was taken. The lawyer advised that this 
matter . . . there should be no charges. 

For the information of the legislature, the report was received 
by the department on June 28, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you say 
and the deputy minister of Justice says that these reports are not 
usually released when the decision is not to lay charges. Well 
that’s simply not true, Mr. Minister. 
 
When the former minister of Justice was investigated, the 
investigation was announced, and the report was released. 
When Phoenix Advertising was investigated, the investigation 
was announced, and the report was released. When your 
department’s handling of the Milgaard case was investigated, 
the investigation was announced, and the report was released. 
 
Why all the secrecy surrounding this investigation, Mr. 
Minister? Mr. Minister, we think you need to come clean on 
this investigation. We need to see the mandate the independent 
prosecutor was given, and we need to see his final report. Mr. 
Minister, will you release that information today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
member for the further question. The matter here involved a 
private citizen. It was not in the nature of a matter of 
investigation of a previous minister. It was a situation where the 
allegations were made. They were investigated appropriately by 
the police. The police had further questions. They went to 
prosecutors who sought outside advice. It’s not my intention to 
release this report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Tentative Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 
Mr. Speaker, is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Madam Minister, the leaked copy of the SaskTel agreement we 
obtained yesterday clearly shows that the overall benefit 
package far exceeds your stated guidelines of 1 per cent a year 
for three years. Now in fact when everything is considered  
wage hikes, RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan), 
medical coverage  the total package appears to be at least 
double the standard guidelines that you yourself, Madam 
Minister, set. 
 
So, Madam Minister, why have you exceeded your guidelines 
that you set out before this dispute took place? And, Madam 
Minister, isn’t it going to set a dangerous precedent when your 
government has to negotiate new contracts with other 
government employees in the future? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would say that it is 
inappropriate for me to comment on the details containing the 
tentative agreement while voting is taking place. We respect 
that democratic process for the members of the union to express 
their wishes at the ballot box in terms of the contents of the  



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

tentative agreement. 
 
I would further say though, that looking at the headlines today 
in the paper and so on and the comments that have been made 
by the member opposite, that anyone who would give any 
credibility to the arithmetic of members in that party whose 
voodoo economics put this province $15 billion into debt 
should be seriously questioned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental question for the minister in charge of SaskTel. 
Madam Minister, I won’t ask for your resignation because the 
electorate will take care of that for us. 
 
Madam Minister, you have exceeded your guidelines, and it’s 
taxpayers and SaskTel customers who will wind up paying the 
bill for your mistakes. Of course you also exceeded the 
McDowell commission guidelines of $4,400 per MLA and the 
taxpayers wound up paying for that as well. So you’re setting a 
precedent, Madam Minister, and many people are going to 
question the extremely generous medical coverage that you 
have given to the unions. You are basically covering everything 
that your government has de-insured for every other taxpayer, 
things like prescription drugs and vision care. 
 
Now, so not only do taxpayers have to pay for their own 
prescription drugs and their eye glasses, now they’re being 
asked to pay for those things for SaskTel workers  
prescription drugs, eye glasses and all those other things. In 
recent weeks we have brought forward cases of elderly people 
who have had their oxygen supplies cut by this government 
through the Health department. Yet you have given . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The hon. member has 
been quite lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to put his 
. . . Order! Order. I’ll ask the hon. member to put his question 
directly. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, is 
it fair  is it fair — that SaskTel workers get medical coverage 
that most Saskatchewan people are not any longer entitled to 
have? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it’s not really surprising, 
coming from that side of the House, that members opposite 
would talk about fairness to workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What do we hear from them? What we heard in the context of 
this current situation is back-to-work legislation, right-to-work 
legislation. We have . . . Every progressive labour provision 
that’s been brought before this House has been opposed by both 
parties on the opposite side of the House. 
 
They advocate, Mr. Speaker, Alabama North for the workers in 
this province, and they criticize us for being generous with 
workers. Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Highway System 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
minister responsible for Northern Affairs. Mr. Speaker, as we 
all know, the conditions of roads and highways in northern 
Saskatchewan is appalling. These roads have been ignored and 
under-funded for years, and this government does not seem to 
be prepared to change its precedence of ignoring the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
There is some concern on the part of the people in my 
constituency over the talk of a possible construction of a 
superhighway that will link Fort McMurray, Alberta to Meadow 
Lake. This highway will bypass over a dozen smaller 
communities that desperately need improved highways and 
methods of transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years the people in my constituency have been 
fighting for a road into Garson Lake and on to McMurray. 
Construction of a highway from Meadow Lake up towards 
Candle Lake and Dillon is already done. And this road 
continues travelling towards Alberta, bypassing Garson Lake 
and currently has no roadway connecting it to the rest of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure this House and the people 
of Athabasca constituency that construction of this 
superhighway will not continue, and that the funds will be 
directed towards the construction of a road to Garson Lake and 
towards the great need in improvements of the highway that 
concurrently connects Meadow Lake to Beauval to Buffalo 
Narrows and on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, today the member ought to 
apologize in the House for making too many negative doom and 
gloom statements about people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  And today in regards to the roads, I’d like 
to report this, Mr. Speaker. When you look at the situation in 
northern Saskatchewan, the Tories completely neglected and 
devastated northern Saskatchewan. The Liberals, with their 
$114 million cut  Mr. Speaker, we could have raised five 
hospitals in La Loche with the $50 million cut by the federal 
Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, a housing 100 per cent cut 
by the Liberals in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
situation in highways, the Cumberland bridge is going up in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  The road to Grandmother’s Bay is being 
made  for the first time, a connection to Grandmother’s Bay. 
 



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  In his own constituency, Athabasca, road 
is going up . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 

Natural Gas Exploration in the North 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people in my 
constituency are not only concerned about the superhighway 
that may bypass many of the communities that desperately need 
roads, they’re also concerned about the possible exploration of 
natural gas in the north-west corner of the province, near the 
Alberta border. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the impact that this type of exploration will have 
on the people in this area in the province is astounding. I want 
to make it clear that we’re not against exploration of natural gas 
and growing economies, but we do want to make sure that 
people in the area are consulted before any development occurs. 
They want to be consulted so their outlook for jobs and the 
communities will see some benefits of having this industry 
operate in their own backyards. 
 
Will the Minister of Northern Affairs assure this House and the 
people that we represent that no natural gas exploration will 
occur in the Canoe Lake, Primrose Lake weapons range without 
consultation and approval of the people who live there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, this person should be 
apologizing, you know, for development. On the one hand, he 
says he’s for development; on the other hand, he says maybe 
and maybe not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on his previous question, on Carson Lake, 
although the Liberals have cut $114 million and although they 
have cut $15 million in our education budget, Mr. Speaker, we 
hired 20 people from the La Loche area to build 5 kilometres of 
that road towards Carson Lake. That is a lot better than what the 
Liberal government are doing. All we got from the Liberals is 
gun control in northern Saskatchewan and all of those cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would say that the person should be looking at this 
government in regards to our development strategy in mining, 
with 50 per cent employment, and looking forward to the 
developments in that area in regards to oil and gas, for greater 
employment and greater benefits for the people of the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Traditional Gathering Rights for Northerners 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
the forestry management Act was tabled in this House some 
time ago, there has been considerable concern on the part of the 
Metis and native people of the North with regards to their rights 
to pick berries and medicinal herbs and gathering of firewood.  

They have been told that as long as they’re picking these things 
for their own personal use, as they have for centuries, that no 
permit or fee will be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many elders in my constituency pick berries and 
sell them by the jar. Many also gather firewood and sell it to 
people who need it. Medicinal herbs are often used for healing 
others, not just the person who picks them. Will the Minister of 
Northern Affairs assure this House that these people will be 
exempt from this piece of legislation, and allow them to 
continue their way of life, as they have for centuries? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I attended a trappers’ 
convention. The MP from Churchill River was . . . Kirkby was 
dancing up a storm and a jig telling the trappers, yes we will 
support you when we get elected. When he gets elected, the 
trappers, all they got was gun control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When we were in power, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll tell you this much. Most of the developments in northern 
Saskatchewan in regards to the firewood, the collection, making 
sure that there are no permits  we have listened to the people. 
The legislation will have that. And this is a government that 
listens to the people of the North, and that’s the way we will 
continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 
Health Facilities be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day . . . order, order. I’ll 
ask hon. members to come to order, please. 
 
Before orders of the day, I wish to table, in accordance with 
The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, the 23rd annual 
report of the Provincial Ombudsman, and the report of the 
Children’s Advocate. 
 
I advise members that both reports are within the same 
document. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before orders of the day, with leave, 
I have a couple of motions I’d like to move. 
 
Leave granted. 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence to Attend 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Conferences 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest from Friday, May 10, 1996 to 
February . . . May 17, 1996 inclusive to attend the 8th 
Commonwealth parliamentary seminar in Hong Kong on 
behalf of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld, that by leave of the Assembly, that 
leave having been granted: 
 

That the member for Redberry Lake, from Wednesday, 
May 8, 1996 to Friday, May 24, 1996, inclusive be granted 
leave to attend the Commonwealth parliamentary visit at 
Westminster on behalf of this Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: I table the answer to question no. 79. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 79 is tabled. 
 
Question 80 is converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 71  An Act 
to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989, and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act be 
now read a second time. 

 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 
opportunity to speak on The Rural Municipality Amendment 
Act, and as a former reeve I’ve been actively involved in rural 
government and I believe there is definitely room for 
improvement in provincial legislation. 
 
Still, I am not sure that this Bill gets to the root of what is 
troubling rural municipalities. I’m afraid that troubles are far  

deeper than the reaches of this Bill and I would hate to think we 
are skirting around the real issue in this Assembly. 
 
The reforms we make to our laws should be tangible and 
accomplish something positive for our province. Do these 
changes make a difference? Will they help alleviate some of the 
current problems? And why are we making these changes? 
 
It is these kinds of questions we must answer before we could 
make any decisions about a Bill affecting rural municipalities. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, under the legal terminology and under 
the clauses and subclauses of this Bill is an Act that has serious 
implications on all Saskatchewan’s towns and villages. 
 
This Act deals with assessment and, as I am sure the members 
opposite realize, assessment is a major topic of concern in rural 
and urban areas. Mr. Speaker, the government would have us 
believe that this Bill brings us one step closer to what they call 
fair value assessment. 
 
Any time the word fair is used with the NDP government, the 
people of Saskatchewan should sit up and take notice because 
I’m highly sceptical of how this government defines the word 
fair. They say their budget and their actions are fair to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do they mean shutting down hospitals and forcing health 
professionals to leave our small towns is fair? Do they mean 
that cutting back on education funding to rural school boards, 
forcing school closures and program losses, is fair? Do they 
mean that taking money out of rural communities and 
funnelling it back into cities is fair? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, if this is what the NDP government 
considers fair, this province is in deep, deep trouble. Mr. 
Speaker, we agree that the assessment system does not need to 
be more equitable . . . does need to be more equitable. For 
example, the farmers have been protesting for years that their 
property is worth eight to ten times the assessed value. The new 
assessment system will apparently have updated productivity 
indexes for the agricultural land. 
 
These will use factors like soil type and ability to grow wheat 
and grains, to compare one quarter with another. Range land 
and pasture land should also increase in assessment value. And 
in many cases there are positive steps forward. In an article in 
The Western Producer last fall, SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) is quoted as giving its 
approval to a government tax policy that needs to be in place if 
the new assessment system begins in ’97. 
 
But that doesn’t mean individual municipalities don’t have 
some concerns about these changes. In a letter to the editor, the 
reeve from the RM of Buckland outlines some of his concerns. 
Mr. Speaker, he says at the end of this letter that the people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know what these changes will 
mean to them. And we couldn’t agree more. 
 
The people of this province are getting tired of government’s 
back-room policy-making sessions. How many times does this 
government have to be told that people want to be consulted  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

before the policy is made? We do have some concerns about the 
vast power the government has to make regulations which will 
determine how fair value is to be determined, even though we 
admit that different percentage values for different classes of 
land may bring about a more equitable system. We want to 
assure that rural municipalities are treated fairly by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the members opposite understand our 
hesitation in coming out in full support of this Bill. After 
watching rural communities so carelessly destroyed by this 
government, it’s no wonder that we are reluctant to jump on the 
government bandwagon. It’s no wonder that we are not willing 
to pass any legislation without ensuring that the views of the 
RMs (rural municipality) and towns are indeed represented in 
this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I have all been talking with our 
constituents about what changes this Bill could mean to rural 
municipalities. We can sit in this House and pick apart a piece 
of dry legislation, or we can take this legislation out to the 
communities and transform its legal jargon into valid 
community concerns. 
 
If you ask me, Mr. Speaker, it is the people on coffee row in our 
towns and communities that should have a say in this 
legislation. Because it doesn’t affect most of the members in the 
government’s cabinet, the only interest it has — most of the 
ministers — is that a piece of legislation they pass through the 
Assembly . . . They don’t know rural Saskatchewan, and quite 
frankly from their actions these past five years they’ve been in 
power, it seems obvious they don’t care about rural 
Saskatchewan either. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in her budget address this year, the Minister of 
Finance talked about working with rural municipalities to deal 
with a number of fundamental issues. She said: 
 

We must find common solutions to the challenges of future 
fiscal arrangements, the three provincial levies on the local 
tax base, and the funding needed for key roads and 
infrastructures. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, whenever the government says they will 
work with third parties, I become very cynical. I can’t forget 
that in the same budget address, just seconds before, the 
Finance minister said that the revenue-sharing grants for 
municipalities will be reduced by $20 million in ‘97-98. I have 
a feeling, Mr. Speaker, that this was not determined by working 
with municipal governments. 
 
There are some areas of this Bill that lead me to believe that the 
government doesn’t understand the workings of rural 
municipalities. There is something we touched on when this 
Bill was read a second time. For example, this Bill allows rural 
municipalities to pass a by-law providing that businesses will 
not be assessed if the building is vacant or has been vacant for 
some time. 
 

Mr. Speaker, from the way this Bill is presented, it seems that 
separate assessment and taxation of business occupants will be 
optional. In municipalities where a business assessment is 
retained, it will be calculated using a percentage of property 
value set by provincial regulations. It will also be the provincial 
regulations that establish how much can be raised for other 
taxing authorities such as school divisions where a municipality 
chooses not to continue with business assessment and taxation. 
As we stated when we spoke on this Bill in second reading, we 
want to be sure that occupied businesses are not forced to 
shoulder the tax burden. We can’t do anything further to 
penalize businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe the members opposite haven’t noticed, Mr. Speaker, but 
in small towns throughout our province, businesses have been 
forced to close their doors. We are seeing a steady stream of 
people leaving rural Saskatchewan  not because they want to, 
but because this government is ignoring their concerns. 
 
Don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker. I’m not saying urban 
businesses are faring much better under this government’s 
oppressive tax and labour policies. All we have to do is 
compare Saskatchewan’s bankruptcy and business start-up rates 
with Manitoba’s, and we can see that Saskatchewan businesses 
are getting the short end of the stick from a government that 
promised job creation. And I don’t know how long it will take 
before this government gets the message. 
 
The only way to keep Saskatchewan alive is create a positive 
economic climate, and no, that doesn’t mean poaching jobs 
from other provinces or moving jobs from one city to another 
within the province. This means establishing policies that help 
foster business growth in all areas of our province. It’s a simple 
message, Mr. Speaker, if only they would listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also want to touch on the changes on the 
appeal process as they are outlined in Bill 71. As I understand, 
the appeal process lets people challenge assessments if they 
believe errors have been made in calculating property or 
business assessments. These people can appeal at the local 
board of revision which is often made up of municipal council 
members. The second level of appeal, the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board, is appointed by the provincial government. 
The government apparently believes that, with amendments 
offered in this Bill, the entire process could be better 
streamlined. 
 
Some of the main changes listed include full disclosure of 
information by all parties to an appeal. All decisions of the 
board of revision must be in writing. And the time for business 
and property owners to file appeal will be extended from 20 to 
30 days, and that written materials must be filed by, and 
provided to, all parties to an appeal 10 days in advance of a 
hearing, and that the board of revision can establish a number 
of panels to hear appeals, and municipalities can jointly create 
district board of revisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t see much of a problem with these changes. 
I think it provides clear guidelines for board of revisions to 
follow, and that’s important. In my experience with local 
government, they want to be seen as open and accountable. But  



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

unlike the provincial government, who also says they want to be 
seen as open and accountable, I think the municipal 
governments really mean it. 
 
When it comes right down to it though, the 
government-appointed Saskatchewan Municipal Board still 
holds the power. This Bill also clearly states that the SMB 
(Saskatchewan Municipal Board) may adjust assessments up or 
down in its decisions. 
 
This comes as no surprise to our caucus, and it probably comes 
as no surprise to the people of Saskatchewan who have seen 
this government’s need for control in all areas of governance. 
Since the day they were elected in October of ’91, this 
government has been bound and determined to control 
Saskatchewan people. For example, they have continued to prop 
up Crown corporations with political patronage appointments, 
as we have seen much of lately. Just look at SaskTel and Don 
Ching. Or how about SaskPower with Jack Messer at the helm? 
I must admit with Mr. Messer I am not sure whether the 
government is controlling him, or in many cases, he is 
controlling the government. But either way the NDP is keeping 
tabs on a huge industry in this province. 
 
And it’s not just the Crown corps this government is trying to 
control. And I can bring it up again and again, and I still don’t 
think I can emphasize enough how this government is trying to 
control municipalities themselves with the introduction of The 
Service Districts Act. 
 
All along, municipalities were insisting they could come up 
with the creative solutions to help back-fill the offloading by 
the provincial government, and they have been doing that since 
this government came to power in ’91. The people in the towns 
and villages throughout the province were telling the Minister 
of Municipal Government that they did have the answers. Still, 
the government stubbornly persisted. The minister and the 
Premier made thinly veiled threats. There was no doubt in 
anyone’s mind that these threats were a very clear indication of 
the government’s control. 
 
Now we hear that the minister has finally started to listen to the 
people who will be affected. Does this mean they are willing to 
give up their tight-fisted control and put power back into the 
hands of the people who deserve it? I hope so, but I will only 
believe that when I finally see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I still have only started to touch on the 
implications of this Bill. My colleagues and I are still talking 
with people in our constituencies and trying to determine public 
reaction to this Bill. 
 
We cannot pass this Bill off lightly because, Mr. Speaker, we 
are not only talking about a value placed on a parcel of land in a 
rural municipality. We are talking about tax increases that will 
have to be paid by the people of the municipalities. 
 
Before I conclude here today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read 
a part of an editorial that appeared in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix on October 23 in ’95. He or she writes: 
 

SAMA, rural and urban municipalities, school divisions 
and the provincial government are currently formulating 
the new system, supposedly keeping in mind the best 
interest of the ordinary citizens and businesses. 
 
However, with slightly more than a year to go before the 
tax notices start arriving in our mailboxes, some 
fundamental issues have yet to be settled. 
 
Municipalities haven’t been told how the province will 
define property classes and set percentage of value to apply 
to property assessments. Without that information, cities 
and towns can’t calculate the impact of reassessment. 

 
Even with the new system local governments are expected 
to keep the local tax levied at current levels. But how the 
reassessment affects taxpayers isn’t clear because 
municipalities still don’t know which “tax tools” they’ll be 
given to set levies. These tools include variable mill rates 
and minimum taxes. 
 
While these and a myriad of other issues are being settled 
behind closed doors, what should concern taxpayers is so 
far they know little about who is influencing the 
deliberations. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

If these are some of the concerns being addressed behind 
closed-doors, when do ordinary taxpayers get an 
opportunity to present their case? 
 
Has anyone raised even more fundamental questions such 
as whether . . . 

 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  With apologies to the member opposite who 
was going on with a fine speech, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the gallery 
opposite, in the west gallery, we have with us today a special 
guest, a man who has taught for several years in north-eastern 
Saskatchewan and has worked very diligently within the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation organization, is currently 
acting as president. And I would like members to welcome 
Dwain Drew to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  And why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Also to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted 
 



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition and the education critic, I too would like to extend 
our welcome to past-president Dwain. And I know we’ve had 
the opportunities to share many a conversation and idea, and I 
look forward to your continuing support for education in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 
the member opposite for his comments, and I also appreciate 
the break. 
 

While these and myriad of other issues are being settled 
behind closed doors, what should concern taxpayers is so 
far they know little about who is influencing these 
deliberations. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

If these are some of the concerns being addressed behind 
closed-doors, when do ordinary taxpayers get an 
opportunity to present their case? 
 
Has anyone raised even more fundamental questions such 
as whether property taxes are the best way to fund 
municipal services? 
 
These and dozens of other questions need to be asked, and 
asked soon. 
 
Waiting until our 1997 property tax notice shows up, 
demanding that we fork over 20, 50 or 100 per cent more, 
will be too late. 
 
This is one time our eyes shouldn’t (be) . . . (glazed) over 
when “reassessment” is mentioned. 
 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, people need to be concerned about 
changes in our legislation, and we as their representatives need 
to bring their concerns forward and make sure that any new 
laws or changes to existing laws are in their best interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is too important to the people living in 
rural municipalities to treat it as housekeeping and ram it 
through the House. Mr. Speaker, until we have gathered more 
information and talked in greater depth with the people of rural 
Saskatchewan, we cannot decide whether we will support this 
legislation as is. 
 
Therefore I move that Bill 71, The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, again be adjourned. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 46 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 46  An Act to 
amend The Municipal Board Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased again to 
have the opportunity to address this House on the changes to 
The Municipal Board Act that are proposed in Bill No. 46 
which is entitled The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first change proposed by Bill No. 46 is a 
reduction in the quorum on the board from two members down 
to just one member. This is found in section 3 of the Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board has an important 
function, and I really question whether it’s a good idea to have 
a quorum of only one member. Remember, Mr. Speaker, that it 
is here that the Saskatchewan Municipal Board hears and 
determines assessment appeals under three municipal 
government Acts: The Northern Municipalities Act, The Rural 
Municipality Act, and The Urban Municipality Act, as well as 
several other Acts. Surely a tribunal such as this should have a 
quorum of at least two as is presently the case. 
 
Is it really a good idea to leave an important appeal in the hands 
of just one person? The reduction in the required quorum from 
two down to just one is another sign that this government does 
not really like the consultative process. 
 
The next major change in the law proposed by this Bill is the 
addition of classification appeals to the jurisdiction of the 
board. The board already hears assessment appeals, and it 
seems to make sense to expressly state that classification 
appeals are included in the jurisdiction of the board. That 
change is found in section 4 of the Bill. 
 
Also in section 4 of the Bill, we find the addition of appeals 
under The Condominium Property Act, 1993 and The South 
Saskatchewan River Irrigation Act to the jurisdiction of the 
board. This sounds like it would be logical, but one has to 
wonder who has been hearing appeals under these two Acts up 
to the present time. If the Saskatchewan Municipal Board has 
been hearing appeals on assessments and classifications from 
the condominium legislation and the South Saskatchewan River 
irrigation legislation over the past several years without any real 
authority to do so, then have these appeals been valid? Is the 
general curative section necessary in order to make these board 
decisions valid, which would otherwise be void? 
 
(1445) 
 
Section 4 of the Bill also completely revokes the jurisdiction of 
the board to hear assessment appeals under The Assessment 
Management Agency Act where the grounds of the appeal is 
that the manual used by the agency is contrary to that Act or any 
other Act. It would appear that the government is no longer 
going to allow that type of appeal to be heard in front of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board but only to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must question this move in view of the massive  



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

project underway presently to conduct reassessments of the 
lands and buildings in this province. There will surely be an 
enormous number of reassessment appeals filed in the next year 
or two regarding the reassessment manual prepared by the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency and by the 
municipalities which opt out of SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) and conduct their own 
reassessments. It is not fair to expect such a large proportion of 
the reassessment appeals to be heard by the Court of Queen’s 
Bench when the procedures and the expenses are so much 
greater. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fully realize that the change away from the 
Municipal Board and towards a Court of Queen’s Bench relates 
only to appeals where the basis of the appeal is that the manual 
used by the assessment agency is inconsistent with the law 
governing the agency. None the less, I expect that the number 
of such appeals will be great in the next year or two. 
 
And it is disappointing, to say the very least, to see that the 
Minister of Municipal Government is so determined to force up 
the cost and inconvenience of such appeals that she will take 
away the jurisdiction of the Municipal Board to deal with them 
and place jurisdiction with the courts. It’s effectively the same 
as saying that she intends to make appeals essentially 
unavailable except to the very rich and the very powerful. The 
ordinary citizen, in effective terms, will have very little hope of 
ever having such an appeal heard if this section of the Bill goes 
through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next matter that concerns me about this Bill is 
section 6 which completely repeals the mechanism which 
allowed the board to rehear applications related to financial or 
debt matters. Under the existing rules, the board, upon receiving 
a written request from a local authority as well as on its own 
initiative, may reverse its decision or review its decision. When 
circumstances change, the board would often review and alter, 
change or vary its decision. Now all that will be gone. 
 
I say that’s a shame. I realize, Mr. Speaker, that the mechanism 
of a new section 40 is designed to replace this process, but I 
must confess, Mr. Speaker, that I have a great many doubts as 
to whether this new process will function as effectively as the 
old one did. 
 
The next section of the Bill which needs to be addressed is 
section 7 which deals with appeals by way of stated case. Here 
there is a massive shift in the burden of work and the burden of 
costs from the board to the litigants. The new rules may be 
workable for the larger cities, but I again have a real concern 
about the financial ability of smaller municipalities and private 
litigants to bear the financial burden of this change. 
 
Firstly, the party that dislikes the decision of the board must 
seek leave from the Court of Appeal to proceed with his appeal 
to that court. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the planners behind this 
Bill have any idea of the cost of an application for leave to a 
Court of Appeal. 
 
Next, the Bill removes the role of the Municipal Board as a  

flow-through mechanism for appeals. This was a valuable role 
for the board to take in that it could assist people with their 
preparation of their documents for their appeals. Under this 
Bill, the workload is shifted entirely to the litigants. Mr. 
Speaker, this is another example of this government’s capacity 
to offload its financial burdens onto those who are least able to 
bear them. The entire responsibility for the preparation of all 
their documentation, rather than preparing it in conjunction 
with the board’s staff, will be that of the litigants. 
 
This will mean more legal fees, more staff time, and 
consequently higher salaries and expenses. Maybe Regina and 
Saskatoon can afford the increased costs, but I am certain that 
many of the smaller towns, cities, and rural municipalities 
cannot bear this additional cost. And what will be the result? 
The result, Mr. Speaker, is that the mechanism becomes 
unavailable to all except the wealthy and the powerful. 
 
The next change is the new section 33.2. This provision states 
that the appellant must serve the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board with a copy of the application. And then the board 
delivers the appeal documents to the Court of Appeal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this astonishing. In one breath we are asked 
to eliminate the board as a flow-through mechanism, and in the 
next breath we are asked to pass a Bill which requires that all 
appeal documentation still be filed with a board which then 
must deliver it upon the court. It seems to me that the board’s 
meaningful role in helping people with their appeals is being 
abolished, but the board is keeping its role as a glorified 
document storer and a delivery service. Mr. Speaker, I ask you; 
what is the sense in this? 
 
Next, in the next line we find section 33.3, and this new section 
provides that if leave to appeal is granted, then the order made 
by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board is held in abeyance until 
the Court of Appeal rules otherwise. This sounds logical and 
fair, but I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that the appeal process is 
now two stages, not just one. 
 
Furthermore, it is moved from the comfortable and familiar 
environment of the Municipal Board to the formal and austere 
environment of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. Mr. 
Speaker, I have the utmost respect and admiration for 
Saskatchewan’s Court of Appeal, but as anyone who has ever 
been involved in appeal litigation knows all to well, that the 
cost of appearing there and being represented by counsel can be 
enormous. The procedures are quite formal and regimented, and 
the time frames can be long and onerous. Sometimes the 
waiting times for a hearing in front of the Court of Appeal can 
extend into years  not just months or weeks but years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to comment on the new version of 
section 40. This is largely a rehashing of old section 19(3), (4), 
and (5) of the existing Act, but there is an important change. 
There will now be a new route for the decisions of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board to be reviewed by the board 
itself. Under this Bill, the board will be able to review its own 
decisions within one year if there was any error of clerical 
nature. The power of self-review will also exist if there was a 
mistake in calculation or incorrect information supplied by a  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

person or an organization. 
 
This may sound logical at first glance, but are they truly logical, 
Mr. Speaker, or are they open to abuse? Mr. Speaker, I 
reluctantly conclude that they are open to abuse, and thus they 
concern me greatly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is an error of clerical nature? Sometimes 
when I listen to the speeches from government members in this 
Chamber, I wonder whether the entire text might be a clerical 
error. When is information correct and when is it incorrect? 
That depends on who you’re speaking to. And as you know, 
Mr. Speaker, in this party it’s quite often we hear the public told 
about information which the government shells out which we 
think is incorrect. That’s our job while we are in opposition. 
 
The point I’m trying to make is that these additional grounds for 
re-hearing of an application before the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board are open to abuse because they are shamefully unclear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the net effect of this Bill may well be well 
intended, but the side-effects, especially in terms of costs, are 
negative in the extreme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts for 1994-1995 show that the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board spent $755,000. I suspect that 
the attempt to shift the burden of costs for appeals onto the 
litigant is an indirect attempt to offload provincial 
responsibilities for municipal government onto the population 
and onto the municipalities themselves, without anyone taking 
notice. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have taken notice. We have taken notice, 
Mr. Speaker, and we see what is wrong. This is a province 
where many of the municipalities are small and financially 
strapped. It is a province where people are accustomed to 
getting a fair hearing initially and a fair hearing on appeals. A 
fair hearing means that you’re not going to be bankrupt by legal 
fees and you’re not going to be overwhelmed by complicated 
and overly formal procedures. It means a fair hearing in a 
comfortable forum. It means a hearing in a forum where 
citizens can present their case with the help of a lawyer, if they 
choose to hire one, but a forum where a citizen could choose to 
represent himself, if that’s what he wishes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the definition of fairness seems to have gone out 
the window with this Bill. If this Bill is passed, a great many of 
the appeals that can be expected as a result of reassessment will 
go by the wayside because of lack of finances or a lack of legal 
training on the part of the people affected. Mr. Speaker, that 
could be shameful. 
 
That concludes my remarks on second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed  

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 39  An Act to 
Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed my 
pleasure today to be able to address Bill 39, The Irrigation Act 
 
The impact of Bill 39 will be of course far-reaching for 
Saskatchewan producers who are involved in irrigation right 
across the province, and certainly others who must administer 
irrigation methods across the same province. It’s a very 
comprehensive piece of legislation that will replace The 
Irrigation Districts Act and The South Saskatchewan River 
Irrigation Act and The Water User’s Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I recognize that no legislation is perfect, I feel that Bill 
39 has several major problems that should be addressed. Since 
this Bill was first proposed, we have consulted with many 
stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, stakeholders who will be affected by 
these new laws and regulations. And I will of course be raising 
some of these concerns on their behalf. 
 
Bill 39 proposes the establishment of irrigation districts across 
Saskatchewan to administer the laws, set fees for the users, and 
to collect those fees. Many of the parties I have spoken with are 
quite concerned that the irrigation districts will be given too 
much power. While I do believe that the government intends to 
streamline the administration relating to Saskatchewan 
irrigation, I think that possibly this legislation could achieve 
exactly the opposite result. 
 
Here once again, we are seeing the creation of districts at the 
local level. This seems to be a favourite habit of this 
government. We saw it with health. Now the push is on for 
municipalities to form service districts, and the same type of 
reform is being pushed onto school divisions. And here we see 
it happening with irrigation associations. 
 
Some of the parties affected by this Bill are worried about the 
section in Bill 39 that will allow the boundaries of irrigation 
districts to be defined by land area instead of being defined by 
the members. These parties feel that this criteria may not be 
practical when dealing with the back-flooding situation. For 
example, Mr. Speaker, I guess if you had someone that was not 
wanting the water to be back-flooded on them, they could hold 
up the complete project, and it would affect some of the other 
irrigators’ crops that do need the water at certain times of the 
year. 
 
While section 17 does allow for the irrigation district to set the 
fees, all of those fees would still have to be approved by Sask 
Water. Sask Water would also control the amount of money the 
irrigation district would be allowed to borrow. If the 
government does intend to streamline the process, why does it 
feel the need to create another Crown corporation? Part V of 
this Act sets out the sections needed to establish Saskatchewan 
Irrigation Projects Association. So while the government spends 
thousands of dollars this spring to tell the Saskatchewan people 
while fiscal restraint is so necessary, they will see more funds 
being spent on another Crown corporation. 
 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, just about everyone I spoke with regarding the 
new legislation has some problems with it. I think many in 
general  I know many of the irrigators of course along 
Diefenbaker Lake and the Saskatchewan River are in my 
constituency in the Outlook area  a lot of them, were 
consulted but a lot of them also had many concerns. 
 
Of course one of the major concerns is people are feeling that 
they will be relinquishing some sort of control while the 
government would take on an additional control. Of course the 
added burden of extra bureaucracy is forefront in everyone’s 
minds, as we’re trying to cut down on bureaucracy and red tape 
in this province. Here again, we could be just setting up another 
level of it. 
 
Some of the comments, Mr. Speaker, that were made to me by 
irrigators were that well, this new legislation is no worse or no 
better than the legislation it replaces. There certainly were 
people that were adamant that they did not like the legislation at 
all. There are others that said they did like it. There were others 
that said that they would want to see more of . . . more 
information on the Act. Many said that when they asked 
questions, that there were no answers and were told that those 
would be set out in the regulations. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem that we’ve 
identified in this House several times over the course of this 
session, that many of the problems that we have with legislation 
is through the regulations and they should be clarified at the 
outset so that people feel more comfortable with the legislation. 
 
As we know, when that happens, when the government is 
upfront with the people and explains things without the 
regulations in the legislation, it does make it a lot easier for a 
government to proceed with an Act or a piece of legislation or a 
consolidation as we see here, if the people are onside and agree 
with it. And one of the easiest ways to get people onside is to 
communicate with them and educate them as to what the 
government views are, be upfront with them. And certainly the 
people involved with this Act  the irrigators of the province 
 would like that opportunity. And unfortunately to this date 
they haven’t had it. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, for a fact that the last thing Saskatchewan 
farmers or of course the municipalities want to deal with is 
more red tape, as I said earlier. I’m sure they told the 
government the same thing and they just indicated they had. 
And certainly once again, as we’ve seen before in this Bill 39, 
the government, or at least the bureaucrats, are not listening to 
what the people out there are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 76 of this Act does provide for a new 
appeal process for producers unhappy with their irrigation 
service to take their cases to the Court of Queen’s Bench. While 
it is encouraging to see that the producers will be able to have 
an independent body hear their complaints, taking appeals to 
the Court of Queen’s Bench could be quite costly for producers. 
And most times when that happens, you see that that process is 
not continued. 

Under Bill 39, unless they are extremely well-versed in the legal 
process, they will have to hire a lawyer  and we all know the 
costs of that, Mr. Speaker. Surely in this day and age and as we 
move into the new century, there’s got to be better ways to deal 
with the things than constantly having to run and hire a lawyer 
and go to court over the whole process. 
 
The problems that we have is that people don’t have that kind 
of money to throw around. And when they’re dealing with the 
province, and the province of course is using taxpayers’ money, 
it’s a little hard for an individual to fight a government who has 
all sorts of taxpayers’ dollars to use in their high-priced 
lawyers. 
 
The costs of processing appeals through the Court of Queen’s 
Bench could be a deterrent for some producers, as I’ve stated  
and it will be. And once again, those same court costs are costs 
that the taxpayers of this province have to pay. 
 
I believe that the appeal process must be acceptable to all. We 
certainly would wish that this would happen all across the piece 
and that everyone in the province certainly has an affordable 
process to make an appeal. 
 
Another inadequacy of Bill 39 is that section after section refers 
to powers of the irrigation districts, Sask Water, Saskatchewan 
Irrigation Projects Association, and other bodies as defined by 
the regulations. This is because of the implications of this Act 
— to promote, develop, and sustain irrigation — will affect all 
Saskatchewan producers relying on irrigation. 
 
There again the question . . . it begs the question: why is so 
much left out of the Act and put into the regulations which have 
not been developed to this point for the Act. Once again I can 
only stress, Mr. Speaker, the importance of having these 
regulations up front so that these producers know full well what 
they’re getting into. 
 
One of the concerns expressed to me by many of the irrigators, 
particularly on the west side of the province, was we need to 
slow down the process of this legislation so that these 
regulations can be set out and that the irrigators are fully aware 
of what the implication of some of those regulations might be. 
And one of the things that they’ve asked me to do is to try and 
impress upon the government side that this is an important part 
of this Bill that needs to be looked at. It needs to be fixed 
immediately before we proceed too much further with this Bill. 
 
The impact of the changes proposed in Bill 39 cannot be 
understated. But without all the changes laid out before us, we 
will never get a chance to debate them in the House. This is 
consistent with what we’ve been saying, Mr. Speaker, in 
regards to regulations — that we’re being asked to support a 
piece of legislation without knowing the detail. And we all 
know where the devil is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess it begs a question again that, why does the government 
insist on leaving so many of the changes in the regulations. If it 
is not afraid to debate those changes in the House, then bring 
them forward, and we can discuss them and see what they’re 
hearing from producers out there would compare with what  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

we’re hearing with the same people that we’re talking to. 
 
I’m pleased to see though that much of the changes to irrigation 
service proposed in Bill 39 will be gradually phased in over a 
five-year period. However, Mr. Speaker, there is a problem with 
some of those in that some of the people that irrigate or live 
within an irrigation district or have land within an irrigation 
district do now pay irrigation fees and have not irrigated their 
land for as high as, I understand, 15 or 16 years. However, they 
continue to have to pay irrigation costs, and of course as this is 
phased in over five years, they will have to, you know, they will 
have to continue paying for that amount of time. 
 
On the other side of the argument, of course, is the irrigation 
district itself in that they have to, of course, budget for their 
expenses and their costs. And without some sort of rule that 
allows people to . . . or districts to keep people within their 
district and charge them fees, it makes it a little tough for 
anyone to budget as we know. 
 
The new regulations and laws are so complex, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important that these Saskatchewan irrigators are given adequate 
time to make the adjustments triggered by these changes. We all 
know that a lot of times when things need to be changed that 
we’re all a little reluctant to move ahead in an area where we’re 
not sure what’s going to happen, how it’s going to work, and 
that’s understandable. However again, if the government 
through its bureaucracy, can be upfront with these producers 
and these irrigators in Saskatchewan, a lot of these changes can 
be made in a positive note rather than having everyone fighting 
it to the bitter end, which in this case could be for a number of 
years. 
 
Over all, I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed to see so much 
irrigation authority being transferred from the hands of 
Saskatchewan farmers into the hands of another government 
corporation. Of course the unique needs of every Saskatchewan 
irrigator relying on irrigation services must not be lost in the 
new bureaucratic structures created within this new Act. I’ve 
stated a few of them, Mr. Speaker, and we talked about flood 
irrigation, where there are extreme circumstances that would 
not relate to irrigators that use a sprinkler system or other types, 
that have to be looked at. And conversely I guess, Mr. Speaker, 
there are things that sprinkler irrigators do that certainly 
wouldn’t affect flood irrigators. 
 
There are not a lot of flood irrigation projects left in this 
province, as many of them have moved to the sprinkler system 
for a variety of reasons, many of them which have to do with 
land. And as we all know, farmers are one of the greatest 
supporters of the environment and the land that we have in this 
province and we’d hate to see that any of their role of keeping 
of the land is deferred to bureaucracy. 
 
I guess, as you can see, Mr. Speaker, that I have a problem with 
seeing many of the improvements that the government aims to 
achieve with Bill 39 and again I can only stress upon the 
government to be upfront with the irrigators of the province. 
 
And I would note that, as well, I am one of those irrigators, Mr. 
Speaker. I do not belong to a district. We didn’t have the same  

opportunities on Last Mountain Lake as were afforded to the 
producers on Lake Diefenbaker and the Saskatchewan River 
system. However, you know we have some concerns as private 
irrigators as to where we’re moving with water restrictions, 
what will happen to those of us that have long-term agreements 
with the Water Corporation . . . that those of us that pump our 
own water and have our own expenses. 
 
We know we’re always a little bit leery, as I stated, when we’re 
moving into areas and new Bills are being proposed. I can only 
hope that the Bill as it relates to private irrigators that don’t 
have the luxury of being in a district or near a district will be 
looked after, and that there isn’t anything hidden in here that we 
certainly haven’t been made aware of. 
 
I’m sure that a lot of these concerns that I’ve raised today on 
behalf of irrigators across Saskatchewan  and many of them 
again residing and irrigating in the constituency of Arm River 
 will be addressed by the government and their bureaucrats. 
And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that when we get into Committee 
of the Whole that the government will have some of the 
answers that the irrigators are asking for. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would adjourn my debate and we can move into the 
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The motion to adjourn is not in order, 
although I’m not certain that’s what the member intended to do. 
Having previously adjourned debate, the hon. member is not 
permitted to adjourn. If he’s simply wishing to take his place, 
then proceed. Perhaps the hon. member would like to clarify his 
intention. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just finish my 
remarks, the wording of the Bill, and I will take my seat at this 
point. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:14 p.m. until 3:42 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  28 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell MacKinnon 
Shillington Tchorzewski Whitmore 
Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Calvert Koenker Trew 
Lorje Teichrob Nilson 
Cline Serby Stanger 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Jess Flavel 
Thomson   
 

Nays9 
 
Osika Aldridge McLane 
Draude Bjornerud Krawetz 
Boyd Heppner Goohsen 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

(1545) 
Bill No. 17 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 17  An Act to 
amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to join with other members of this House in debating 
Bill 17, The Highways and Vehicles Statutes Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) said in this House when he moved 
second reading of the Bill, the automobile is in fact a wonderful 
invention; but more than that, it is now an integral part of our 
lives. Without the ability to drive, many of us would find it 
impossible to work or even to live. That’s especially true given 
the vast distances between communities in some parts of our 
province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, too often people forget that driving is not a 
right; it is a privilege extended to us by our fellow citizens. In 
extending that privilege, our neighbours, our friends, our 
families, are saying to us they trust us to do what is right behind 
the wheel of that car. They trust us to consider the safety of 
others as well as ourselves when we are making use of the 
public roadways. They are trusting us to know what is right and 
what is wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, most of us take the trust 
placed in us very, very seriously. 
 
Most of us are responsible drivers, responsible citizens. We 
may forget to put on our seat-belt once in a while, we may even 
exceed the speed limit from time to time, we may run a yellow 
light here and there; but, Mr. Speaker, for the most part we take 
care that we are not endangering ourselves or others when we 
are behind the wheel. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, not all of our citizens are 
responsible. Not all of those people we have given the privilege 
to drive take the rights of others seriously. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, while driving is not a right, a person’s right to know 
he or she is safe to drive, safe to walk down the street, must be 
a solemn right. We must know that our society is doing 
everything in its power to maintain the safety of the innocent, 
the safety of those who do follow the rules set down by our 
society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what Bill 17 attempts to do. It 
attempts to make our streets, our roads, our highways, safer. 
And we as a caucus commend any action that tries to do this. 
 
Many portions of this Bill are straightforward housekeeping 
items. There’s an aspect that further restricts the speed 
motorists can travel when passing work crews. And of course 
that makes perfect sense. 
 
And there are other changes as well, changes that affect rules 
concerning school buses, changes concerning traffic lights, 
changes concerning the rights of police officers. And we have 
some questions on most of the aspects of the legislation,  

questions we will ask when we eventually get to Committee of 
the Whole. And my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena has 
already spoken on some of our concerns here, concerns that 
again we’ll bring up in committee. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously the part of this Bill that has 
received the most attention is the aspect that deals with 
enforcing stricter rules on drivers who choose to drink. Before I 
go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell the House that I, 
probably more than anyone in this House with the possible 
exception of the Sergeant-at-Arms, have seen the graphic 
results of drivers who don’t know when to say when they 
should be driving or when they should not; drivers who not 
only have no regard for their own safety, but for the safety of 
others. 
 
As a member of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
for nearly 25 years, I attended many accident scenes where 
alcohol was a definite factor — accident scenes where people 
have been hurt and killed. And the worst part of these scenes is 
not the death or injury of the person that was drinking and 
driving. It may sound harsh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but after 
you’ve seen enough of these accidents, it’s very difficult to 
muster up much sympathy for those who climb behind the 
wheel knowing full well they’re endangering themselves and 
others by doing so. You can feel sorry for their families, their 
friends, whatever, but that same sympathy is hard to come by 
for them personally. 
 
But it’s a different story for those who are the innocent victims 
of these people’s reckless disregard, the people who are 
responsible, those who take their privilege to drive very 
seriously indeed, those who do have regard for others  these 
are the people you remember at night. And you think of their 
families; you think of the widows; you think of the children 
who are without one or both of their parents because some jerk 
got behind the wheel drunk. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 
never forget them. Those are the people we owe; those are the 
people who deserve to know they can be safe once again. 
 
Everyone in this House, I think, agrees that we must do 
everything in our power to ensure that we clamp down on 
drinking and driving and drunk driving. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
for several years our province has had the dubious distinction of 
having the most drunk drivers  at least the most drunk drivers 
caught. Saskatchewan enjoys being number one in many 
categories, including being judged as the best place to live in 
North America — climate aside, I would suggest — but, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, despite all the things we have in Saskatchewan 
to be proud of, this drunk driving statistic is a huge scar across 
the heart of this province. 
 
Before I move on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a few 
words about those people in our province that have committed 
so much of their lives to trying to curb this horrible statistic, the 
people who are working so hard to make sure our roads are 
safer for all of us. In particular I want to commend the Students 
Against Drinking and Driving organization for their dedication. 
It makes me so proud to see young people devoting so much of 
their time and energy to such a worthwhile effort. 
 



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

I, along with the member from Arm River, recently met with 
Jason Dubois of SADD (Students Against Drinking and 
Driving) to discuss his thoughts on this piece of legislation. I 
can’t begin to tell you how impressed I was with this young 
man’s eloquence and dedication to the issues that concerned 
him. It is people like Jason and the many others involved in the 
crusade against drinking and driving that have alerted the 
people of Saskatchewan and the legislators of this House that 
something has to be done. 
 
I also want to recognize the methods that were used to craft 
together this particular piece of legislation. Of course the 
process was started with suggestions made by the Saskatchewan 
Interagency Committee on Impaired Driving. Then two years 
ago an all-party committee was struck by this House to further 
study the problems and recommend solutions to curbing the 
growing problem of impaired driving. 
 
This committee travelled the province and took suggestions 
from the people and many of the suggestions that committee 
heard have been incorporated into this Bill. 
 
Out of all the provisions regarding drinking and driving that are 
incorporated into this Bill, the provision that lowers to .04 the 
limit needed for policemen to suspend a licence for 24 hours 
has received the most attention from the media and people we 
have talked to regarding this legislation. 
 
And I’ll go into detail on what we’ve heard just a little later on, 
but I feel that another important aspect of the Bill and in my 
view a far more vital aspect is the penalty imposed on those 
who have been caught exceeding the .08 blood alcohol limit. I 
feel it is these penalties that are the key to making our roads 
safe for our citizens again. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that .08 
limit is not universally accepted by everyone, and in a letter 
received by my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena from Aaron 
Shroeder of the SADD group, I get the impression that many in 
our society and members of SADD feel that limit should be 
changed and, I assume, lowered. 
 
That’s fine. But let’s face it  any legal limit you place on 
drinking and driving is an artificial line in the sand. At .079 
you’re all right; at .081, you’re not. It’s an artificial border, as 
artificial as the painted line down the centre of our highways, 
but as an artificial line that is necessary. Because unless you 
bring in laws that make it so any level of alcohol in your system 
 even the smallest amount  illegal, you need that artificial 
line. While a zero tolerance policy would be ideal in a perfect 
world, it is not practical in our world. 
 
So we have to keep in touch with reality and ask ourselves how 
do we best enforce the laws we now have. We’d have to ask 
ourselves these same questions if the legal limit were dropped 
to .06, .04, or even .02 because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 
limits, while lower, are as artificial as .08. 
 
As Aaron Shroeder writes, alcohol affects different people in 
different ways. That’s why any set limit is not perfect. And 
that’s why no legislation regarding this issue is perfect. That 
includes this legislation which I don’t think is perfect. I know 
I’ll receive criticism for daring to utter that, but it’s not perfect.  

It has good intentions  no question about it  but I’m not so 
sure those intentions will be met through this Bill. 
 
It’s not a question of opposing the Bill because I don’t think 
anything would be served by doing that. It is a matter of 
pointing out some of the problems in Bill 17 with what is 
included and, most importantly, what is not included. 
 
But before I digress any further, I want to again focus for a 
moment on the penalties for those caught exceeding .08. I feel it 
is these provisions that have to be as tough as nails before we 
succeed in getting drunk drivers off the road. And I admit this 
Bill does go some distance  albeit a small distance, in my 
view  in addressing this particular issue. 
 
Under this Act, the statutory licence suspensions for drunk 
drivers has been increased. As I understand the Bill, for the first 
offence that suspension is now one year, up from six months. 
The second offence goes from one to three years, and the third 
offence increased from three to five years. 
 
Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our society where the privilege to 
drive is such a necessity for most people, these are harsh 
penalties. But I can’t help but think to myself, how many 
chances should a person be given when they recklessly scoff at 
the laws set down by our people? 
 
While the minister responsible says these are some of the 
toughest penalties in the land, I think we as legislators, we as 
citizens, we as parents, have to ask, are they in fact tough 
enough? Is a five-year suspension after three or more 
convictions a harsh enough penalty? I’m not sure it is. 
 
And what are the penalties for those who actually do injure or 
kill those by driving and drinking? 
 
Perhaps I’m drifting off into what is a federal jurisdiction here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I believe, for a real deterrent, these 
penalties, including harsh jail sentences, have got to be 
reviewed. And I encourage this government to instigate such a 
review. 
 
I guess what I’m mainly worried about with this Bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that it appears to be doing more than it 
actually does. Groups such as SADD want to see all drinking 
and driving eradicated. Again, that’s a good goal but probably 
not a realistic one. 
 
That being said, if lowering the 24-hour suspension limit to .04 
actually works as a deterrent for those drivers most reckless in 
their disregard for the safety of others, I’ll be the first to stand 
up and cheer. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m just not sure this 
Bill is going to target those people that are most guilty. 
 
(1600) 
 
I’m talking about the people who would get into their vehicles 
regardless of what the legal limit is. These people are not going 
to be reached by lowering the .06 limit. And I truly believe it is 
these people we have to get off the roads  these are the 
people. 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

Although I know police associations have endorsed this Bill, I 
have talked to individual officers in private who are concerned 
it will do little. Some have told me they believe it is nothing but 
wallpaper to make it appear that the government is doing 
something. And I’m talking here strictly about the 24-hour 
suspension rule. And other citizens have related this concern to 
me as well. Because they see the people who drive when they 
are well past the legal limit and they know this change will do 
nothing to stop those idiots. 
 
In committee we’ll be asking the government to provide us with 
statistics which will prove this move will definitely do some 
good. Again, let me emphasize here: we as a caucus don’t think 
this change will do any harm when it comes to making our 
roads safer, but we’re not totally convinced, as I’ve stated, it’ll 
do any good. 
 
Once again, it should not be the family who enjoys one glass of 
wine with their meal that we have to focus on, or the worker 
who stops in for a beer after work. The people we have to focus 
on are those who stop in for six or seven or more beer after 
work. Those are the people we have to stop. Those are the 
people killing our children or spouses or friends. 
 
We’ll be asking the government a number of questions in 
committee that will deal with the effectiveness of this 
legislation in all aspects. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 
an issue that’s simply too important to pass through this House 
unchecked. No legislation is perfect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No 
solution is perfect. But for the sake of all of our citizens, we 
have to ensure the legislation we pass in this House will do 
some real good. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless my colleagues here, the 
Tories, have any comments, the official opposition is prepared 
to pass this Bill on to Committee of the Whole at this time. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I participated in the committee that 
did the public consulting work that led to the drafting of this 
Bill and to this piece of legislation. 
 
It was thought at that time that we might get the legislation 
before the Assembly and put into law before the last election, 
but unfortunately I guess the issue seemed at that point to be 
too controversial to bring into legislation and so it was passed 
over until now, which of course is a year after the election. 
 
That in itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, tells me that if the 
government was afraid to put this into effect before the election, 
that there must be something in the Bill that people are sensing 
would affect the outcome of an election. 
 
I would digress just for a minute to compliment the Leader of 
the Liberal Party for his presentation on this Bill. And I think as 
a new member having come in and not having had the 
experience of going through the process as we all did over the 
past year and being involved with at least hearing about the tour  

that was taken through the province and those kinds of things, I 
think he has put his finger very genuinely on some of the 
problems that will result in this legislation. 
 
The process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that went into this Bill is 
commendable and our caucus does support the process that we 
went through to achieve the answers that we got and to come 
into a situation where you can draft legislation with a lot of 
public input. And we believe that that’s a good process for 
democracy. However, there are some points of view that never, 
ever get expressed on a touchy issue where morality is a part of 
the function that you’re trying to solve  or the function of the 
problem. 
 
The committee was careful to consult broadly with the public 
and this kind of consultation is important to the formation of 
any kind of legislation, and it enhances our democratic system. 
But as I say, we did find ourselves, I think, lacking in one area. 
And I would be remiss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I didn’t allude 
to the fact that we had an awful lot of school children involved 
in the process, and that was good, but we didn’t have a whole 
lot of adult participation in a lot of areas. 
 
I don’t know if that’s apathy on the part of the public or if it 
was the fault of the way we organized ourselves to try and get 
people out, but definitely if we do this sort of thing again, we 
have to do some concentration on getting adults to express their 
points of view through a large part of this province. 
 
Likewise in general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree with the 
objectives of the Bill. The loss of life caused by drunk driving 
is a tragedy and it is inexcusable in most cases. As legislators it 
is important that we take steps to prevent it. It is important to 
send a message to society that drunk driving is not an 
acceptable behaviour. The faster the cars become, the more 
powerful the motors, the more reason we have to discipline 
ourselves as a society. 
 
This Bill does that and our caucus believes that this is a positive 
step, even though we see that there are going to be some 
failings, which I will get to in a minute. 
 
The reduction of the blood alcohol driving limit to the .04 sends 
a powerful message about how society now views these kinds 
of offences. Unfortunately though, I believe that when we do 
this to an adult society, as the Leader of the Opposition has 
alluded to, we will find ourselves saying that basically the 
ordinary social drinker, the ordinary fellow who is going to 
have a beer on the way home from work, is the fellow that’s 
being targeted the most here. 
 
And we might find a situation where RCMP members  who 
are actually human beings I’ve come to discover  and who 
are human enough by nature to probably be worthy of some of 
the statements that were made in our tour, which went along the 
lines that all of these people, being human, would use discretion 
in how they apply the law. 
 
I don’t believe personally that we should place the RCMP in the 
position of having to use their discretion in how they apply the 
law. The law should be written definitively enough so that  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

they know where they stand. But I realize that there is a grey 
area in all things. 
 
And I do believe that in this situation we are then going to find 
members of the RCMP saying that, well this fellow is just an 
ordinary guy going home after having a couple of drinks and 
possibly I’ll just sort of close my eyes and let him go. Well 
where does discretion begin and where does it end? It does pose 
some real serious problems for the enforcement. 
 
Unfortunately when you start to use discretion in the 
application of law, then pretty soon that discretion becomes the 
way the law is viewed by the public and people may simply say, 
well they’re not enforcing the .04 so it must really be .06 or 
something else, and not pay that much attention. 
 
Now however while we agree with the general objectives and 
the intent of the Bill, I have some concerns that may not have 
been achieved in a proper balance within this Bill. 
 
Most fatal accidents involving alcohol involve persons with 
blood alcohol limits far in excess of a zero tolerance or even a 
.04, and the member very aptly pointed that out. And as a past 
member of the force, I’m sure that he is absolute in his view of 
this and correct in noting those facts. And he probably heard 
some of the statistics that we heard during our tour. And those 
statistics did genuinely bear out the fact that most accidents are 
caused by people that consume vast quantities of alcohol. 
 
The most common place for accidents to happen is at 1. 
something, you know, in that area; it’s not even the .08 that the 
federal law becomes a factor in. And you become reasonably 
responsible for a criminal offence if you’re caught at the .08. 
And most accidents are caused even with the alcohol levels 
higher than that. 
 
So what has happened here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that, as has 
been pointed out, we may be targeting  with a very severe law 
that sends a very serious message  we may be targeting the 
innocent people, basically, in our society, the law-abiding 
citizens who normally wouldn’t break the law anyway. And we 
may have targeted them and missed the boat on some of the 
other people that are the serious offenders. And I will get into 
that as we go. 
 
This legislation puts a great deal of onus on the average, 
responsible, social drinker, but it does not go far enough to 
enforce the laws of the extreme drunk drivers. And enforcement 
of course is the key word here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because on 
the contrary, the Department of Justice recently made the 
decision to reduce prison terms for offenders in order to relieve 
stress on our prison system. 
 
Now it’s unfortunate that we have so many people incarcerated 
in our country that our prisons are overloaded with people, that 
they’re full. I don’t know if we should start building some more 
prisons or if we should start exiling some kinds of criminals to 
the foreign islands out in the ocean, or if we should try to 
employ some other kinds of punishment. 
 
I don’t really know what the answer is, Mr. Deputy Speaker,  

but I do know that if we don’t carry out a penalty on a criminal, 
and we allow them simply to go through the process to be 
found guilty, and run in the front door of the prison one day and 
out the back door the next day, there is no message in there 
that’s going to send a clear signal to that person that he 
shouldn’t break the law any more. 
 
And that’s where our system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is breaking 
down. Therefore penalties for some extreme drunk drivers, who 
are the people who we are trying to target, may well be reduced 
in the system as it goes now. If their sentences then are reduced 
simply because we have to expediently allow for more room to 
be made in the prisons for the new people coming in, then we 
missed the boat, I think, with this legislation. 
 
So we have here a great piece of legislation. All the intents and 
purposes of it are aimed in the right moral directions, and yet it 
is destined to fail unless we can get our justice system to work 
in coordination with this type of law. 
 
It is obvious at cross-purposes . . . obviously at cross-purposes 
of course with what this Bill is trying to accomplish when the 
justice system doesn’t cooperate and bring about the fair 
sentencing and the carrying out of those sentences. By focusing 
entirely on the motor vehicle licence aspect of this issue, we 
may have missed the boat about the real issues involved. 
 
On the other hand you have severely and criminally drunk 
drivers being treated relatively lightly by the justice system 
while the average social drinker is treated comparatively harshly 
by SGI in the licensing system. Because quite frankly when you 
reduce it to .04 and then you start looking at taking people’s 
licences and those kinds of things, the person that’s causing 
probably the least amount of problem in our society is the one 
that actually will carry out his sentence. Whereas the serious 
offender who goes to jail won’t be called upon to carry out his 
sentence or to serve his sentence because the jails are too full. 
 
So again, while our caucus fully supports the objectives and the 
intent of this Bill, it may well have fallen out of the balance 
with regards to the problems that really need to be solved in our 
society. The government should try to address these problems in 
the regulations and by consulting with the department on 
sentencing. 
 
And on the serious issues of minor offences . . . or less serious 
rather, issues of minor offences, we ought to, I think, find a way 
to be compassionate. But on the end of the spectrum where 
people are causing death and causing people to lose their lives, I 
think we have to be far, far more diligent towards seeing to it 
that these people pay a penalty of some sort that when they 
leave a prison they will know in their minds that this is such a 
terrible experience and such a terrible place to be that I never 
want to be back there again. 
 
Now I’m not advocating that we become inhumane. I am 
advocating, though, that we have to have crime and justice 
balanced. We have to have penalties that are equivalent to the 
crime to such an extent that people simply will find it more 
uncomfortable to break the law than it is comfortable to go out  



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

and break the law. 
 
In other words we have to  we have to  I think see more of 
these people serve their sentences. And maybe their sentences 
don’t necessarily have to be a term in prison. 
 
Maybe we have to force some of these people to do some 
manual labour. Maybe we have to make them work a bit. 
Maybe that’s the answer; I don’t know. But we’ve got to do 
something to convince these people that their lifestyle is not 
acceptable. 
 
I’ve heard of a case very recently where a man had been found 
guilty for the fourth time of drunk driving  the fourth time. 
He’s now sentenced for two years in prison for his offences. He 
goes to jail and he spends five days in jail and he goes out the 
back door because the warden came to him and said: you can go 
home now; we haven’t got any more room for you; we’ve got 
too many other prisoners coming in. 
 
That simply is not acceptable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it 
simply makes a fool out of those of us who make these kind of 
laws where we try to actually help society. And it makes a fool 
out of the law because we didn’t keep that person there and 
make him pay his penalty. And that person has been supposedly 
reported to me as saying that he simply has no respect for the 
law and will probably offend again. 
 
(1615) 
 
We need to address our justice system. We can make all the 
great and wonderful laws in the world. We can go out and we 
can consult with all of the people in Saskatchewan and we can 
come up with the most miraculous kinds of legislation or laws 
that has ever been seen in the history of mankind. But if the 
justice system does not fulfil its obligation, then there is no way 
that this can succeed. 
 
And after you look at it for awhile, how could you possibly ask 
a member of the RCMP to take his job seriously and haul in a 
criminal if he knows very well that after he goes through all of 
his paperwork, all of his testimony, all of the things that are 
required of him in order to put a criminal behind bars, and five 
days later he watches him walk out the back door and a free 
man off to run and do the same things again? 
 
Again, the process by which this Bill came about was 
commendable, and I think it was a great and wonderful 
experience for myself and the people that were involved. I only 
hope very sincerely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that by passing this 
legislation we will in fact somehow save more lives. 
 
But I want to address one other issue that I think falls a little 
short in this legislation. And I address this because I have a son 
who’s the right age. And I would have thought that young 
people would like to have the opportunity to be able to have a 
drink and have the freedom to be able to drive and not be 
bothered by that, but he pointed out one very important thing to 
me. 
 
He said, dad, in our society we don’t allow kids that are 16  

years of age who are allowed to buy a driver’s licence to go in 
the bar and drink. We don’t allow them to go to the liquor 
board store and buy alcohol, and yet you’re saying to me that 
I’m allowed to drive with two beers under my belt. Not allowed 
to buy it, not allowed legally to consume it, except in my home 
under supervision of my parents  there’s always a loophole in 
the law  but, he said, I’m allowed to be half drunk. And he 
said, at my age, at .04, he said, I’m quite a ways there. 
 
He said to me if you want to be realistic about your laws and 
have people respect them, especially young people today who 
are well educated, then you’ve got to be consistent. 
 
And he said, if you’re not going to allow us to buy liquor, don’t 
allow us to drive with it. He said, when we’re under 19 years of 
age, zero tolerance is exactly what it should be. 
 
I was really proud to have a son that told me that kind of a 
message when I honestly believed that he would want to have 
the latitude and the parameters to be able to go out and do what 
this law is allowing people to do. 
 
So we have missed what the young people told us, and we’ve 
allowed this legislation, once again for some kind of 
expediency, to attempt to soften the blow somehow of the 
public reaction that may come from that group of young people 
perhaps, that do at this time drink a lot of alcohol and 
participate in these kind of activities. 
 
So I think we should have toughened it up, and I wanted to put 
that on the record not only as a compliment to my son, but also 
to make sure that people see that perhaps when young people 
do not respect this law there might be a reason for it  the fact 
that we haven’t been consistent in the way we treat all of these 
aspects. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to compliment those people 
that were on the driving committee and compliment the 
government on the process that they took. 
 
There were people from the Assembly involved. They all did a 
very remarkable job. One individual by the name of Dave 
Abbey, and I’m hoping he won’t be embarrassed if I mention 
his name, is truly a trooper. He’s truly a brilliant man and I 
think I’ve grown to respect bureaucrats more than I ever would 
have if I hadn’t met him and been associated with him. 
 
And so the effort was good, the people that worked on it were 
excellent, and the job was miraculously done to one goal, which 
was a good goal, and that being to try to correct the problem of 
people dying as a result of drunk driving. I hope we achieved 
that but I do believe we can do better if we work on it more in 
the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

The Chair:  I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My officials 
are Murray McLaughlin, deputy minister, just to my left. And 
on the other side of Murray is Dale Sigurdson, assistant deputy 
minister. And behind . . . oh, sorry, we’ve moved; over here to 
my right. And to my far left is Hal Cushon, the director of 
policy planning and program development branch. Jack Zepp, 
right behind me, director of administrative services. Beside Jack 
is Doug Matthies, general manager of Crop Insurance 
Corporation. And Norm Ballagh, the general manager of ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), and Ross 
Johnson, budget officer for administrative services branch. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. I’d also like 
to welcome the minister back from his extended trip to the 
far-off shores. And I’d as well like to welcome his new deputy, 
Dr. McLaughlin, here today as well. And I look forward to 
some nice dialogue this afternoon in the short time that we have 
left. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, if we could, while it’s fresh in your 
memory from your trip to some of the Asian countries, I’m just 
wondering if you could outline for us possibly some of the 
benefits that we’ll see arising out of that trip and if there are any 
particular contracts that you were able to sign while you were 
there on behalf of the industry and the producers in 
Saskatchewan. And possibly, if I could maybe roll three 
questions into one, any particular area which you would view 
being most important to agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I would gladly answer that question, and 
I thank the member for that question. 
 
I’ll start out, Mr. Chairman, by saying that what I saw for the 
first time, my first trip to Asia, falls in very well with the 
strategy of this government and the Ag 2000 program. The Ag 
2000 program, what we’ve done is focus our finances away 
from primary production, as we had to in the ‘80s and early 
‘90s, to focusing the few dollars that we have to spend on 
adding value to primary products. 
 
We’ve got the agri-food equity fund where . . . or agri-food 
innovation fund, I’ll start there, whereby farmers or people  
anyone who wants to add value to primary products in a new 
product or a new way  can go to the innovation fund and get 
financial assistance. 
 
The ag equity fund, at the same time, provides financial 
assistance to those people who want to . . . after they’ve put  

their business plan together and they want to go into 
production, the equity fund will help them purchase machinery 
and equipment or put equity into their project. 
 
And then of course we have the Ag Development Fund, which 
does a range of projects mainly aimed at value adding to our 
primary products. 
 
This is outlined in the Ag 2000 proposal and we’re focusing 
and going along those lines today. 
 
In Asia, I was very, very pleased . . . It’s too bad the member 
opposite couldn’t have come along, because it’s really amazing 
to see the potential that’s being developed, that’s developing for 
Saskatchewan in the Asia region. 
 
We met with a number of people  a company like Zen-Noh in 
Japan. Zen-Noh is the largest agricultural cooperative in Asia. It 
has 2,300 member co-ops. It trades annually $100 billion 
Canadian. These guys just go out and do business with the 
world and they do it in a big way. 
 
They trade products. Most, or a lot of their products, are 
products that we produce. They trade in wheat, barley, canola, 
beef, pork, potash  which are the five or six major 
commodities. And they’re very interested in looking at 
Saskatchewan. The same with Taiwan. The same with Hong 
Kong, which is the link into China, and Korea as well. 
 
Because what’s happening in those countries is they’re 
expanding population base is retracting their agricultural base. 
And the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) and 
the WTO (World Trade Organization) reducing the tariffs 
around the world have dictated that these countries can now 
increase their trade because the amount of protectionism 
through the tariff barriers are being reduced. 
 
They also understand one other thing. They do a lot of trading 
with the U.S. (United States) in this region. But they also 
understand one other thing, and that is the quality that Canada 
and Saskatchewan produces. That came up to us time and time 
again. Somebody like Lorne Thomson from Thomson Meats 
has been able to put a product, a packaged product, on the shelf 
in Japan, in Tokyo, which is unprecedented from Saskatchewan. 
 
Traditionally Tokyo and Japanese bought bulk products. They 
bought bulk products; packaged them at home. They bought 
bulk canola seed and processed it at home. But now they’re 
starting to understand that it’s probably cheaper and better for 
them to know the quality and cheaper to lay the product in if 
it’s processed, partially at least, near the source. And that was 
one of the constant messages throughout Asia. 
 
There were some deals that are very close to be signed. But let 
me tell you this: it wouldn’t matter . . . let’s say there were 10 
deals signed . . . (inaudible) . . . signing deals. Let’s say there 
were 10 deals signed on my trip or our trip over there. I 
couldn’t take credit for any of those deals. Because the deals 
that would be signed, if they were signed when we were there, 
would have been worked on for at least two years, maybe  



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

longer, in order to build up to that signing. 
 
So there were some deals that were very close to be closed or 
were closed but through confidentiality and requested by the 
people involved, I can’t say. There will be some deals that will 
be signed hopefully in the very near future, and there will be 
some deals signed two years down the road from our trip. It’s 
an ongoing process and I want everyone to understand that. 
And I know that’s the thing to do. I used to do it when I was in 
opposition. How many deals did you sign? How much money 
did you get out? Well truth be known, it wouldn’t be me that 
did the deal anyway. 
 
But what the government  I want to impress upon you what 
the government’s role is in all this is one of opening the doors. 
We had an example of a meeting with a person from 
Saskatchewan who had been dealing over in Japan. We were 
there. The person that they were dealing with was at a mid-level 
of government. Because we were there the senior vice-president 
came to the meeting, and the Japanese person told the 
Saskatchewan person that he was really, really pleased because 
it helped to expose his department  and these are huge 
companies, remember that  it helped . . . like he would see 
this guy maybe once a year if he was lucky at the Christmas 
party, you know. 
 
It helped raise his level in his department in the consciousness 
of the executive senior vice-president. So I often describe 
myself over there  I kind of laughed  as a cheerleader 
because that’s what we do. We reinforce. If I sit down to the 
Japanese government or a Japanese company and say that 
Thomson Meats is a good company, it’s got a good reputation, 
it’s got good quality, that’s my job. I don’t write the deals. I 
don’t make the deals. I’m not the dealer. I’m government’s job 
. . . And I just can’t impress upon you enough the importance of 
government being there. 
 
The first time you meet these people, you don’t do much 
business, you know, unless there’s a deal that’s already going 
on. They get to know you. The second time they loosen up a bit, 
and by the third time you’re getting the deals made. We have 
people over there who of course know these people on an 
ongoing basis, which really helps because then it’s connected to 
government. So I outline that to you. There’s much more I 
could say. I’m really excited about Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and 
Hong Kong, and mainland China. It’s a market that’s endless. 
 
We could double our hog production in Saskatchewan and not 
even begin to fill the void that’s going over there. The same 
thing with beef or chicken. 
 
So the GDP (gross domestic product) in the region . . . I think it 
was Taiwan. There was some complaining about the recession 
they were in. They only had a seven and a half growth last year. 
Well we would love to have that problem. 
 
In Korea the average farm or the average income from 20 years 
ago was $500. Today it’s $10,000. And by the year 2000, it will 
be $15,000  disposable, net income per capita. And 
remember in Korea, there is very, very little if no income tax at 
all. So their money goes a long way. 

So that growth is just going through the roof. This is an area 
where all of Canada, Europe, and United States are really 
focusing on because that’s the mouths are being born, and 
they’re hungry mouths. And now the difference is they have 
disposable income that is rising rapidly to take care of that 
hunger. 
 
And the Asians spend about 40 per cent of their disposable 
income on food. So as that rises, we are very well positioned, I 
think, focusing as we are on ag equity, ag innovation. And ADF 
(Agriculture Development Fund) will go a long way to supply 
that market, and hopefully what it will do . . . give value added 
production a boost in Saskatchewan and provide those jobs we 
need so badly around the province. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It sounds like you 
had a very exciting trip, and I’ll be looking forward to seeing 
some of the fruits of that come to fruition over the next couple 
of years. 
 
Just one comment that you made earlier, and you talked about 
how this trip and what’s happening over there fits in with your 
government’s commitment to diversification. You’d have to 
understand that I’m just maybe a wee bit sceptical on that, as it 
appears to me that there’s about $49 million were taken out of 
the budget in the area of diversification support. So I’m just a 
little sceptical about that comment. 
 
However you talked about your strategy and how the value 
added fits into it and how it relates to overseas as well as in our 
own province. Could you just maybe outline to me, Mr. 
Minister, a kind of a . . . I guess a rather precise overview of the 
mandate of your department, I guess, as it exists today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  With regards to the budget and 
diversification, I think what we’re trying to accomplish, simply 
because we’re forced into it because of the legacy that we 
inherited, is that we’re trying to make our dollars  keep the 
budget balanced  make the dollars stretch as far as we can. In 
order to do that, instead of government trying to do everything, 
we are partnering with the private sector. The trade export 
corporation that’s being set up now  and it’s just being born 
basically  is one of the ways that we attempt to do that. 
 
Although it’s not directly agriculture, I find it hard these days 
. . . and I’ll get to the mandate because it will be in the mandate. 
I find it hard these days to distinguish between what’s 
agriculture and what’s economic development because, to me, 
they’re the same thing because it’s developing jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan, value adding in rural Saskatchewan, and then 
having the value added in the cities as well. And one of the nice 
parts about the trip and diversification is that Mr. Goodale, who 
initiated this team Canada trip  at least the first half of it that 
I was on  was very conscious of the fact that diversification 
will come if we have the investment. 
 
The investment is now starting to come from Asia. And that 
way, with our trade export corporation combined with value 
added in agriculture and food products, combined with capital 
investment from Asia . . . should be a very good partnership on 
which to build jobs in rural Saskatchewan, and we’re very  



May 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

optimistic of that. You know, I understand your role to question 
that, but I’m saying we’re very optimistic that that’s going to 
take place. 
 
So far as the mandate of Agriculture and Food today, of course 
it’s traditional in some respects, and I think new in some 
respects. The new part is the part I’ve just described, not really 
new, but the more emphasized part now on value adding to 
primary products. 
 
Of course we still have an extension division which does very 
good work in disseminating information to farmers. We’re 
going on-line computers; we’re trying to keep up with 
technology. But we still have the agrologists in place in, I 
believe, roughly 32 sites around Saskatchewan, approximately. 
And we have Crop Insurance division, of course, which we’re 
working very hard on to try to update and modernize in order to 
fit the needs of the producer in the year 2000, and that process 
is ongoing. 
 
Of course we are changing the role of ACS. We’re reducing 
ACS because we felt that the lending to the primary producer, 
while it was important, it seemed to us more important if we 
want to establish jobs, especially now that the grains economy 
is starting to swing out a little bit  albeit beef is down right 
now, but it’s starting come back up again  so that we can 
focus on the value adding through ag equity, ag innovation, 
ADF. 
 
And of course there are other areas: research and development 
in the department, policy and planning. But the focus of the 
whole department, if I were to sum it up today, that is to be an 
assistant to the producers and the value added industry in 
Saskatchewan; to assist them in making this economy the best it 
can be; and  especially now when our prices are up a bit in 
the bulk sectors  to help them with, you know, through 
extension with chemicals or farming practices; to assist them 
diversify into areas such as ginseng, raspberries or whatever, 
Seneca root, or saskatoons, or horseradish, or whatever they 
might want to get into, and many of the specialty crops; to give 
them the expertise to start those crops; to help value add. 
 
And I don’t know if I’ve missed any departments or not, but 
that’s what all the departments are focusing on today . . . is try 
to get the value added . . . assist the primary producer in the 
value adding of the products. So in some ways, like I said, 
we’re still in the tradition of extension, tradition of extension 
but the focus has shifted. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. Since you raised your 
inheritance from the previous government, maybe you could 
outline for us what the mandate of your department would have 
been then in 1991 as you took over from it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I think when we came into government 
in 1991, we were coming off a time of poor crops, poor prices. 
And the role of government then I think was  whether you 
think it was done rightly or wrongly  it was transferring 
money from government to primary producers. There were  

assistance measures. There were assistance measures for . . . 
there were loans and basically trying to stabilize I think the 
government. The Agriculture department’s role was trying to 
stabilize the farm numbers by putting in legislation that tried to 
sort of level out the risk so that everybody took a little bit of the 
risk. 
 
And the results of that, in some cases, I think worked. And most 
cases unfortunately, the incomes transfers tended to be 
capitalized into the operation and sometimes caused more 
problems than it was to sort of make sure that the farmer was 
there for a longer period of time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since there was a 
change in the mandate from when your government took power 
in 1991, could you tell us then, how does those changes take 
place? What happened? What transpires when you have a 
change in government? What transpired so your department 
could gear up to what your mandate was going to be as opposed 
to what was there in 1991? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, what happened was we looked at 
what the mandate was, and we saw that there had to be a shift in 
that mandate for a number of reasons. First of all, there was 
some budgetary reasons. We were elected in 1991 with a 
mandate to balance the budget, and we did that. And I don’t 
think the Finance minister some days had many friends, but at 
the end of the day, we as Agriculture and every other 
department was asked to meet a certain budget requirement, and 
we did that. 
 
That was part of it. But the main part is we saw the shifting in 
focus and the need to value add and grow different crops so that 
we didn’t get trapped in that grain world that we lived in in the 
’70s that was very good to us. But we became, I think, a little 
bit myopic. 
 
So we started a process under previous ministers of developing 
our Agriculture 2000 program, and that was the . . . It was a 
long process of consultation with groups, farm groups and 
individuals around Saskatchewan. And basically what we said, 
we have to be partners with these people. We can’t just be sort 
of sitting here handing out money and sort of letting things go 
because we each have responsibility, and if we’re going to 
make it work, we got to work together. 
 
Business bought into that big time. And I think the result of the 
Agriculture 2000 are things like the trip, like trade missions, the 
one we were just on. Things like the meeting we had today with 
the people who were on that trade mission . . . came to Regina 
to discuss what the follow-up is and how do we focus on 
continuing the ball that’s starting to roll for us in economic 
development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess in light of 
your last couple of answers, how your mandate has changed, I’d 
just like to pursue, I guess, a little bit with what transpired upon 
your administration assuming power then in ’91. And do that, I 
guess, in the context of . . . I believe you were the official 
opposition critic at that time, and I think a lot of people 
assumed that you would become the minister, but I guess that  



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1996 

wasn’t in the stars at that time. 
 
However I guess given your background, I guess we’d have to 
assume that some of the vision that the government had  
because we heard it from the government of the day about some 
goals and wonderful things they had planned for agriculture  
that you would have played quite a role in this procedure. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I hope that’s not a trick question, Mr. 
Member. I’ll tell you; I’ll answer that this way. I made the final 
decision, urged by many people, to get into politics. And when I 
made that decision, I also made the decision to serve my 
constituency in the best way that’s possible because they’re 
number one. And if I was called upon to serve in any other 
capacity, whatever that capacity be  being on a board or a 
committee or a minister  I would do that to the best of my 
ability. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s a very nice 
motherhood statement. So I guess, did I hear you say that yes, 
you played a role in what direction your government at that time 
was going to take in agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, I think . . . Let me put it this way. I 
hope I played a role. I was there, and I was involved. I was the 
agricultural chair, I was the critic from ’86 to ’91 and then the 
chair of agriculture caucus. And if I didn’t play a role, I guess I 
wouldn’t be doing my job. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you then 
maybe articulate for us some of the goals of the party at that 
time and some of the election promises that were made back 
then, as it relates of course to the farming community, I guess, 
leading up to the election of October ’91 and then after that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well in that whole time, where I hope I 
was involved in decision-making . . . I’m not going to get into 
reiterating election promises, but I’ll tell you the one major 
campaign promise that we had in 1991 was to get the budget 
under control in order that we might be able to create some 
economic activity in this province. 
 
We had a population drain; we stopped that. We had deficits for 
10 years, driving up the debt to 15 billion: we’ve stopped that. 
And because we’ve done that  and we were the first province 
in Canada to do that  and because we’ve done that, those 
decisions led to us being able now in 1996, after trying to clean 
up the mess the first couple of years and getting the budget 
under control, to be positioned better, I think, than any other 
province in Canada  because of our fiscal situation  to take 
advantage of the opportunity that awaits us, for example, in 
south-east Asia. So the mandate was to clean up the mess, 
balance the books, and then get on with business. We’re on the 
get-on-with-business stage right now. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You continually 
talk about the mess you were left with. Could you maybe just 
outline briefly for us, in your view, what mess was there left in 
Agriculture from the Tory regime of the ‘80s? 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well one of the biggest messes I guess 
was the fact that the finances were out of control. We had a 
problem in that ACS was used sometimes for political reasons. 
There were some loans, you know, put through ACS. And what 
happened was it drove the portfolio up to over a billion dollars. 
 
And much of that debt was not recoverable. In fact we’re still 
 from the spring seeding loan, from the production loan  
we’re still trying to collect that debt. So I guess maybe I 
stretched it a bit when we said we cleaned the mess up. We’re 
still cleaning in some areas like ACS. And of course we’ve 
made the decision to now depart from ACS and let the banks do 
the lending, and we’ll focus on the value adding. So that was a 
large part of what I called the mess was. 
 
I think the other thing that’s important to mention here . . . and I 
do this at the risk of being criticized. I’m not immune to 
criticism; I’ve been criticized before. But there was one thing I 
think that happened in the ‘80s. Now I don’t lay total blame on 
the previous government because I think there were a number 
of people involved. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Like the federal liberals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Like the federal Liberals, yes, to cause a 
problem. What I’m trying to say is that there was a mentality 
put forward by the previous government that government  
even though on one side they were saying government couldn’t 
do anything  that government should do everything, like 
pulling money out of the Agricultural Credit Corporation for 
example and pumping it in the same way the federal 
government was doing it. 
 
And so what happened now, when the budgets are maxed out, 
we had a mentality that well, if we get in trouble, all we got to 
do is go to the mailbox, and we’ll have a cheque there to bail us 
out. Gladly people are weaning themselves from that because 
. . . as governments get their finances together as we’ve had to 
and make some terrible tough decisions that were very 
unpopular at the time, we’ve been able to help on that weaning 
process. 
 
I think that’s one of the major things we’ve been able to 
accomplish. I don’t think that . . . I can’t take credit for it all. 
Prices are coming up. The agricultural in general is improving. 
But I certainly say that this government can take credit for 
stopping the bleeding  stopping the bleeding  of taxpayers’ 
dollars being pumped into the agricultural industry and the 
agricultural industry’s still in decline. It was wasting money. 
 
So I think that we can take a lot of credit for that, and I believe I 
was part of that process. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Langford ..................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1299 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
 Tourism Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
 Accomplishments of La Loche 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
 United World College Scholarship 
  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
 Massacre in Tasmania, Australia 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
 Labour Day 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
 Spinal Health Care Week 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Child Poverty 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Education Funding 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 Funding for Providence Place 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 New Democratic Party Campaign Promises 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
 Independent Prosecutor’s Report 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1293 



 

 SaskTel Tentative Agreement 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
 Northern Highway System 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
 Natural Gas Exploration in the North 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
 Traditional Gathering Rights for Northerners 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker .............................................................................................................................................................................1295 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence to Attend Commonwealth Parliamentary Conferences 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989, and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1299 
 Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1303 
 Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1304 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1306 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1309 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1309 
 
 


