


















































April 30, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1255 
 April 30, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens for the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition are from the small communities of 
Milestone, Penzance, Cupar, and a number of names from the 
city of Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  I also would like to present petitions of 
names throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities that names came from are Regina, Estevan, 
mostly the city of Regina and through southern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present names of people throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Canora, Theodore, Herbert, Moosomin, and a number from 
Roblin, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
All of the signatures are from Regina. And if I knew the city 
better and the addresses, I’d be sure they’d come from Regina 
South. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by concerned citizens, of 
course, of Regina, as well as surrounding Regina, and that of 
Glenavon, Mossbank, Montmartre, McLean as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Wood Mountain, Rockglen, Assiniboia, Limerick, St. 
Victor, Fir Mountain, and also Gravelbourg, and Glentworth, to 
name some of the constituents. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from through Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
mostly from Regina here. We have two pages full. And we also 
have people from Macoun and all from throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
day no. 41 with my colleagues and the people all throughout 
Saskatchewan in their efforts of trying to save the Plains Health 
Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are almost 
all from the Regina area. In fact many from Regina Victoria, 
Regina Coronation Park, of course Regina Albert South, Regina 
Elphinstone, Regina Northeast, and Regina Dewdney, in 
particular. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 



1256  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Legislative Assembly, not one but two groups from Regina 
Coronation Park. Seated in the west gallery are 48 O’Neill High 
School grade 12 students accompanied by their teacher Rhonda 
Barnes-Pitka and Roger Sylvestre. I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming the grade 12’s from O’Neill. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you. And while I’m on my feet, Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery there are 26 students from Elsie 
Myronuk School and these are grades 4 and 5 students. And 
their teacher is Anca Toma and chaperons include Mrs. 
Morrison, Mrs. Olson, Mrs. Wilson, Mrs. Wacker, and Mrs. 
Hamilton. 
 
Now I want to while we’re welcoming these groups, just 
announce that room 218 is our territory; we’ll call it Regina 
Coronation Park territory for the balance of the afternoon 
because I’m meeting with these groups back to back there. I ask 
all of my colleagues to join me in welcoming the groups. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 14 
guests from Thailand accompanied by Mr. Ron Veller, assistant 
director of education for the Kerrobert School Division, and his 
wife Rae. A total of 60 people from Thailand are visiting 
Canada over the three-week period from April 18 to May 10. 
And most of our Thai visitors here today are teachers and 
administrators involved in elementary and secondary education 
 
Some people from government, university, and technical levels 
are also here as well. The Kerrobert School Division, Mr. 
Speaker, is hosting our 14 guests during their stay in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada and Thailand are two of 54 participating 
countries throughout the world who are members of the 
American Field Service. I look forward along with the Minister 
for Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, and the 
Education critics in the opposition, to meeting our guests in the 
members’ dining lounge at 3 o’clock and I would ask all 
members of the legislature to join me in welcoming our Thai 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure to introduce to you, sir  although I don’t think 
you need the introduction, or many people in the legislature 
need the introduction  the presence of a former premier, a 
distinguished premier of the province of Saskatchewan, my 
predecessor, Mr. Allan Blakeney, who served as premier of this 
province from 1971 to 1982 and then in opposition from 1982 
to 1987, I guess it was, Mr. Premier. And with his wife, Anne 
Blakeney. 
 
They have accompanying them, Mr. Jeff Caville of Ottawa. I  

hope I’m pronouncing the name correctly. Jeff is the grandson 
of Mr. Allan Gilmore who’s the first executive director of the 
Wascana Centre. The Wascana Centre, as you know, is the joint 
enterprise of the government, the University of Regina, and the 
city of Regina in the hundred-year project which beautifies the 
surrounding area. And I know that Al Blakeney was very much 
active when he was a minister, before taking over the leadership 
and the premiership of the government, in the development of 
Wascana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you please join me and all the members 
join me in welcoming a very, very distinguished Canadian, his 
wife, and Jeff Caville to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
also like to welcome this afternoon Mr. Blakeney to the 
legislature here, on behalf of the Conservative opposition. We 
too are keeping an eye on the Premier, the current Premier, Mr. 
Blakeney, and we just want you to know that as well. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we would like to extend our 
welcome as well to the visitors from Thailand. The American 
Field Service organization has been successful at helping 
individuals from all over the world understand each other’s 
culture and history. 
 
I am pleased that the first delegation ever to visit Saskatchewan 
are being hosted by the Kerrobert School Division in my 
constituency. It’s exciting to have 14 friends from Thailand 
touring our beautiful province for the next three weeks. Our 
guests have experienced quite a bit since arriving here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, including a touring a Hutterite 
colony, an oil plant, a buffalo ranch, a dairy farm, several local 
art galleries and museums, and of course many local schools. 
 
It’s true that the world is getting even smaller, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s through such important exchange programs that we can 
continue to expand our knowledge of other countries and 
cultures to the benefit of us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also welcome our very special 
guests here this afternoon and wish them wonderful weeks here 
in Saskatchewan visiting here in our great province. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf of the 
Her Majesty’s Official Opposition, would like to extend my 
welcome to not only our international travellers, but to our 
former premier of this province. And I might just add, Mr. 
Speaker, he looks considerably younger than he did when he sat 
in the House. But I want to wish them very well and a welcome 
here as well on behalf of the official opposition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you and to members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce a constituent and a friend in the west gallery today, 
a gentleman who had a long career in the education field and is 
now in retirement active in terms of the cooperative movement, 
Angus Addley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

NATO Delegation 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
express our gratitude on behalf of all Saskatchewan residents 
for the many volunteers and military officials who today are 
doing their utmost to provide a warm welcome to the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization delegation visiting 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw. These officials, representing airforces from 
member NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) countries, 
are touring the city of Moose Jaw and the base to assess it as a 
possible site for training NATO pilots as part of a billion-dollar 
contract. The Moose Jaw effort is part of a three-community bid 
to attract this important training to Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw has had a long and proud tradition of 
training pilots to defend democracy. Pilots trained there 
valiantly and fought in the Second World War, and in more 
recent times, they have delivered precious aid to innocent 
victims of conflicts around the world while serving on United 
Nations peacekeeping missions. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, we wish these dignitaries a warm visit 
to our province and we hope the Canadian aerospace training 
project personnel are successful in securing these jobs for our 
province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Economic Development Authority 
Launches Web Site 

 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I 
introduced a new high-tech word to the legislature  cybrarian. 
Well today I want to announce another more economically 
directed advance into the world of high-tech  an 
announcement, Mr. Speaker, that shows we are doing far more 
than just talking about preparing for the new century. 
 
Last Friday at the University of Regina software technology 
centre, the Regina Economic Development Authority officially 
launched its own web site. For the cybernetically challenged, 
this means that Regina is now on the Internet. We can now be 
surfed and trolled. 
 
The Regina Economic Development Authority’s web site will 
greatly increase our city’s exposure to the world. It will 
translate into economic benefit for Regina and for the province. 
Potential residents, businesses, employees, and executives will  

be able to quickly find the information they need to relocate or 
do business here. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this newest high-tech development is yet 
another example of partnership of governments and private 
sector companies working together. Both federal and provincial 
governments contributed to the project under the Internet access 
application development fund. The Regina authority will 
administer the site and it was designed by Digital Mediaworks 
of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, increasingly Saskatchewan is at the head of the 
class when it comes to info technology, an industry that hardly 
existed a few years ago. I’m happy to see this new example of 
partnership in my home city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Heroic Actions in Blizzard 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would appear that 
our seven-month winter has now finally reached its conclusion, 
we can only hope. It was an extremely harsh winter, in terms of 
the budget, cold temperatures, and severe blizzards. 
 
One such blizzard in early December brought out heroic actions 
from a number of Arm River residents in rescue efforts. And 
although it is several months after the fact, I would today like to 
recognize these people. 
 
When Brownlee area farmers John Beck and Maurice Eberle 
learned that Mortlach teacher Marilyn Knaar, who had been 
following a school bus to guide her home through the blizzard 
was missing, they put their own lives in jeopardy to begin 
searching for Ms. Knaar. After spending seven hours trapped in 
the cab of her truck, Marilyn Knaar was found by Maurice 
Eberle. John Beck had twice been within 200 metres of the 
teacher’s truck. 
 
During the same blizzard, students in two school buses in the 
Eyebrow district spent several hours stranded on rural roads 
awaiting rescue. Area residents Dan and Cindy Devine, Grant 
Torgerson, and Terry Leggott, risked their lives in rescue 
attempts which fortunately proved successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members in the Assembly today to join 
me in congratulating these folks in their heroic efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Internship Program at 
Estevan Comprehensive High School 

 
Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to report 
that a new program at Estevan Comprehensive High School will 
mean increased and enhanced links in communication between 
education, skills training, and jobs in the community. The 
student internship program will mean that the school will 
supply student interns whose skills and training match those 
that have been identified by the business community. 
 



1258  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

The intern will work 165 hours, arranged at times agreeable to 
the employer and the student. The student will work for a class 
credit and a work experience, and in return will want to be 
considered for future employment. 
 
The goal of the program is to create pathways to employment 
for students who are in grade 12. These new channels of 
communication will create opportunities for employment or 
on-the-job training such as apprenticeships, or a better 
understanding for students of what they may pursue in 
post-secondary education. 
 
Student internship will also give community employers the 
opportunity to select and assess the suitability of student 
workers for employment. As a result of this interaction, courses 
at the school will more closely reflect the needs of the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of cooperation and community 
spirit that we have outlined in our Partnership For Growth 
strategy and this is where jobs will be created for our children. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was disappointed to 
receive a government news release a few minutes ago detailing 
how many jobs will be lost at the Whitespruce Youth Treatment 
Centre. Sixteen positions will be transferred to the Calder 
Centre while 41 Whitespruce employees will receive lay-off 
notices effective July 31. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this state-of-the-art facility was the first of its kind 
to treat youths suffering from drug and alcohol addictions. Mr. 
Speaker, there were always a waiting-list . . . or was always a 
waiting-list to get into the facility, and young people came from 
across the province. And certainly I’ve had many concerns 
raised from my own constituency, the constituency of 
Moosomin, as people felt this facility provided a very great 
place in helping young people overcoming their addictions. One 
other thing we have to be proud of is the number of young 
people that came from other provinces to use the facility. 
 
My sympathies to the Whitespruce employees who will lose 
their jobs; to the city of Yorkton that will experience a loss of 
several full-time jobs, and the local economy that will feel the 
loss. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I’m more concerned that addicted 
youths receive the same or better treatment, including the 
continued class time, gym program, and several other aspects of 
treating youths that no other facility could provide. 
 
Many concerns have been raised by professionals, Mr. Speaker, 
including mixing addicted youths with adults at the Calder 
Centre, and since I share those concerns, today’s news was not 
good news. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

La Ronge Health Centre’s Official Opening 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, on Friday, April 26, I was 
joined by the Premier and the hon. Health minister in 
participating in the official opening of the new La Ronge 
Health Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  The grand opening was a community 
celebration and was attended by chiefs and mayors and local 
sponsors, corporate sponsors, and residents from across the 
North. 
 
The new health centre is meeting the needs of our people in the 
North by offering a wide range of integrated services including 
home care, public health, health education, mental health 
counselling, alcohol and drug recovery, speech and language 
pathology, dental health, early childhood intervention, a 
resource centre, a holistic healing room, as well as acute care 
and long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the people of La 
Ronge and area for their tremendous and outstanding 
involvement in helping this project to completion. I would like 
to also thank the local businesses and organizations, as well as 
the corporate sponsors including Cameco, COGEMA, 
Weyerhaeuser I’d also like to thank La Ronge hospital board, 
northern health services branch, and Saskatchewan Health. 
 
A youth choir from Churchill High School, Senator Myles 
Venne School, Pre-Cam Elementary School, and Gordon Denny 
Elementary School sang “O Canada” at the grand opening. I 
found it appropriate that elders and young people were able to 
participate in an opening because the La Ronge Health Centre 
will be meeting their needs in the future. 
 
Again this is an outstanding example of cooperation and 
partnership in the health area between the government, the 
community, and the corporations as we face the challenges of 
the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cypress Hills Regional College Graduation Exercises 
 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, April 26, I 
was happy to attend, along with the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training, the annual graduation exercises 
of the Cypress Hills Regional College in Swift Current. 
 
The regional college system is a uniquely Saskatchewan 
institution. Cypress Hills College, like the other regional 
colleges, offers a variety of programs including home care and 
special care, office education, business, adult secondary 
education, adult basic English, English as a second language, 
and the first year of university. As well, Mr. Speaker, the 
college has partnered with various international organizations to 
offer a literacy project in Tanzania, a project which has gained 
international recognition. 
 



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

During the evening ceremony, 23 Swift Current service clubs 
and businesses presented over $4,000 in bursaries and awards 
 a true partnership of community and college. 
 
Another note: 12 of the 13 graduates of the home care program 
are already employed; 13 of the 15 office education students are 
employed. 
 
Not only Cypress Hills Regional College, but all the regional 
colleges are noted for their flexibility in offering courses which 
respond directly to the needs of the community and the 
students. 
 
My congratulations to Emily Rempel, acting principal; Terry 
Gove, program administrator; Spencer Wooff, chairman of the 
board; and all the board members and staff, on a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We just heard a little 
while ago from the member of Moosomin about another closure 
in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this morning I too was 
dismayed to receive the government’s news release outlining 41 
job cuts to staff at Yorkton’s Whitespruce Treatment Centre. In 
this release, the Minister of Health says, I quote: 
 

The loss of jobs is an unfortunate consequence of the 
decision to consolidate treatment programs. 

 
What is truly unfortunate is that the cabinet minister from 
Yorkton is defending this government’s decision to slash 
services and jobs in his constituency. We see the same thing 
happening in Moose Jaw and Swift Current. The gutting of 
services continues, affecting the people who are the backbone 
of Saskatchewan. And where do the remainder of these jobs 
end up? In Saskatchewan’s two major cities. 
 
Will the minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) tell us if the options under 
consideration for the Whitespruce Centre will replace the same 
number of jobs being ripped out of the Yorkton area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to just report and advise the member opposite that I too, as he 
is, and the community of Yorkton, is always concerned when 
you have job losses to a community. 
 
And in the past couple of years we’ve experienced some of 
those same kinds of losses in other areas, Mr. Speaker. And as 
governments consolidate their services, as did Morris 
Rod-Weeder, who moved some of their senior management 
staff and their sales people from Yorkton to Saskatoon; as did 
the Dairy Producers, who moved better than 80 of their 
employees from Yorkton, consolidating some of those services, 
government does the same sorts of things. 

And today, Mr. Speaker, what we’re finding is that with the 
major federal cut-backs that we’ve experienced in this province 
over the past year, our government is rationalizing our services. 
And part of that is to ensure that we can provide solid services 
to adolescents in this province and the consolidation of the 
programs were required. 
 
And I want to assure the member opposite that we are in fact 
finding other uses for the Whitespruce facility and are currently 
working with a number of players to help accommodate that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, we continuously hear the 
government talking about back-filling what the federal 
government has cut. They are not back-filling; they’re 
excavating. It’s the federal government who believes in rural 
Saskatchewan, that back-fills by opening up a Canadian Grain 
Commission service centre in Melville. That’s back-filling. 
Yours is excavating; ripping out jobs. 
 

Changes to Security Guard Legislation 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the 
Minister of Justice. And I’m sure any one watching the news 
last night felt a small part of the heartache suffered by the 
Nicolichuk family of Saskatoon. They lost their son Jason last 
fall when he was murdered. Alone on duty as a security guard, 
he was not equipped with any type of security device. Yesterday 
one of his killers was sentenced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an October 5 article which appeared in the 
Star-Phoenix, registrar Pat Styles is quoted as saying, “The 
Private Investigators and Security Guards Act is under review.” 
That was 6 months ago. Yesterday, Mr. Justice Wright declared 
his astonishment that the government didn’t mandate this type 
of communications equipment in its regulation. 
 
Does the minister not agree with the family of the victim and 
the judge in this case when they say these changes are needed 
now, not later? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 
of the Opposition for that question. The former minister met 
with the members of the UFCW (United Food and Commercial 
Workers), the union involved with this, as well as some 
members of the industry. I met with some of these people 
earlier this year. 
 
The process of changing the Act and the regulations . . . The 
Act is The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act. We 
are working on that. It’s in the planned agenda for next year’s 
legislative changes. 
 
The process is one of consultation with the industry and with 
the various people that are concerned because we’re in a stage 
where we don’t want to set up government bureaucracy that 
steps in and monitors this. We want to work with the industry 
so that they set positive, good standards for what they are  



1260  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

doing. We’re working very closely with them. 
 
This process is ongoing. In fact there’s a scheduled meeting set 
tomorrow setting up the whole consultation process with the 
industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, it appears that the Justice 
department is working at the same lightning pace as it is on the 
pedophile issue. The Private Investigators and Security Guards 
Act has provisions that are nearly two decades old. Many 
security guards complain of inadequate training and lack of 
supervisor backup on job sites. Updating this legislation could 
very well save lives in the future. 
 
The session is on now, and now is the time to make the 
changes. Will the minister commit to proposing updated 
changes to The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act 
during this session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for the second question about this. 
 
We are in the process of trying to set up the system whereby the 
industry works together with us. And as we’ve seen before, 
when we proceed in a way that doesn’t deal with all of the 
problems, we sometimes end up with legislation that doesn’t 
work that well. And we’re in a situation here where there are 
very many difficult questions. Our government and I personally 
have a great deal of sympathy for the Nicolichuk family. But I 
also appreciate that they have identified some of the positive 
things out of this incident that can help other people, and we are 
very willing to work with them, and any suggestions they might 
have, and also with the UFCW union who is very concerned 
about this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future of Eaglestone Lodge 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, last week 
we brought to the attention of the House the recent closure of a 
seniors’ home in Leroy which occurred because of this 
government’s lack of commitment to health care. 
 
This evening, residents of Kamsack will hold a public meeting 
to discuss the status of Eaglestone Lodge in their community. 
Because of this government’s funding cuts to the local health 
districts over the past few years, this lodge will close if the 
facility cannot be sold by May 17. Because of the importance of 
this meeting, and because I know the minister wants to truly be 
in touch with local health care issues and hear their concerns 
firsthand, will he indicate if he plans on attending this 
evening’s meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in response 
to what the member said about the Leroy lodge situation, I did 
look into that matter, and I found that the Leroy lodge was an 
army barracks built in the 1940s. That’s why that building is 
being shut down. And the couple that was referred to by the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena is going to be housed in the 
same facility, albeit in a different town. But they’re both going 
to the same place unlike what was implied in the Chamber last 
week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the Eaglestone Lodge, I want to tell the member that 
there are extensive requirements for that lodge to continue to 
operate as a special care home, including: changes to get it up 
to fire code which is very important for the safety of the people; 
an extensive sprinkler system is needed; a fire alarm; new 
corridors in making the building wheelchair accessible. 
 
But I want to say to the member that one of the things that 
people will be looking at in Kamsack is whether the Eaglestone 
Lodge might be suitable for a personal care home. We’re just in 
the process of changing the regulations and I’ll be talking to the 
community about that in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  I realize that you’re in discussions right 
now, Mr. Minister, but that isn’t really good enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a group has expressed an interest in buying 
Eaglestone Lodge; however changes must be made to The 
Personal Care Homes Act which would allow the facility to 
continue operating as a special care home. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
understanding that this Act will not be reviewed until June, 
which would be too late. The minister does not appear to realize 
that the Eaglestone Lodge is not only a well-run facility, it is a 
cornerstone of the community of Kamsack. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 
intervene, hold up the possible closure of this facility until such 
time as the community can examine all possible options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member is simply 
incorrect when he says that regulations will allow the 
Eaglestone Lodge to be operated as a special care home. The 
issue is whether it can be operated as a personal care home. The 
member is incorrect when he says this issue cannot be 
examined until June. This issue will be examined very shortly. 
And when the personal care home regulations are updated and 
amended, I will be talking to the health district and to the 
residents of Kamsack. 
 
But I want to say to the member, just for his information, that 
the amount of funding for home-based care in that health 
district is increasing by close to 6 per cent. And the amount of 
funding increasing for supportive care, long-term care, is 
increasing by 3.1 per cent. 
 
There is more money going into that health district, Assinboine 
Valley, for care of senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, which is a far 
cry from what the federal Liberals are doing who are cutting 
back on health care spending by $50 million. A far cry from the  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

Nova Scotia budget just introduced that cut health care 
spending by 30 million. A far cry from the Conservatives in 
Manitoba who just cut health care spending by 37 million. But 
the New Democrats are . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Next question. 
 

SaskTel Tentative Agreement 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my first 
question this afternoon is for the minister responsible for 
SaskTel. Madam Minister, we’ve received a leaked copy of the 
tentative SaskTel agreement. It includes provisions like an 
enhanced medical program and a $500 RRSP (registered 
retirement savings plan) each year for permanent employees. 
 
Madam Minister, how much additional monies are these 
provisions going to cost SaskTel and can we afford these types 
of bonuses during this time of restraint? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it has not been our 
practice to carry on collective bargaining in the legislative 
Chamber, and I think that’s an appropriate practice and we 
won’t start now. I would just comment in a global way on the 
tentative agreement and it’s provisions, Mr. Speaker, in that 
they are calculated to come within the overall mandate set for 
collective bargaining for the last five years in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
remaining two questions are for the Minister of Economic 
Development. Mr. Minister, yesterday you told us that nearly 
200 jobs have already been created at Intercon: 130 in Moose 
Jaw and 60 in Saskatoon. Today we find that that’s simply not 
true. 
 
We have been in contact with Maurice Werezek, the president 
of the union at Intercon. He checked with the personnel office 
this morning and he told us that there are actually fewer people 
working at Intercon today than one year ago. 
 
One year ago there were 834 people working at Intercon in 
Saskatoon. Today there are 753  that’s 81 less jobs in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, not 60 more like you led this House to 
believe yesterday. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you provide the wrong figures to the 
House yesterday? Why are you creating these phantom jobs to 
cover the real reasons behind your $5 million give-away to 
Intercon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member, as I did yesterday, that I said that there were 130 
people being trained for the plant to be hired by July of this 
year. 
 

So just remember and keep the story straight and don’t try to 
twist it to create even more gloom and doom than you’re apt to 
do. 
 
On the issue of Saskatoon, I want to make it clear that our 
consultation with Intercon in Saskatoon is that there are about 
60 more people working today than when the deal was signed 
and ratified last year. And I stick by those numbers. 
 
Just get it straight  130 being trained for the jobs in Moose 
Jaw, to be hired by July of 1996, new jobs, and 60 more than 
when the deal was ratified, in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that isn’t 
what you said yesterday in the House. In fact you said, and I 
quote from Hansard, April 29: 
 

The fact is that under the deal 130 new jobs will have been 
created by July 1 in Moose Jaw and 60 jobs have been 
created in Saskatoon. 

 
That isn’t the facts, Mr. Minister. Yesterday you said that by 
July 1, 130 new jobs would be created in Moose Jaw. The 
union fellow that we talked to tells us that they are not new jobs 
at all. They are existing jobs that have been simply transferred 
from Saskatoon  60 slaughter positions have already 
transferred and 65 to 70 more processing jobs are to be 
transferred on June 14. 
 
Mr. Minister, when a job moves from Saskatoon to Moose Jaw, 
it’s not a new job, even though I can see why you’d want to say 
that given your dismal record in job creation. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you playing this shell game with the job 
numbers? Isn’t it simply a feeble attempt to cover up the real 
reasons behind your $5 million give-away to Intercon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member that the agreement that was made with Intercon 
has been made public. We have agreed that if new jobs are 
created and as they are created, the loan will become forgivable 
at a rate of 12,500 per job. 
 
If the jobs aren’t created, the loan will become due and payable. 
It’s a wide-open process. 
 
But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious how we got to 
being $15 billion in debt with Tory mathematics. This is simply 
adding and subtracting; not very complicated. One can 
understand how they would get into the dilemma that they got 
into in the 1980s, when they had to deal with big numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr.  



1262  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

Speaker, today is to the minister responsible for the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, yesterday the auditor’s report contained 
some very disturbing news about the finances and the attitude 
of the Workers’ Compensation Board. Your hand-picked board 
has been extremely unwilling to cooperate with the Provincial 
Auditor. In fact last December the board’s private auditing firm 
said that the Workers’ Compensation Board specifically asked 
them not to provide the auditor’s office with the reports he was 
looking for  not to supply them. 
 
Mr. Minister, the auditor makes two very specific 
recommendations in his report. He recommends that the 
government direct the Workers’ Compensation Board to adopt 
the recommendations of the public accountants committee task 
force. And he recommends that the government direct the 
Workers’ Compensation Board to cooperate with the auditor’s 
office. Doesn’t seem too unrealistic to me, Mr. Minister. 
 
Would you demand that your board follow these 
recommendations? And if they refuse to do so, will you fire 
your board and replace them with a board that will cooperate 
with the auditor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well this is an independent board, Mr. 
Speaker, and firing might be what the members opposite do in 
an overreaction to a problem that they perceive to be there. 
 
I would say that the Workers’ Compensation Board have an 
appointed auditor. The appointed auditor is KPMG. They do 
their due diligence by generally accepted accounting principles. 
They’ve spent several months just completing the audit at the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. And the Provincial Auditor has 
not actually directly asked us for information. I understand 
there’s a meeting tomorrow between some people at the 
Workers’ Compensation Board and the Provincial Auditor to 
sort this out. 
 
What we want to know is, why can’t the Provincial Auditor rely 
on the information supplied by the professional auditing firm 
that’s in there now. They have actuaries at their disposal; 
they’re a nationally recognized, professional accounting firm; 
and if there’s something that the Provincial Auditor cannot rely 
on from the professional auditor, we’d like to know what it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental question for the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, 
it’s really quite simple. If you want to straighten things out, 
have the Provincial Auditor do it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Workers’ Compensation Board finally did 
provide the auditor with the reports he was looking for, just last 
month. Now after reviewing these reports, he found problems in 
the Workers’ Compensation Board’s financial management 
system and he decided that it was necessary to examine the 
Workers’ Compensation Board’s financial practices directly.  

That audit will begin on May 1, the first time since 1988 that 
the auditor has conducted a direct audit into the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. It’s far overdue, Mr. Minister. 
 
There are clearly problems in the financial management of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. Every employer in this 
province knows it. Administrative costs are rising and getting 
out of control and the premiums are sky-rocketing for the 
people that are using the process. And now the auditor has 
confirmed that he has serious questions about the financial 
practices of the board. No surprise to anybody, Mr. Minister. 
 
Will you guarantee that the Workers’ Compensation Board will 
comply fully with this audit and the results that are coming 
from that audit? And will you commit to taking whatever steps 
are necessary so that the recommendations from the auditor are 
put into place and these problems are then corrected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why 
the member opposite would come into this Legislative 
Assembly and attack the credibility of a professional accounting 
firm. 
 
I’ve said that KPMG is the appointed auditor at the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. The appointed auditor has found nothing 
wrong with the systems in place for guarding the contributions 
of employers to make sure that working men and women are 
protected in Saskatchewan by the workers’ compensation 
system. 
 
That appointed auditor has done their due diligence; they’ve 
worked by generally accepted accounting principles. And I 
would submit to the member that if there’s something wrong, 
that the private sector accounting firm would have in fact found 
that to be the case. 
 
The process has been quite clear for some time, Mr. Speaker. If 
the Provincial Auditor wants information on any of the 
agencies, departments, or Crowns where there’s an appointed 
auditor in place, they should request that information through 
the appointed auditor. 
 
We have put the information into the hands of the private sector 
auditor who has obviously passed on this information to the 
Provincial Auditor. There is a disagreement between 
accountants in this case. We’re going to get it sorted out, but I 
don’t know for the life of me why he’d come in and attack the 
accountant. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The Speaker’s having some 
difficulty hearing when the minister was providing his answer, 
and I’ll simply ask for the cooperation . . . Order. I’ll ask for the 
cooperation of all members of the House to allow the question 
to be heard and the answer to be heard. 
 

Unfunded Pension Liabilities 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, when the Provincial Auditor 
released his spring report yesterday, he identified a number of  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

concerns including the issue of unfunded pension liabilities. 
The auditor indicates there are many significant risks in 
managing unfunded pension promises of over $3 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people who have already retired or 
are approaching retirement and need to know that their decades 
of pension contributions will be there when they need these 
funds. 
 
Will the Minister of Finance explain how she intends to address 
this growing concern? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member opposite for the question. I think there’s a couple of 
things that have to be kept in mind. First of all, we are 
accounting for the liabilities on our summary financial 
statements, unlike provinces like Manitoba. We are managing 
the pensions; that is, we are paying the pensions as they come 
due. 
 
And I guess the final point is that we have made the necessary 
changes. It’s ironic that Premier Blakeney would be here today, 
because it was under his regime in 1978 that the pension 
schemes were changed so that they are fully funded, the ones 
that have come into place, and they are modest. 
 
And I think the most important thing is that the member 
opposite not create unnecessary anxiety. People who are owed 
pensions in this province will be paid their pensions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, what we’ve heard here this 
afternoon again is a clear misunderstanding that the Finance 
minister has concerning unfunded pension liabilities. And I 
refer here to an article today in the Leader-Post where the 
Minister of Finance is quoted, with respect to unfunded pension 
liabilities, as saying, “Once everybody who is in that old 
unfunded plan retires, the problem quite literally is gone.” 
 
Well this just is not the case, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago this 
government said it planned to form a commission to study its 
pension plan obligations. The Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts recommended such a body be established in October 
1994. The Dominion Bond Rating Service also recommended a 
plan to erase this liability in March 1995. 
 
Will the minister explain why this government has done nothing 
to address an issue that has a direct impact on 133,000 people 
who are members of government-administered pension plans, 
and in fact has a dramatic effect on every taxpayer in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
the question. I would say to the member once again: the key 
thing is that the decision was taken wisely in 1978 to change all 
of the pension plans so that every person who signed on to a 
government pension plan since 1978 is in a fully funded plan 
and in, I would also stress, a modest pension plan that is kind to  

taxpayers  a taxpayer-friendly pension plan. 
 
And I would just say to the member opposite, we are managing 
our pension liability. As pensions come due, we have the 
capacity to pay them. We will continue to do so. And it’s 
important to reassure people that yes, this is an issue, just as the 
debt of the province is an issue, but we are managing it and we 
will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this government just seems to 
forget the importance of the independence of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
Last fall we experienced firsthand the mess that the Workers’ 
Compensation had gotten itself into. They had proposed rate 
hikes up to 565 per cent. After hundreds of business people 
implored this government to do something, the Premier actually 
stepped in. His solution? An Ontario actuary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this actuary simply swept the problems of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board under the rug. The WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) still can’t explain why the 
annual adjustment for ’94 to the liability compensation fund 
exceeds $28 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Labour understand that this 
has tremendous negative impact on business and job creation in 
this province? Will you admit that the WCB is a mess and is 
still facing important questions? And will you get the 
mandatory review under way immediately and who will be 
appointed to that review board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well there’s several questions involved 
there, Mr. Speaker, surely more than I can answer in a minute. 
The board of review . . . the committee of review will be 
appointed shortly and they will perform the committee of 
review function. 
 
I will not admit that the Workers’ Compensation Board is a 
mess, as the member describes it. We should be proud in this 
province of the Workers’ Compensation Board. They have the 
only funded program in any jurisdiction in Canada. They have 
had consistently for a number of years. They make sure that 
workers receive the benefits when they’re injured on the job. 
Employers pay among the lowest rates of compensation 
premiums anywhere in Canada. 
 
Instead of preaching doom and gloom . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now I’m having a great deal of 
difficulty being able to hear the minister put his response to the 
question, and I will ask for the cooperation of all members on 
both sides of the House to allow the Minister of Labour to 
complete his answer. 
 



1264  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

Order, order. Order. Order. All members will come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I think the members 
opposite are allergic to the truth, is what they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, the fact remains that they 
continue to preach doom and gloom about successful programs 
in Saskatchewan, one of which is the workers’ compensation 
program that is one of the best programs of any workers’ 
compensation program anywhere in Canada, if not the best, and 
all people in Saskatchewan, employers, legislators, and working 
men and women, should be very, very proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 2:22 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No.   6 - An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
Bill No. 13 - An Act to amend The Department of Social 

Services Act 
Bill No. 14 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Income 

Plan Act 
Bill No. 34 - An Act to amend The Electrical Inspection Act, 

1993 
Bill No. 37 - An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 
Bill No. 22 - An Act to amend The Radiation Health and 

Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related 
Amendments to The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act, 1993 

Bill No. 15 - An Act to amend The Child and Family 
Services Act 

Bill No. 32 - An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

Bill No. 35 - An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 
Bill No. 40 - An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies 
Bill No. 41 - An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 
Bill No. 50 - An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential 
amendment 

Bill No. 12 - An Act to amend The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act and to make 
consequential amendments 

Bill No.  4 - An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 
Bill No. 27 - An Act respecting Architects 
Bill No. 61 - An Act respecting the Practices of Professional 

Engineering and Professional Geoscience and 
to make consequential amendments to other 
Acts 

 
His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 81 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1997 

His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:25 p.m. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Minister, I wish to ask leave of the 
Assembly to proceed with private members’ public bills and 
orders, second readings, item 15, Bill No. 78, An Act to enable 
Northern Municipalities to Name Airports within their 
boundaries, and to ask for leave to revert thereafter to the 
seventy-five minute debate. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce two 
very good friends and constituents from Lucky Lake, Lindy and 
John Buhr who are in the west gallery. They are community 
leaders and farmers in the area and long-standing friends, and I 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 78An Act to enable Northern Municipalities to 
Name Airports within their boundaries 

 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First off, I 
appreciate the government’s cooperation in dealing with this 
non-partisan private member’s Bill to put into Saskatchewan 
law the right for northern municipalities to name airports that 
lie within their boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a spirit that lives in the heart of northern 
Saskatchewan people and this spirit is grounded in the culture 
and the history of our northern communities. For so many years 
strong native and non-native leaders have helped shape the 
colourful character of Saskatchewan’s North. Elders, trappers, 
fishermen, business people, teachers, leaders, and countless 
others have made invaluable contributions to the lifeblood of 
communities throughout the North. 
 
People like Jonas Clarke, one of La Loche’s respected leaders. 
As an elder, a fisherman, and a trapper, he led the people of his 
community with dignity and fairness. Jonas Clarke was an 
excellent role model for people throughout the North. It was  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

this man who blazed a trail to the Cluff Lake mine site with his 
hard work and perseverance. Mr. Clarke has passed on but he 
had left behind him a legacy of respect and admiration. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I won’t go on to list the names of all the 
people who have helped carve out the northern character. Mr. 
Clarke was one of them. 
 
We don’t have the time for one thing, but for another thing I 
don’t have the knowledge to name every person who deserves a 
mention in the long line of people who have contributed to 
individual communities throughout northern Saskatchewan. I 
cannot say whose name should accompany the spirit of 
communities because I don’t have the same knowledge and 
understanding that those people have. 
 
Each community is moulded by unique histories, and I cannot 
speak with authority on behalf of those communities. And with 
all due respect, Mr. Speaker, neither should the government. It’s 
for this reason that I’ve introduced this Bill, An Act to enable 
Northern Municipalities to Name Airports within their 
boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a Bill that I dreamed up this session. 
This has been an ongoing effort by communities for years, long 
before I became a politician. I want to make it clear that I’m 
bringing this Bill forward on behalf of my constituents and on 
behalf of the people of the North who would like to see their 
heritage preserved. I hope the members of this Assembly will 
understand this and support it without tarring it as a politically 
partisan Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Act that I propose, municipalities would 
have the legal right to name airports situated wholly within or 
immediately adjacent to their boundaries, whether or not that 
airport is owned, operated, financed, or controlled and regulated 
by that municipality. Right now, there is no clear policy on this 
subject. 
 
(1430) 
 
The Bill that I’m bringing forward would make it mandatory for 
airport owners and operators to consult with the northern 
municipality before naming airports in northern communities. 
This would give the people of those communities a chance to 
pay tribute to people who helped shape their towns and villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not suggesting an extensive overhaul of the 
system. I’m not suggesting that pilots be forced to identify an 
airport by its new name immediately. I can understand that 
pilots prefer to identify an airport by the community in which it 
is located. 
 
What I am suggesting is a way for this government to give 
northern people a chance to preserve some of their heritage. I 
know it doesn’t seem like a gigantic step, but even something as 
simple as having a plaque commemorating a person would have 
deep meaning to the people in these communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe there is anything controversial  

about the Bill I propose. I am not trying to make radical 
changes that would deeply affect our province. What I am 
trying to do is give the people of the North one more avenue to 
show a deep pride in their heritage and to share their lively and 
vital history with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, An Act to enable the 
naming of northern municipalities Act . . . to Name Airports 
within their boundaries be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
say just a few words about Bill 78. We have had our officials in 
various departments look at this Bill, and questions have come 
up regarding the constitutional ability of the province to 
legislate on this issue, as well as a few other questions. 
 
We will need time to investigate this question further, Mr. 
Speaker, and I therefore move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Partnership for Growth 
 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 
afternoon to have an opportunity to once again address the 
House about the excellent economic development opportunities 
which are available in our province and are certainly adding to 
the strong growth and renewal of our economy. 
 
At the end of my comments, I’ll be moving a motion to 
encourage people to continue working with the government in 
achieving the goals and objectives set out in the Partnership for 
Growth document of the Department of Economic 
Development. 
 
I want to start perhaps with just providing members with a bit 
of an overview of what this strategy provides. This is the 
second phase of this government’s economic development 
approach. In 1991, when the government was elected for the 
first term, it provided a unique opportunity for Saskatchewan 
businesses and people to sit down and talk about how we would 
get our economy growing again. 
 
For five years prior to that we had seen a terrible situation, as 
the economy began to spiral down, largely because of 
uncertainty caused by policies of previous provincial 
government, including an oppressive tax regime and a serious 
problem in terms of its debt building. 
 
When the government came in in 1991, late 1991, it decided to 
start to turn that around. And it did so by sitting down with 
businesses, with working people, and with various other groups 
in the province to talk about what kind of an environment we 
would need to build in order to create a better, more positive 
Saskatchewan economy. That initial report, called the 
Partnership for RenewaI, served as a foundation for the 
government’s economic development approach. 



1266  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

In its first four years we saw 10,000 new jobs created, not by 
government, but by private industry in cooperation with the 
government, who had provided a series of positive initiatives. 
Today, as we enter our second term of government, Mr. 
Speaker, we have once again gone back to the business leaders 
and the community leaders in our province to talk about how 
we now move that economic development agenda forward 
again. 
 
The result is an action plan called the Partnership For Growth: 
Building on the Renewal of the Saskatchewan Economy. This 
paper has been pulled together by the Minister of Economic 
Development, and it targets a 21-point plan to create 20,000 
new jobs by the end of this century. That’s a very positive 
initiative. It’s a very proactive and straightforward opportunity 
for us to come together as a provincial community to restructure 
our economy and start moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are three important points that I think we 
need to acknowledge in this Assembly that this plan does. First, 
it focuses in on cultivating a positive environment for economic 
growth. Secondly, it strives to build upon existing strengths and 
realize growth opportunities available in our economy. And 
finally, it seeks to develop partnerships and programs to seek 
full employment. 
 
There’s been a lot of talk over the past several years about a 
jobless recovery. I’m very pleased that in Saskatchewan we 
have in fact seen job growth accompany the economic recovery 
of our province. I think that the government has a lot . . . they 
can take certainly a lot of credit in terms of providing the sort of 
partnerships which have helped business start to generate more 
jobs. 
 
In terms of the three points that this plan addresses, cultivating 
a positive business environment for economic growth, I want to 
just highlight some of the pieces that are being looked at here. 
This is not simply a document full of platitudes and rhetoric. In 
fact it is very much the opposite of that. 
 
This document provides a comprehensive plan with achievable 
targets for economic growth and job creation. It outlines clearly 
here that we want to set a positive climate for business, 
including a four-year financial plan and debt management plan. 
The Minister of Finance has introduced that into this House. It’s 
under debate in the Assembly currently, and it provides a very 
positive look at how this government is getting its own financial 
house in order. And for that very reason, business feels 
comfortable. 
 
We are also striving, as the Minister of Economic Development 
has said, to establish a program to reduce government 
regulation and the regulatory red tape that often accompanies 
government initiatives. We were striving to reduce this red tape 
by over 25 per cent in the next 10 years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the issue which the members opposite keep 
telling us we need to focus more on is taxation. They tell us we 
need to take a look at this. They . . . according to them, 
everything is gloom and doom of course; we keep hearing this 
in the House. What they refuse to recognize is the partnership  

we have struck with local businesses, with the provincial 
business community, to take a look at the tax system. 
 
Now it says here that we will be introducing a long-term tax 
plan to promote productive investment and greater job creation. 
I’m going to repeat that again so that the members opposite can 
write it down, so they can refer to it in their notes later — 
introduce a long-term tax plan to promote productive 
investment and greater job creation. That won’t simply be an 
academic review; it won’t simply be a review done by 
bureaucrats in our government; it will be a review done in 
partnership with the business community because that’s what 
we believe in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to be building 
on existing strengths to realize growth and opportunities. And 
this is where the real good news of our provincial recovery is. 
 
This program contains more than  I count half a dozen points 
 to expand the agri-food industry, to expand forestry, to 
expand the growth in mining, to expand the growth in energy, 
to embark into new ventures in tourism and the cultural sectors, 
and to build on information technology. Very, very positive 
areas, particularly tourism and culture, the cultural sector. This 
is a great opportunity for us to take advantage of a positive 
business climate, not only here in Saskatchewan but across 
Canada, as we see the exchange rate play into our favour and 
the positive environment that we have for business to invest 
here. 
 
Take a look simply at the film and video industry, which is a 
very new industry, a very exciting part of our  particularly 
Regina’s  local economy. A few weeks back, I had the 
opportunity to remind the House just the total size of this 
industry. What we’re talking about is a new industry that 
provides 581 new jobs last year  581 new jobs  more than 
$15 million in direct investment and $46 million in spin-off 
benefits. This is a very positive new industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third point that we’re working on is 
developing partnerships and programs to seek full employment. 
Job creation is an extremely high priority for this government. 
We’re not afraid to put out a plan which says that we believe 
this economy will grow strong, it will grow quickly, and it will 
provide real job growth. 
 
The members opposite continue to harp about how bad things 
are, and yet we’ve seen the positive growth. Over the past three 
years we’ve seen more than 10,000 new jobs created. We’re 
confident that business will create another 20,000 jobs by the 
year 2001. But it’s going to do this not only  as we heard 
today in question period, where the Leader of the Opposition 
was attacking this government for its job creation efforts  in 
the large cities. This will happen on a regional basis, largely 
because of our community-oriented plan of regional economic 
development authorities. 
 
This is the sort of innovative ideals that this government is 
putting forward and putting into action. It is going to support  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

new small businesses through reasonable, single-window 
initiatives. Not the grand plans and the give-aways of previous 
governments, but by very simple, straightforward initiatives. 
 
We’re also going to make sure that other people have an 
opportunity to participate, both in terms of exports, in terms of 
maximizing opportunities for aboriginal people, and in terms of 
looking at new technologies such as emerging technologies in 
agriculture, agro-biotechnology, and info tech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plan is extremely positive and we can see that 
it’s already working. Building off of the Partnership for 
Renewal that occurred last year and moving into the 
Partnership for Growth, I look only at my home riding of 
Regina South to see the positive initiatives here. Since the 
election in 1995, in June of ’95, no fewer than a dozen new 
businesses have opened in my riding  a dozen. Now these are 
not simply expansions. These are brand-new businesses who are 
creating real jobs in my community. In total here I see a dozen. 
I’ve got in front of me a list of a dozen businesses all in the 
retail sector, creating more than 106 new jobs in Regina South 
for Regina people. And I think that’s an extremely positive 
statement. This is not something created by expanding the 
government bureaucracy or through government hand-outs, but 
is a sure sign that consumer confidence is returning to our 
economy and that the business community is feeling extremely 
positive. 
 
Now you may say, oh well, another example of this strategy 
working in Regina; what about the rest of the province? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, as I was flipping through the news clippings the 
other day, I’ve come across no fewer than 150 pages of good, 
positive economic news in the months of February and March 
alone. Now if the . . . I trust . . . and I know some members have 
cautioned me on this on our side, but I trust the members 
opposite can read and in fact do read the newspaper 
periodically. And if they did, they would find some of the 
good-news stories that are in here. 
 
Just flipping through I see, here’s an item out of the Wakaw 
Recorder that says: “Humboldt company develops high output 
used oil processing system.” 
 
An Hon. Member:  Bet it’s in big print, though. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  I’m quite certain they’re only able to read 
the headlines, so I’ll just quickly scan through so that they don’t 
lose their attention here. “New bed and breakfast wishes guests 
a safe journey.” “Economy expected to grow.” No you never 
hear them talk about that. “COGEMA gets green light to 
expand operations.” Well of course they don’t want to talk 
about that; that sounds like job creation to me. “Wascana 
Energy and the band to sign deal.” Well once again here it 
appears that this is a partnership happening; of course the 
opposition wouldn’t want to bring that up. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I flip through these clippings, I see throughout 
Saskatchewan a business community that is feeling confident. It 
is feeling comfortable and is anxious to get on with the business  

of creating jobs and helping to make our economy strong. I 
would certainly make my clippings available to any member of 
the opposition that’s interested in actually reading what’s 
happening out there in real Saskatchewan outside of the gloom 
and doom of the Liberal caucus office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apart from the news clippings and the look around 
at the individual communities and the real projects that are 
happening, we can see on a macro level that this strategy is also 
working. In the April 23 Star-Phoenix, there’s an article says, 
“Bankruptcy decline positive sign for Saskatchewan.” and I 
want to read just the first two paragraphs. It says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan was one of only two provinces to see a drop 
in business bankruptcies last year. 
 
As well, it is only one of two provinces to continue to 
experience a decline in bankruptcies so far this year. 

 
Business bankruptcies are down. Business incorporations are 
up. The result of that is going to be increased job activity in our 
province. So the members opposite should take note of this. 
The strategy that the provincial government has put into place 
back in 1991 and has renewed in 1995-96 is working. It is good 
for business. It is good for jobs. It is good for our economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can move on beyond simply taking a 
look at business bankruptcies and talk about what exactly is 
happening for the businesses that continue to work within our 
communities and grow. 
 
Let me tell you a tale of two governments. Back in 1991, early 
’91, there was a regime sitting on the treasury benches, headed 
by the Conservative Party and Grant Devine. It was a regime 
that bought into a concept of tax harmonization. It’s great 
scheme of the day was to harmonize the GST (goods and 
services tax) and PST (provincial sales tax). Now the argument 
was it was good business. 
 
You know what happened, Mr. Speaker? As soon as they put it 
in, the retail economy went into the sewer. It wasn’t good for 
business and it ended up causing a recession. We saw a real 
drop in retail sales. 
 
The first act of this government, of this administration on the 
treasury benches today, was to repeal that harmonization. And 
as a result, consumer confidence, business confidence, and the 
economy started to return and rebound. 
 
Let me take a look at what it meant for some of the hospitality 
industry in this province. In 1991 we had a hotel occupancy rate 
in Regina and Saskatoon of only 55 per cent. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, that has risen to almost 70 per cent  70 per cent 
occupancy. I think that speaks well not only of the positive 
nature of the retail industry but also very positively about the 
tourism potential for our province as well. Now you may say 70 
per cent, not a big deal. The fact is is that puts Regina among 
the top four cities in Canada in terms of occupancy in its hotels, 
which is a positive sign for our tourism, right up there with 
Toronto, with Calgary, and Vancouver. 
 



1268  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite may say, oh well the hoteliers, 
they’re this government’s friend, of course they’re going to help 
them out however they can. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the 
tourism-related jobs are big business in this province. More 
than 20,000 people depend directly on the food and beverage 
industry for their jobs. Another 8,200 depend on the 
accommodation industry for their jobs. There’s another 1,600 in 
venture and outdoor rec; transportation, another 6,700; 
attractions, 3,300. More than 40,000 people in Saskatchewan 
earn their living from the hospitality industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government understands the importance 
of these sectors to our economy. We understand the importance 
of these sectors to creating jobs, and we understand the 
importance of those jobs to helping people live productive lives 
in our society. That’s why many of us have a great concern 
about the lack of attention being paid particularly by the federal 
government right now on some of the initiatives that they are 
undertaking. 
 
The new harmonized GST is a particular problem, and I won’t 
belabour the point except to say that this government . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The member’s time has 
expired and if he wishes he must put the . . . if he wishes to 
move his motion, he must put it now directly without any 
further debate. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I would 
move, seconded by the member for Battleford-Cut Knife: 
 

That this Assembly encourage Saskatchewan businesses, 
workers and communities to continue to work together 
with the government to achieve the goals outlined in the 
Partnership for Growth. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to have an 
opportunity to speak on such an important issue  economic 
growth. I live in rural Saskatchewan, residing on a mixed farm 
near the village of Senlac, 10 miles from the Alberta border. It 
never fails to amaze me that the members opposite continually 
refer to Alberta and its wonders, because I, sir, live 30 miles 
from Provost and over the 28 years I have resided in this area, 
have seldom shopped there. It is expensive and has little more 
to offer than my own village. 
 
On the other hand, I also live 30 miles from Unity. It is my 
main centre for shopping, banking, and more important, it is 
where the majority of my area go to the doctor’s, the dentist, 
and the optometrist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a strong advocate of my rural area and today 
I would like to tip my hat to our rural businesses. The 
constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife is a diverse area with flat 
farmland, rolling hills and trees, and an abundance of wildlife; 
agricultural and the oil industry are the largest economic factors 
of our area. But, Mr. Speaker, you will see that the ingenuity, 
diligence, and intelligence are the innate qualities of the  

industrious people that make this area such a wonderful place to 
live. 
 
The people themselves are responsible for taking the initiative 
to make our area viable and vibrant  people who are busy 
with our families, with our communities, and with our 
businesses; people working together, diversifying, and 
improving our quality of life and who are creating jobs. 
 
I want to highlight these businesses and acknowledge the 
contributions they are making to our communities and who are 
maintaining an important part in our viability. G L M Tanks of 
Battleford opened its doors in 1981. It is a steel fabricator, 
manufacturer, who constructs storage tanks to supply oilfield 
industry, liquid fuel storage, pulp and paper, chemical and 
mining industries. In 1994 it expanded its fabricating shop and 
this year expanded another 2,500 square feet for a paint job. 
Mr. Speaker, this manufacturer employs 80 people working 
around the clock in three shifts. 
 
We have Sifto Canada located in Unity. It has been operating 
since 1949 and employs 80 people. Its major products are table 
salt, food and fish processing, highway de-icing, chemical 
manufacturing, and agricultural salt, and markets its products 
from Thunder Bay to the Pacific coast. Remember the next time 
you add salt to your meal or to your water softener, that it is 
mined and manufactured in Unity, the largest employer in this 
area. So make sure that the label says Sifto. 
 
Years ago people farmed the land, planted basic crops, raised 
cattle, hogs, and chickens. Today we have farmers doing all 
that, plus raising ostriches, bison, elk, and deer, and many are 
into specialized crops. This has created spin-offs for many 
enterprisers in agriculture. In our local areas we have seed 
cleaning plants, we have seed farms, we have liquid feed 
suppliers, and we have fertilizer companies. 
 
For example, Big Yield Ag Services of Wilkie opened their 
doors in the mid-80s. It has continually expanded and now has 
12 employees supplying fertilizer to customers from Wilkie and 
the surrounding area within a 60-mile radius. 
 
Located in Marsden, we have the Palmer Ranch, Canada’s only 
bull display centre, raising 300 bulls of all breeds, and is a 
worldwide promoter of Saskatchewan. 
 
Unity is becoming a major grain trading centre. Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool terminal has the first export grain cleaning facility 
to be put into a concrete elevator in Saskatchewan. It will also 
be the pilot project for training for the operation of this plant. 
Nearing completion is the community-owned north-west 
terminal which will also be constructive in creating jobs. 
 
Not only in agriculture have we this spin-off, but we are 
benefiting from oil. In Macklin, jobs are being created through 
servicing, drilling, vacuum, water and pressure trucking, with 
companies opening their doors such as Blue Moon Oilfield 
Services, B & G trucking, and Marshall’s Welding. 
 
E & L Holdings, a residential and commercial construction 
business, relocated to Macklin from Primate in 1993. Eric  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

Scherger employs 16 people and does a good business 
interprovincially. 
 
In Senlac, Muffer-all Services is doing reclamation, not only 
restoring the land but vitality into the community with job 
creation. We also have Senlac Manufacturing Ltd which 
manufactures both agriculture and oilfield-related products. 
Also nearing completion is the CS Steam Plant which will also 
generate jobs for our people. Many of these businesses are 
established, believing in themselves and our province. Daily we 
have new people with new ideas opening new businesses to 
complement the diversity in our area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce you to a few of our 
small-business people, the fibre of our communities. Ron and 
Carn Kelly have been operating an abattoir and custom cutting 
and wrapping meats from their farm near Cut Knife for some 
years but now, with their son Tim and daughter-in-law Carla, 
have expanded and opened Kelly’s Meats in Unity. It is a new 
counter service offering not only fresh cuts and speciality 
meats, but also has an eat-in or take-out soup and sandwich 
counter. Kelly’s Meats employs four full time and three part 
time with plans for expansion in the future. 
 
A bold new entrepreneur is Hal Hepting of Unity who in May 
opened Maverick Tannery. The hides of mostly birds such as 
rhea, ostrich, emu, and some goat hides come from across 
Canada and come from as far as Texas. They are processed in 
finely ground bark from various areas of the world as well as 
other natural products, an environmentally friendly process 
developed in Europe. This new business employs two full time, 
as well as Hal, his wife, and his son, with plans to expand and 
employ up to three more. 
 
Wilkie is an important link in the CP (Canadian Pacific 
Railway) freight network and driving replacement crews to 
work and bringing off-duty crews home created a business for 
Larry Risling. This minimizes the amount of time CP staff 
spend away from their families. Risling and his hired drivers 
shuttle the train’s engineers and brakeman between three 
communities in style in seven white cadillacs. 
 
And more and more good news. Women are striving to promote 
and develop new businesses, seeing a need for a service or a 
product. In May, 1993, Shannon Powell opened the Hair Nook 
in Unity with two stylists. Everyone needs a haircut, but 
Shannon thought women should be pampered  and well we 
should be  and now has expanded her business to five 
stylists, a pedicurist, a receptionist and a masseuse. An 
appointment at the Hair Nook is a girl’s best friend. 
 
If you are planning a wedding, drop in at Pearls and Lace 
Wedding Boutique in Battleford. The manager, Wendy Steel, 
offers all consultation and preparation services. You can get 
your wedding dress, all formal wear, your caterer, bartender, 
your cake, and your stationery. This business opened last week 
and is also preparing to expand. 
 
NuTec Crests, owned and operated by Carmelle Coward, 
opened in Battleford in 1994. This company manufactures 
jackets, wind suits and outer wear with computerized  

embroidery for custom designing. 
 
It is presently working on a contract for wind suits for Summer 
Games. This business, Mr. Speaker, has tripled in two years and 
employs one full-time, three part-time seamstresses and one 
part-time embroiderer. 
 
Country Charm II opened in Senlac under the ownership of 
Yvonne McGregor. When Yvonne left our area, she sold the 
business to Debbie Francis. When Debbie’s personal status 
changed, she moved to Macklin, taking Country Charm II with 
her and opened on Macklin’s main street. But there was a need 
for a store like Country Charm, so Sharon Cooper opened the 
Village Trading Post in the same location. Now we have two 
unique stores selling birthday and wedding gifts, T-shirts, jeans, 
and much, much more. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Battleford-Cut Knife constituency has five first 
nation bands adding to our diversity. Land entitlement 
purchases are in progress for all bands. Little Pine is developing 
oil and gas for employment. The store at Sweetgrass has 
reopened. Poundmaker has an interpretative centre opening this 
spring, which will house artefacts and historical information for 
the tourist industry. 
 
Red Pheasant has a healing lodge employing first nations 
people and helping first nations people. There are many 
good-news stories in my area, but time does not permit me to 
speak on everyone’s achievements. By supporting development 
of the agricultural industry, new doors will open and expand 
leading to new jobs. 
 
The Speaker:  And the member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to add my 
two cents’ worth in this debate over the motion proposed by the 
member from Regina South. Because, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
this motion, once again, proves the member from Regina South, 
like all the members over there, are just missing the point again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this motion the member encourages business 
people and communities to continue working with the 
government to promote job growth in our province and, Mr. 
Speaker, my first reaction to this motion is to ask the member: 
are you joking? Or can you be serious? 
 
I guess the member is saying, Mr. Speaker, that it is the 
business community of Saskatchewan, it is the workers of 
Saskatchewan, it is the communities of Saskatchewan, who are 
to blame for the zero job growth we’re seeing in this province 
today. That’s why I ask the member opposite how he can 
possibly be serious about this motion, because it is my view, 
Mr. Speaker, it is this government who should work with the 
business community of Saskatchewan, with the workers, with 
the communities, to better cooperate in their job creation 
efforts. It’s time to stop calling the kettle black because, Mr. 
Speaker, at every turn efforts to create jobs in Saskatchewan are  



1270  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

stymied by this government’s policies of high taxation and high 
utility rates. Job creation is discouraged by this government 
through its own doing. 
 
And the member from Regina South has the gall to stand in this 
House and say it is the employers, the entrepreneurs, who have 
to do more. I mean how much more can they do? Those who 
have managed to survive under this government’s anti-business, 
anti-job creation policies have done so by the sweat of their 
own brow, not because of any help that this government has 
provided. 
 
Members opposite have even stated on occasion it is not 
governments that create jobs. I agree with that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve seen, governments can sure kill jobs. And 
sadly that’s the course taken by this government as it continues 
to choke the life out of our business community. 
 
I ask the member from Regina South, what does he expect the 
business community to do when your government releases a 
document like the Partnership for Growth? Are they supposed 
to fall at your feet and thank you for all you’ve done for them? 
Because I don’t think there’s a lot of thanks in their hearts, Mr. 
Member. You know what they might say to you? I think they 
might say to you, thank you, Mr. Member, for taxing me to 
death. Thank you, Mr. Member, for raising my utilities again 
and again and again. Thank you, Mr. Member, for supporting 
your Finance minister in her refusal to even consider lowering 
the sales tax. Thank you, thank you, thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of all the things I’ve heard in this legislature, of 
all the rhetoric, of all the motions we’ve debated, this is the first 
one that actually made me laugh when I read it. And I’m sure 
the member opposite must have gotten quite a chuckle too when 
he wrote it because you have to have quite a sense of humour to 
swallow the political nonsense being shovelled by the member 
from Regina South. 
 
Mr. Member, everyone in this province knows the job creation 
strategy of your government is a joke — it has been since 1991 
 everyone perhaps but the members opposite. Well I 
shouldn’t say that. I’m sure there are several on the 
back-benches over there that know it’s a joke as well. But 
again, Mr. Speaker, they can’t say that. The muzzle comes out 
once again. Every time I think one of them over there will have 
the fortitude and stand up and tell the Premier he’s wrong about 
his job destruction strategy, wrong about his high taxation 
policy, wrong about writing-off rural Saskatchewan, they sit 
there like highly paid mannequins. They sit there mute. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they must be deaf too because they don’t actually 
seem to be aware of the despair that is growing, particularly in 
rural areas. 
 
This government talks about back-filling. In fact what they’re 
doing in rural Saskatchewan is a full-scale excavation. Services 
and jobs are being ripped out of rural Saskatchewan, replaced 
with nothing but empty houses and boarded-up shops. 
 
But of course the member from Regina South would know 
nothing of this. He sees none of the destruction his 
government’s policies have caused across this province,  

comfortable as he is in the confines of the city. Before that 
member puts forth motions slapping his government on the 
back I invite him to tour the province; go to the towns that have 
lost their service centres, their government offices, their 
court-houses, their hospitals, their schools. Travel to those 
communities where the loss of even a handful of jobs is 
devastating. Travel across this province, talk to these people; 
see how impressed they are with your government’s job 
creation strategy. 
 
Talk to your colleague from Swift Current, a city that’s been 
devastated by job cuts. Talk to the member from Yorkton that’s 
lost Whitespruce. Talk to the former members from Melville 
that’s seen so many of its government services and jobs ripped 
away. Then, Mr. Member, you may finally have a grasp on 
reality. You may actually come to know the people of 
Saskatchewan; I mean the real working people of this province, 
not the civil servants and patronage appointments he’s used to 
hanging around with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what’s the point? I could talk until my hair 
turns grey and the member opposite won’t grasp that reality. 
And even if he does, what can he do about it. This cabinet 
doesn’t listen to dissent, doesn’t hear criticism, they just tune it 
out or find someone else to blame for their own mistakes and 
their own choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and the business 
community have always been willing to cooperate in any way to 
create jobs for our province. It’s now time for the member from 
Regina South and the rest of this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
caucus to participate in that cooperative spirit. Then and only 
then can some hope return throughout this great province of 
ours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Before I recognize the 
next speaker, I do want to remind all members of the House that 
the rules of the Assembly do require that the debate is directed 
through the Speaker. And I think it just best serves the dignity 
of debate if all members will cooperate with that. 
 
Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to try and set 
out for the opposition what we’re trying to achieve. There 
seems to be a lot of misunderstanding on that side of the House, 
and I don’t think they know where this government’s trying to 
get. 
 
The economic development concerns everyone in this province. 
When we embarked on a long-term economic strategy three 
years ago, we formed a partnership with business, working 
people, cooperatives, communities, and aboriginal peoples, to 
get their input and advice about what should be the strategy, 
and their commitment to achieving the goals of the plan. This 
approach was successful and is being carried on in the next 
phase, Partnership for Growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

Mr. Ward:  To update the strategy, we had to determine how 
we can foster economic growth while balancing all of our 
needs. We turned again to the Saskatchewan people, who 
helped us develop Partnership for Renewal. We held 
consultations with more than 550 businesses, Mr. Speaker. We 
held them with community leaders, representatives of economic 
groups and organizations in 20 locations across this province  
some probably even in the opposition’s home ridings. 
 
Through the government’s Preparing for the New Century: 
MAKING CHOICES  for Today and Tomorrow exercise, we 
asked for views on economic policy and advice about how we 
could incorporate these views into the Partnership for Growth. 
The consultations helped us develop these initiatives. 
 
People in Saskatchewan have told us that prosperity and 
security come from having a job. Employment means 
independence, a feeling of personal worth, and the ability to 
provide for oneself and one’s family. On a larger scale, jobs are 
essential for the long-term viability of our communities and our 
province. High employment means more people are able to lead 
independent lives in relative comfort. 
 
In addition to providing for themselves, they keep the economy 
moving by spending their income on local goods and services. 
High employment also spreads the wealth around. The taxes 
paid by working people are used to provide health, education, 
and social programs for all of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
What I hear from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, the third party in 
particular, is they talk about Alberta. They want us to be like 
Alberta. Alberta’s created more jobs than we have. Well maybe, 
Mr. Speaker, if in our first year we had laid and hacked and 
slashed like the Alberta government, we could hire them all 
back in the last term and say we’re creating jobs too. 
 
The other thing that the opposition doesn’t seem to understand 
is that the population of Alberta is twice as big as ours. They 
also have the Rocky Mountains. Now maybe the third party 
would like to take some of that $14 billion deficit they ran up 
and move a couple of those mountains over here so we could 
have skiing and golf and all the activities that the tourists go to 
see in Alberta. 
 
But right now they seem held up on another little problem with 
their economy. They want us to put in right-to-work legislation. 
They say, what good . . . how is this going to help the economy? 
I came from one of the constituencies, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Whoops. I came from a constituency, Mr. Speaker, where the 
average income is very high. It’s not that the working people 
have high incomes, Mr. Speaker; it’s because we have a 
disproportionate number of millionaires, and those people help 
to bring up your average income. And that’s what happens in 
the right-to-work legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward:  Anyway, throughout these consultations we 
heard a number of strong, clear messages. The main one was 
that although there are many challenges ahead, people are 
hopeful about Saskatchewan’s economy. They see  

opportunities flowing from concentrating our efforts on our 
existing strengths  our people, our communities, and our 
world competitive economic sectors. 
 
Throughout consultations and on implementation of the REDA 
(regional economic development authority) initiatives, 
communities, development organizations, and other 
stakeholders shared the view that there must be more that they 
could do to generate activity and employment, and that their 
roles probably revolved around supporting local initiatives and 
fostering a culture of development. REDAs can provide those 
core functions and services and support development. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I join this debate on the motion moved by the 
member from Regina South and seconded by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife, because it really is an important issue and 
an important topic. 
 
And it strikes me is that we keep always talking on these 
discussions past each other, because it always is implied by the 
members opposite that all we’re talking about is gloom and 
doom, or that all we’re talking about is the government’s 
incompetence. And while there’s a great amount of that 
happening in the government, I have to publicly say that not 
everything that you do on every topic is totally out of a good 
point. 
 
And I will give you credit for a number of them in this debate 
this afternoon. For example, the member from Regina South 
pointed, and I think quite correctly, to a component of this 
whole economic development initiative that is positive, and 
that’s the whole question of regional economic development 
authorities. 
 
I come from an area where one is just being established, and I 
believe that the local communities are looking on this as very 
positive and that it’s a very positive way for communities to 
work together and to build those economic opportunities that 
are possible by natural advantage in that community. 
 
And so I do give the government credit for their work in 
helping communities establish these regional economic 
development authorities. But it is also unfair for the 
government to take credit for everything that these regional 
economic development authorities then subsequently are able to 
do. It simply is no more practical when there was a whole lot of 
things that the former Conservative government could be 
blamed for rightly. 
 
They also could not be blamed for the fact there was a summer 
or two where it didn’t rain. It wasn’t possible to blame them as 
well for economic climate that was happening worldwide. 
Some of the things that happen in the world of economics is 
simply beyond what local, provincial, and even national 
governments can control. 
 



1272  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

(1515) 
 
And a great concern that I think all of us have, looking into a 
deregulated society with a lot of free trade, is being able to 
function in that reality when we’re not going to always be able 
to control these things. 
 
So when I say, but, it is unfair for the government to take credit 
for every good thing that these economic development 
authorities do. It’s also unfair, for example, for the Minister of 
Economic Development to get up in this House constantly and 
tell the House about all the wonderful jobs that, for example, 
Bourgault Industries is creating in St. Brieux and for the 
government to take credit for each and every one of those jobs. 
 
The simple truth of the matter is the people that are largely 
responsible for any of the jobs created in this province have 
very little to do with what we do in this House, but are done on 
the farms, in the villages, in the towns, in the workplaces across 
this province, by people who have the commitment to make 
economic development and job creation and profit happen for 
themselves, their families, and their employees. 
 
And so I think we’ve got to take this all in context because 
quite often government gets very fast and loose with blaming 
everything on the federal government or the former 
Conservative government and taking credit for everything, and 
it is simply not that easy to do and nor is it fair for the 
government to do that. 
 
While this whole document on economic growth has some very 
nice platitudes in it, the fundamental thing that the members 
opposite have failed to understand is that it will fail in its 
objective of creating 20,000 jobs. And I first of all would like 
to point out that the Saskatchewan statistics show that from 
1992 to the present time, there are the same number of people 
working in this province — not 10,000 more than there were 
four years ago  the same number. 
 
So we’re starting firstly with no new jobs being created in the 
last four years. There might have been some new ones created, 
but for every one that was there was an old job lost, and so we 
sit at the exact same numbers. And so we’re not now saying 
20,000 new jobs, falling back on the promise of 30,000 four 
years ago. We are starting from ground zero and there are no 
new jobs created and nowhere in my opinion, unless the 
government fundamentally addresses some issues that it has to, 
will there be no new jobs created in this province. 
 
Now what we have is a situation that on one hand the 
government says we do not want to interfere, we do not want to 
take this very direct role in creation of jobs, like the 
Conservatives did with the big money thrown at things. They’re 
not going to do that. And I think that that’s fair ball. But what 
you have done on the other side, is you’ve created an 
atmosphere that makes it very difficult for business to create the 
jobs. 
 
And I’ll cite examples why I say that you’ve done this, and 
sometimes I think you’re unaware of the ramifications of 
decisions you made. For example, the workers’ compensation is  

something we were talking about today. Can you explain to me 
how in your foggiest imagination, when we came through this 
situation last fall, where there were rate increases proposed in 
ridiculous percentage numbers, in ridiculous actual numbers, 
that would’ve amounted to over 20 million extra dollars to be 
paid for business in this province, how that in any way creates a 
positive economic atmosphere for business. 
 
And I know that we got Mr. Neville in and he reviewed 
everything and said, well let’s not deal with this for a year. 
Let’s put a 10 per cent cap on it. Let’s shove this mess under 
the rug and hope that it’ll go away. 
 
Well businesses know it hasn’t gone away, and unless we deal 
with the underpinnings of this kind of outrageous situation, it 
will never go away. And so we have an atmosphere created 
because of the actions of the WCB that is very negative to 
business. 
 
Last year as well occupational health and safety had a whole 
great number of new regulations put into place. A KPMG report 
looked at those regulations and it was reported that there was 
$18.3 million extra cost to business to implement them. 
 
Now no one, there’s no one in this province, employee or 
employer, who will say we should ever put employees’ safety at 
risk. But somehow we’ve got to do it in a way that is 
cost-effective, and reasonable, and practical for businesses or it 
just creates another negative type of incentive. 
 
The Minimum Wage Board has been appointed for some time, 
and particularly the small businesses and the businesses in the 
hospitality industry that the member from Regina South talked 
about, are very concerned about what’s going to happen. And 
it’s not because they have some type of moral problem with 
paying people more, but what they need to have is a level 
playing-field so that their industry and their businesses are not 
put at great individual disadvantage to others. 
 
We have a situation with the Labour Relations Board. The 
government has appointed a chairman to this board who has an 
incredible academic background in law but has absolutely no 
experience in the practical, real world. And rulings that this 
board are making are creating a great deal of hardship for 
businesses that want to come into this province. 
 
And so I hear from people in the business community, through 
people that I know because I’m in the business community, who 
say daily, almost, that they would like to come to Saskatchewan 
to do business, to create jobs and create opportunities, but 
they’re very fearful about the atmosphere that’s created by the 
fact that people in regulated agencies that have an incredible 
amount of power and authority are taking the labour standards 
in this province to places that this legislature would never have 
considered possible when it passed the legislation. 
 
And so we end up with a situation that an atmosphere is being 
created by regulation that we would have never dared to do in 
legislation. And that is why we’re not going to be able to create 
jobs into the future. Unless we’re prepared as legislators not  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

just to pass legislation and say to heck with the regulations, 
who cares about the regulations, the regulations and the 
interpretation of those regulations by people in authority can 
tremendously disadvantage the business community. 
 
And so while there is great platitudes in this whole effort and 
the whole opportunities for jobs and all the rest of it, unless the 
government opposite is willing to look at all of the 
ramifications of decisions that they’ve made, not only in this 
legislature, but in fact then, Mr. Speaker, I know that you will 
fail in the ability of government to create jobs. And in four 
years the people of this province will hold you accountable for 
this dismal failure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  If there are no further speakers, then we will 
proceed . . . Is the hon. member standing to speak? 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Yes. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I was writing 
notes. My friend made some very valuable comments in 
reference to the Partnership for Growth. 
 
Just one point that . . . couple points I wish to raise. Northern 
Saskatchewan again; we’ll drive past P.A. (Prince Albert), we’ll 
drive past Meadow Lake, and we’ll drive further north than Lac 
la Ronge, and we’ll go to the smaller northern Saskatchewan 
communities. These communities, and I talk about communities 
 La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, 
Pinehouse  all the smaller communities with a thousand or 
1,500 people that seem to be constantly forgotten in reference 
to any planning that the provincial government get under. 
Northern Saskatchewan has been so severely under-funded for 
so many years, and if the government wants to truly create 
substantial jobs for the people in the North, it’ll have to start at 
the bottom, at the community level, and work its way up. 
 
With regards to funding social programs, system of education, 
with regards to accessibility incentives in health care system, 
we all know those are all integrated with the sense of the word 
of community. And if you have an economic plan and it doesn’t 
address the whole community development aspect, Mr. 
Speaker, then it isn’t a plan intended for rural or small northern 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Yes, in northern Saskatchewan I think the majority of people 
are saying, develop northern Saskatchewan resources. But the 
key thing that they’re also saying is that part of northern 
Saskatchewan are the people themselves. At this point in time, 
many northern Saskatchewan communities have houses and 
people. Basically there’s nothing there happening socially and 
very little happening economically. And this Partnership For 
Growth does not begin to address those problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you go into a northern community, the Partnership For 
Growth document should be very, very comprehensive. It 
should look at how people interact socially, how people interact 
economically, and what services are available. I think northern 
Saskatchewan do want to encourage larger companies to come 
into the North and develop the resources. But we also want to 
be partners with these certain companies who are able to access  

jobs. We’re able to decide which areas to be developed, we’re 
able to decide the decisions of this venture, but equally, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re able to participate in the profits of such a 
venture. And the Partnership for Growth really doesn’t begin to 
talk about that in the least bit. 
 
Small northern communities at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, 
cannot develop their economies on their own. We have no 
capital. Where many of us have no economic base, we have no 
tax base. Our skilled workforce is very small in numbers. We 
have no expertise. You look at the tax system; you look at the 
cost of living in northern Saskatchewan; it makes it very 
difficult for the economy to develop at the local level in 
northern Saskatchewan. And certainly the Partnership for 
Growth doesn’t specifically address that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has to be, of course, and I’m encouraged to see, some 
type of effort being undertaken, but I think we have to go 
deeper than that, Mr. Speaker. There needs to be more 
coordination with other government departments. They all need 
to work together. 
 
Again, I go back to the model of community development. In 
northern Saskatchewan one of the biggest disincentives is the 
welfare system. One of the biggest disincentives is the housing 
system, Mr. Speaker. If you want to have a person work in 
southern Saskatchewan  I’m going back to housing again  
obviously many of us have mortgages and we pay into a house 
and that house payment is an investment. In northern 
Saskatchewan, because the banks don’t recognize the North as a 
safe place for investment, there is no housing market there. The 
government is forced at times to build houses, you know, 
through the social housing program. 
 
And if you want to have a job in northern Saskatchewan, if you 
want to get involved with the economy, well the system 
penalizes you because 25 to 30 per cent of your gross income 
goes into the social housing rents that you have to pay as a 
working person. So in essence you’re putting 7, $800 into a 
house each month but you’re not getting any equity in that 
house because it’s simply rent, Mr. Speaker. And this is the big 
problem. 
 
So I go back to my point, is there has to be a lot more 
coordination in northern Saskatchewan when it comes to 
developing the economy because there is a system of 
disincentives, a system that hurts any effort at community 
people and government working hand-in-hand to stimulate the 
economy at the local level. 
 
I think we have to simply encourage business and communities 
to work towards full employment and economic development. 
We need to understand the problems facing different sectors of 
this province and work together to find a way to foster 
economic growth; to specialize for different areas of this 
province. 
 
And what I’m pointing at that . . . with that point, Mr. Speaker, 
is we’ve got to be able to see how the rest of the province work. 
Like, how do we know that the products we’re developing in 
northern Saskatchewan  be it in forestry or be it in tourism   



1274  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

whether there’s markets for that. So obviously we have to keep 
in tune with all sectors of the provincial economy to really 
begin to pinpoint where’s the best hope of our efforts in terms 
of developing jobs and profits for northern people. 
 
Again we need to make sure the Department of Indian and 
Metis Affairs have as much influence and much effort with the 
Minister of Economic Development in terms of developing the 
economy for the northern Indian and Metis people. Again I’m 
talking about the Saskatchewan population, and again I go 
specifically to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I think we look at other things. I’ve mentioned housing, Mr. 
Speaker. When you look at again a northern community, a 
northern isolated community, you’re looking at things like the 
justice system as well. The justice system is severely 
overworked. It’s strained. It’s not effective. It’s not following 
any of the . . . you know, it’s not successful in the least bit. And 
the reason being, Mr. Speaker, again you look at the interaction 
of a community, of how you have a severely economically and 
socially depressed community, you’re going to have . . . your 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) cost will be high. 
Your justice system will be high. The social costs will also be 
increased. 
 
So really I think the point I’m trying to make is that when you 
talk about economic development and you talk about a 
Partnership for Growth when it comes to northern 
Saskatchewan, this document does not address that, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s got to be more comprehensive. It has to be 
in tune with what northern Saskatchewan people want, and it 
really has to begin to look at the whole system of disincentives 
that operate and are certainly prevalent in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When you drive into a small community  say Beauval or 
Pinehouse or Ile-a-la-Crosse, communities I’m familiar with  
many people ask me when they drive in is, what’s in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse? Or what’s in Pinehouse? What keeps people 
here? And that’s a really good question to have coming from 
the outside, Mr. Speaker. And really again, I go back to the 
point of people and houses. What keeps people here? And we 
have 1,500 people in certain communities; the question you get 
from visitors is, what keeps people here? 
 
(1530) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they can’t find the answers, but the answers 
lie with the northern people themselves. We believe  again I 
go back to the point  we believe, for true economic 
development of northern Saskatchewan, we must direct 
finances to local economic development authorities. Direct 
financing by using proceeds of the development of the 
non-renewable industries in northern Saskatchewan, the large 
corporations and large companies operating in northern 
Saskatchewan making tremendous amount of money for the 
Saskatchewan government — we must begin to take a portion 
of those dollars and direct-finance local economic development 
authorities so that they can decide what type of effort and what 
type of economy that they can begin to develop on their own. 
This is the key thing. 

And when people ask me what’s in Beauval, what’s in 
Pinehouse, what’s in Ile-a-la-Crosse, it’s the same as what’s in 
Watson and what’s in Saskatoon. We have dreams and 
aspirations. We have plans. And I think the key thing is here, is 
what can we develop in these small communities? Mr. Speaker, 
we can develop local saw mills to employ 10, 15 people. Mr. 
Speaker, we can look at developing the fish industry by having 
fish hatcheries and by having fish processing plants in northern 
Saskatchewan. We can look at the wild rice industry, Mr. 
Speaker. We can develop a wild rice processing plant and you 
can get wild rice really developed at a fast pace. 
 
We can look at tourism, Mr. Speaker. We have land galore. 
Half the province of Saskatchewan consists within the northern 
administration district, so there’s lakes, rivers and streams and 
forests and fish and on and on and on and on and on. I think we 
look at manufacturing as well, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at 
agriculture. These are industries that we’re not totally familiar 
with, but with the Partnership for Growth strategy, would it not 
be in the government’s interests, Mr. Speaker, to pass that 
expertise on to the northern people? 
 
So really the essence here is, I’m saying that we must become 
more aggressive in our economic development strategy. We as 
government must make a significant difference for the grass 
roots people, people that live in Ile-a-la-Crosse and Beauval, 
Patuanak and Dillon. 
 
And how can we do this, Mr. Speaker? I’m just absolutely tired 
of giving ideas here, but I’ll continue doing so. We could 
establish a new northern development fund, and from that fund 
we could easily have the northern large corporations contribute 
to the fund, and then direct-finance our local economic and 
social development agencies. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is up. We have a heck of a lot 
more we could say, but I’ll hold at this time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker:  The member’s time has expired. The debate 
will continue. If there are no further members wishing to 
address the question, we will then move to the 10 minutes of 
questions and comments by members. The floor is open for 
question and comments. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciated the 
comments from the members opposite. But I noticed that they 
forgot to address the question of sales tax harmonization, and 
so I want to address my question to the Leader of the 
Opposition. Would you please now stand and tell us exactly 
where the Liberal caucus is on the issue of harmonization of the 
GST . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. Now the 
members will be reminded of course that this is private 
members’ debate, and if the hon. member would like to direct 
the question to a member in his capacity as private member, he 
may do so. And so I’ll simply ask him to put his question into 
context, otherwise I’ll go to another member. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess my 
question then is to the member for Melville. As he is also the  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

Leader of the Opposition, I was simply using a larger title. But 
would the member for Melville please advise the House as to 
what his position is on the harmonization of the GST? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to respond 
by inquiring what sort of consultation was done with the people 
along the west side of the province, the business community on 
the west side of the province, with respect to our provincial 
sales tax. Let’s worry about that before we go on into 
something else. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, my hearing might be not so 
good, so I’ll move off the member from Melville. I’ll ask the 
member from Melfort what his position is and whether he 
supports the federal government’s harmonization of the GST 
proposal that’s currently before the government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Well I certainly can speak to that, but it’ll 
take longer than a simple question, and we can do that later. As 
you recall, that there was a time in the provincial economy 
where there was harmonization, where we had both taxes 
shortly there, and the government opposite removed it. 
 
I think that on this issue you’re going to end up with two 
problems. One is you’re going to have some people in the 
business community that is going to look favourably on 
harmonization of the sales tax. Because if you apply the same 
rules that apply to the GST, the advantage for business is that 
that becomes a flow-through expense, so it’s an advantage to 
business because they don’t pay the 9 per cent extra cost. And 
that’s the reason, that’s the reason that I understand that the 
Maritime provinces has accepted this. 
 
In terms of the other side of the argument, because you’re now 
putting the tax on a much broader base for consumers, it’s a 
much greater cost. My position personally is, is that I think this 
has to be looked at in its full context and weigh the full 
ramification of this to the provincial economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed this 
motion was put forward by the member from Regina Albert 
South, I believe is the constituency, so I would like to put a 
question to him. 
 
When I take a look at this motion and it talks about, you know, 
workers, communities working together with the government to 
achieve some goals in partnership, but what we’re talking about 
is some of the economic benefits that go to or don’t go to the 
communities when in fact you don’t have this cooperation 
between workers and communities and government. 
 
So the question is, why on earth did this member, in the 
election, take the position to save the Plains Health Centre, yet 
time after time when it’s brought forward . . . because, Mr. 
Minister, there are jobs, lots of jobs in Regina and in his 
constituency, that he’s not sticking up for. And if that isn’t a 
benefit to this city, then what is? 
 
And now he’s completely changed his position on this, Mr.  

Speaker. So we can talk about economic development all we 
want but . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I want to ask the member 
to put his question directly and . . . Order. And I want to remind 
the hon. member that, under the debate rule 17, questions must 
be put related to the content of the speeches. I’m not hearing 
that, and I’ll give the hon. member an opportunity to put his 
question directly, but remind him it must relate to the content of 
the speeches, according to rule 17. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question 
directly would be, why is this member changing his position 
now, when so many jobs and the economic importance of those 
jobs is so great to Regina? Why did he change his stand? 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, my position today is the same 
as it was during the campaign. I believe that it is important to 
have community consultation. I do not believe governments at 
any level, including elected health boards involved, people who 
are decided to make these decisions . . . these decisions should 
not be made in private. That is why I continue to have the same 
position I did in the campaign, and that is why I support this 
government in its consultation efforts. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
member for Athabasca. I noted with interest in his speech that 
he referred to the importance of community development in 
terms of regional economic development. I totally agree with 
him. 
 
And I would like to know how he squares that need for 
community development with the fact that the federal 
government is cutting $2.5 billion in social programs which 
surely strikes at the very heart of community development. And 
yet they have $1 billion to pay off the Maritime provinces for 
harmonization. How does he think that this is going to enhance 
regional economic development and most particularly the 
community development he speaks of? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the question 
I have back . . . And I thank the member for that question. I 
think the key thing here is this is not a thing that developed 
overnight. This issue, in terms of the treatment of northern 
Saskatchewan, has been happening for 20 to 30 years. Northern 
development resources have been happening for 20 to 30 years. 
And 20 to 30 years ago, there was no federal cuts that affected 
us drastically. 
 
And today the question I put back to the member is, exactly 
how do you perceive that we can do things differently in 
northern Saskatchewan as related to the Partnership for Growth 
document, as opposed to blaming Ottawa for some of these 
problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member for 
Athabasca knows full well, under the rules of the 75-minute  



1276  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

debate, I can only ask questions; I can’t answer them. So I 
would be more than pleased to discuss this with him out of the 
House. 
 
I would though, at this point. like to . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . the member from Melfort . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . in 
his speech about the very positive aspects of REDAs, regional 
economic development authorities. But he did say that there is 
some uncertainly over tax regimes. I would like to ask the 
member from Melfort how he feels, that since the federal 
government is cutting $2.5 million in social transfers and they 
have $1 billion to transfer to the Maritime provinces for 
harmonization, how that is going to help any uncertainty over 
taxes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I certainly would feel 
that it’s important to debate the issues that are before the federal 
government, and I look forward to do that the first time I get an 
opportunity to as a Member of Parliament. 
 
However, what I have to talk about and what the issue was 
today was not what the federal government is doing but the 
choices and decisions that your government is doing. And those 
are where I pointed out areas that are great negative incentives 
. . . or disincentives to the economic development of this 
province. 
 
These are issues that are totally within the control of this 
government. They relate to Workers’ Compensation Board; they 
relate to occupational health and safety; they relate to the 
Labour Relations Board; they relate to the type of people that 
you appoint in charge of arbitration, and all of those sorts of 
issues. Those are choices that your government has made and 
they’re the ones that we should be dealing with in this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  I want to again remind all members to direct 
questions and comments through the Speaker, as is befitting the 
rules of the House and dignified debate. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question will be 
directed to the member for Battleford-Cut Knife. I note last year 
when the Economic Development minister was in her riding 
with respect to cross-border shopping, he’s on record as stating 
that he considers that immoral, to cross-border shop. Now I 
know the member referred in her speech . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I have just recognized that the 
hon. member is not in his seat and is improperly recognized by 
the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And now in the 
member for Battleford-Cut Knife’s address she mentioned how 
she seldom shops in Alberta herself. And I guess the issue here 
might not be one of how many times, how frequently, you may 
shop but in terms of what type of items might you purchase 
when you’re in Alberta. And I would just ask the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife: does she purchase any high-ticket items 
in Alberta, whether they be for agricultural or personal use? 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you. I personally shop very little in 
Alberta. And when I do it might be because my husband was 
there at the bull sale, and I might pick up a few things if my 
store was closed. Other than that, I don’t feel that there is 
anything available. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Oh sure . . . 
 
Ms. Murrell:  I said that I do not shop . . . And one of the 
things that really concerns me is that we hear this all the time. I 
live 10 miles from the Alberta border, and what there is in 
Provost to appeal to people there is beyond me, so if you can 
buy it in your own area where they give us the best service, I 
would prefer to shop locally. And I stress that. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1545) 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6  Hospital Closures 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will at the end 
of my remarks be moving a motion, and I’ll read the text of that 
motion at this time: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly condemn the government 
for the ongoing closures of long-term and acute care 
hospitals across rural and urban Saskatchewan as this 
contributes to the loss of accessible health care for all 
people of this province and causes the health care 
professionals to seek employment elsewhere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, every week, there isn’t a week goes by, in fact 
there’s hardly a day go by in this House, where we don’t raise 
health care issues. And of course we’re not raising them for the 
political reasons that the Health minister would like to accuse 
us of. We’re raising them on behalf of the people that contact 
our caucus, that contact our members, knowing full well that 
they can’t get health care in this province any longer unless they 
go through this process of perhaps embarrassing the 
government into finding them a bed and to finding them some 
way to get their mothers or their fathers or their uncles or aunts 
into long-term care facilities. And it’s all happening, Mr. 
Speaker, because of policy, the policy of this government. 
 
For years we had plenty of nursing home beds in this province. 
Acute care wasn’t the concern it is today. And it’s not that all, 
you know, all the small town hospitals that that government  
the 52 in particular that that government decided to close  
were doing major, acute care operations. They weren’t. But in 
fact they played a significant role in health care in rural 
Saskatchewan, gave people many . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
level of comfort that they don’t have today. 
 
When we take a look at what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan today, especially after this health care reform was 
brought forward by the NDP government, it has been just going 
down, downhill, never ending. 
 
And what’s happened since the beginning of the health care  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

reform when they closed these 52 hospitals? We have now seen 
where in fact they’re gradually closing more each and every 
day. There isn’t a day goes by when we don’t talk about nursing 
homes that are getting closed or hospitals. 
 
But you see what they’re doing? They’re not taking them on in 
a big group any longer because of course that created too much 
stir throughout the province. Now they’re individually picking 
away, one at a time. They’re under-funding health districts, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to ensure that the longevity of these facilities, 
the health care and the seniors care needs, aren’t being met in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When I take a look at my own community, the Shaunavon 
lodge, we have a level 1 and 2 care home, which we know all 
throughout rural Saskatchewan, these homes were filled with 
level 3, and some cases, level 4 patients. That’s what they were 
filled with. 
 
The care homes, the light level care homes have been playing a 
much larger role for years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And really 
that’s been quite a savings to the provincial government 
because they fund it at a much lighter level of care. 
 
And another one is the Ponteix manor which was, you know . . . 
and what’s happening with these communities? They’re being 
told that their doors are going to close or you can find a buyer. I 
mean it’s really the government completely pulling away from 
senior care. 
 
In fact earlier in the House today we had my colleague, the 
member from Saltcoats, raise an issue about the Eaglestone 
Lodge in Kamsack. Now this is another facility slated for 
closure unless it can be sold by May 17. And when I take a look 
at some of the notes that we have had back from the Kamsack 
mayor, Bernie Rink, stating as long as the government keeps 
taking away money from these health districts, health care 
districts, more of these facilities will be closed. 
 
As a result of this government, 18 seniors in Kamsack are living 
in a state of anxiety and stress because they do not know 
whether they will have to leave their home, their families and 
friends. This is certainly not the compassionate health care 
system the people of Saskatchewan were promised by the NDP. 
 
That’s a record that you should be ashamed of, those members 
across the way. When the people of Saskatchewan, people of 
rural Saskatchewan, have to have these feelings and say these 
type of things to make you aware that, you know, they’re . . . 
You look at it as an economic problem; that there isn’t the 
funding. And we look it at, you know, from a perspective that if 
people need care in this province, whether they be sick or the 
elderly, we must find a way to take care of them. And that’s 
where the two parties differ so much, is that in fact there’s no 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I can hear the people 
across the way heckling continuously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
in fact it’s not me that they have to answer to. It’s going to be 
the people throughout Saskatchewan and in fact the people in 
their own ridings that they’ll have to deal with. 
 
Take a look at some of the other cuts, and we’re continuously  

raising these concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 
under-funding in health care. Here we have the Pipestone 
Health District  they have a hospital funding pool was 
decreased by $291,000. We have the Prairie West Health 
District  they have some $273,000 cut in acute care services. 
And you recall, you know, we’ve raised these so often, so many 
times in this House, every few days. So our comments on this 
side are going to be brief today because you have never had an 
opportunity to explain your actions and today’s a perfect time to 
do that. 
 
South Central Health District Board has voted to close acute 
care beds in the Pangman Hospital effective May 1; they’re 
short $450,000. You recall some of the other ones we’ve raised 
before: Swift Current running a $500,000 deficit; I think it was 
the East Central Health District, $3.6 million deficit. It is just 
never ending. It goes on and on and on. 
 
But you know what they do have money for? It’s been showing 
up, it’s been showing up all too often, and of course we’ve 
raised these too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. District support branch, 
they have lots of money for people that. You know, in many 
cases the member for Moose Jaw has raised where they’ve let 
. . . the health districts have let people go because they don’t 
have the funds and yet the Department of Health is running 
around picking these people up. Not only are they getting 
severance but the Department of Health is picking these jobs 
up. 
 
But they’re not picking up the nurses and the doctors that are 
leaving. We have doctors leaving on a weekly basis heading to 
the States, because it’s pointless, it’s pointless to stay in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s the problem that 
we’re having. 
 
Well the member from Regina Albert South is just enjoying 
himself heckling here today, but you know he has a lot to 
answer for if he recalls his election material sending out that he 
was going to defend the Plains. Where is he at today? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in one week we tried on two different 
occasions to bring forward emergency motions and this 
government wouldn’t debate the Plains Health Centre. So I 
mean you can heckle all you want, it’s not me you have to 
answer to. I don’t vote for you, and if I lived in your 
constituency I wouldn’t vote for you. 
 
The fact of the matter is, you’re going to have many people that 
you’re going to have to answer to. And you can sit there with a 
big grin on your face but I don’t think it’s going to bode well 
for you in the next election. 
 
We take a look at some of these kind of salaries that are being 
paid for district support branch. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, keep 
in mind what many of these people are doing. They’re the ones 
that are delivering the bad news to the Regina Health District 
Board. They’re the ones that are delivering the bad news to 
each and every region or district board throughout the province 
that in fact there’s no funds and in fact they have to change 
their ways, they have to cut back services. 
 



1278  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

But who’s doing it? Well we have people here that are earning 
69,000; 83,000; 68,000; 58,000; 67,000. Look at the sort of 
increases they’ve had in one year  10, $11,000 increases in 
one year to their salaries. Those are the sort of issues that we’ve 
been raising, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And you know what it all, what it really, comes down to in the 
end is what is really happening to the people out there. There 
again you recall so many of the issues that we’ve raised in the 
past couple of months. The fellow in Moose Jaw . . . Well I 
won’t get into every case. I mean here’s one where the lady laid 
in the Saskatoon hospital with a broken leg for, I believe it was 
a week. Is this health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think not. 
 
Now if you’re proud of that, well so be it. We’re going to 
differ. We’re going to differ on whether or not that’s health care 
in Saskatchewan, because that’s what you’ve brought it down 
to. You’ve destroyed what people before you worked so hard to 
put into this province  a safe and reliable health care system. 
 
What are they doing in other provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
We raised this only days ago, the fact that the B.C. (British 
Columbia) government . . . And they admitted, publicly 
admitted that they made a mistake; they should not have 
followed the way of the Saskatchewan NDP. They have been 
sucked in. What are they doing to correct it? A $100 million 
boost to acute care services in B.C. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Table it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well I did table it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well table it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I did table it. We tabled it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re 
going to allow them to heckle, at least I might as well send a 
copy over to them so they can read along. Can we send this to 
them? I mean surely you can’t dispute the Vancouver Sun. I 
mean you won’t . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I must remind the 
members that it is not . . . private members do not have to table 
documents when we’re into private members. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t mind 
them having . . . if I can help that member learn anything, if I 
can help him bring his own career along, even though it isn’t 
going to go past the next election, but at least if he can make it 
up to that point without completely embarrassing himself on a 
daily basis . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . they have had it. 
Read along. 
 
At this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to cut my remarks 
short because obviously, obviously there are so many on the 
other side I can tell by their constant chirping that they would 
just love to get into the debate and explain to the people of this 
province why it is that they’ve done the shameful acts they have 
in the last few years. 
 
At this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move: 

That this Legislative Assembly condemn the government 
for the ongoing closures of long-term and acute care 
hospital beds across rural and urban Saskatchewan as this 
contributes to the loss of accessible health care for all 
people of this province and causes the health care 
professionals to seek employment elsewhere. 
 

Seconded by the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I sat here and I listened for several minutes . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . perhaps too long as my colleague says, to the 
remarks from the House Leader of the Liberal Party. And all I 
can say is I’m quite amazed, Mr. Speaker, at the confusion that 
continues to persist over on the front benches of the Liberal 
caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member is utterly confused in his 
understanding of what has happened in the health field and the 
changes that have gone on. I think, Mr. Speaker, that I really . . . 
it is incumbent on us to take this opportunity to take some time 
and explain some of the changes that have gone on. 
 
The member has some difficulty with changes  has some 
difficulty with changes, and what happened was he has been 
spending a lot of time changing parties and now changing 
leaders and I think this is perhaps just far too many changes, far 
too many changes for him to put up with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the entire health system and I 
look at its effect on the people of Saskatchewan and the 
progress that we’ve made, it is without a doubt in my mind that 
the changes in place will end up . . . we will end up seeing in 
the statistics when we look back several years from now, that 
people will end up living longer lives and will end up living 
better as a result of the changes that are going on right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  These changes were put into place because 
we had to prepare for the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The old system was just not sustainable in the way it was put 
together, and that’s understandable. Because it was put together 
in the times when there were far more people living in rural 
Saskatchewan and fewer people living in urban Saskatchewan. 
There’s been a tremendous shift, ongoing shift, in population. 
There have been tremendous shifts in technology. There have 
been things . . . There is equipment and technology available 
now that was not available when the system was put into place. 
And it was simply time for a change. 
 
And I want to just indicate, Mr. Speaker, very quickly, a brief 
look at just how we’ve come in these last three years. For one 
things, three years ago we didn’t even have a health district, let 
alone an elected health district. Now we have 30, and they’re all 
elected. Except for the member . . . In addition to that, we have 
members that are appointed by the government to serve on these 
health boards. 



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

Three years ago we only had a fraction of the home-based and 
community-based services that we have here today. Three years 
ago we didn’t have a provincial palliative care program, and the 
respite care program was in its infancy. We didn’t have a 
network of first responders that now covers the province. We 
didn’t have a school-based immunization program for hepatitis 
B. We didn’t have an AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome) strategy. We didn’t have an AIDS assessments. We 
didn’t have a Provincial Health Council. We didn’t have 
needs-based funding. 
 
Two years ago we had only the beginnings of a stroke research 
centre in Saskatoon. Yet in September of 1995, this stroke 
research centre was recognized by the World Health 
Organization as a collaborative centre, the only one of its kind 
and quality in the world. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have 1,800 fewer people on 
waiting-lists for surgery than we did two years ago. Our cataract 
replacements in Saskatoon are up by 20 per cent and our 
pacemaker implants are up by 16 per cent. It’s moves like this 
— along with the back-filling that we did when the federal 
government cut the funding to the Canadian Health and Social 
Transfer funds to Saskatchewan — it’s moves like this that 
have prompted people like Allen Backman who is a health 
policy specialist and professor of management and marketing at 
the University of Saskatchewan to say this in Maclean’s 
magazine in July of 1995. This is what he said — and I quote 
— referring to the Saskatchewan health reform initiatives; and I 
quote: 
 

“This is the model that all the provinces should move 
towards if they want the greatest efficiencies in the way 
they spend their health dollars.” Impending federal 
cutbacks “are going to devastate provincial health care 
systems. Saskatchewan is more advanced than any other 
province in preparing to deal with that crisis.” 

 
That was Allen Backman. There are numerous articles in 
newspapers appearing daily and weekly, Mr. Speaker, that do 
comparisons of what’s to happen in Saskatchewan, what’s 
happened in Alberta, what’s happened in other provinces; and 
inevitably it’s a Saskatchewan model that comes out up front. 
I’m proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to spend a few minutes giving some background so that 
the members might be a little more advised about how this all 
came about, and have a better understanding of why things were 
done. So they can go back to their communities and help out — 
and help out; help with the reform process which is very, very 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we formed the government in 1991, we had 
a very, very hard look at the health system. It was a system 
which had grown willy-nilly over the years. In fact it was hardly 
a system at all. What we had was lots of hospitals. And I say, 
political hospitals. We had lots of physicians and they’re 
providing health services in an outmoded fashion. 
 
As a result, in Saskatchewan we at that time had over 400 
different boards overseeing health services  400 for the  

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we had more 
hospitals than any other province. In fact we had almost as 
many hospitals as Ontario to serve a population one-tenth the 
size of Ontario. And health costs were growing at an alarming 
rate. Spending on health had doubled in just 10 years and it was 
showing no signs of slowing down. 
 
We had a funding system which provided money to health 
institutions based on care statistics and previous spending. It 
was a system that was inefficient in many ways. And yet change 
was not possible within the existing governing structures. So if 
we were going to preserve publicly funded medicare for the 
next generation, for the 21st century, we had to change the 
system, and we had to have a system that could manage health 
spending. And we wanted to know that the money we were 
spending was going to actually improve people’s health and not 
just to treat them when they were sick. 
 
When we embarked on a fundamental change, we had some key 
decisions. Number one, cost containment should not be an end 
in itself. We needed to develop a better, more responsive health 
system. Change should be comprehensive and systematic. And 
third, we had to involve stakeholders and communities in a 
meaningful way. 
 
So let me describe briefly what has changed in our province 
since health renewal began in 1992. Our plan was constructed 
in two distinct stages. Stage one involved structural reform, and 
stage two involved changes to service program and delivery 
systems. 
 
A little bit about stage one — in the summer of 1993, we 
formed 30 health districts across the province, replacing the 
over 400 separate health boards. Boards composed of local 
residents were appointed to manage the new districts during an 
interim period, and a commission was set up to recommend the 
board election process. As part of this structural change, we 
reduced funding to acute care in order to shift the emphasis to 
health services in the communities and at home. We eliminated 
acute care funding to 52 rural hospitals which were converted 
to community health centres. We also reduced the funding base 
to all remaining hospitals by 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a move that did two things. It helped the 
treasury, and it also helped . . . this transfer was important in 
making a new, modernized, up-to-date health system. 
 
It is true that these changes have not been easy for the 
communities involved. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot 
of agony tied to these type of changes, and we all want to 
recognize that. It’s not easy to see a building close down in your 
home town or your district. And the people who had jobs there 
found that this was a difficult thing to do. But by and large, 
after a lot of thought, giving it a lot of thought, they would 
agree that yes, it did have to be done and they helped in the 
process. 
 
Smaller hospitals simply cannot provide the care people need 
when they are sick. And with today’s technology, more of the 
services people need can be provided in a community setting or 
even at home. People are finding that community health centres  



1280  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

can offer a much wider range of the health services they need, 
from education to physiotherapy and nursing care. And when 
hospital care is needed, modern facilities are usually no more 
than an hour’s drive away. 
 
There were other structural changes to Saskatchewan’s health 
system. We changed the way we provided funding. Instead of 
providing funding to a hospital or a nursing home to keep the 
institution running, we now provide funding to districts based 
on the population and their health needs. This means that the 
health resources are shared more equitably among communities, 
according to the health needs of the district, not according to 
the number of institutions they have. 
 
Another innovation was to set up the Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission  HSURC for short  
an independent body to provide analysis of outcomes of health 
services and recommend effective health practices. 
 
Now this is a key point. It is well-known that many medical 
procedures are carried out when they have questionable value, 
or even may harm a patient. We can make the system better. We 
can make better use of resources by getting more information 
about which health services are truly needed. 
 
For instance, a study by HSURC found that many young 
children are undergoing tonsil surgery unnecessarily. When 
these findings were published, tonsillectomies to children under 
four dropped significantly. Not only did this free up operating 
rooms for people who really needed surgery, it also means 
better care for our children. 
 
We also established the Provincial Health Council, another 
independent body, to advocate health goals which go beyond 
the realm of insured health services. We think it’s time to 
recognize that there is a lot more to health than doctors and 
hospitals. To truly change the health status of people, we know 
we have to address economic and social factors which influence 
health. 
 
And once these new health structures were in place, 
responsibility for a comprehensive range of health services was 
then transferred to the districts. Districts were made responsible 
for acute care, for long-term care, ambulance, and home care 
services. 
 
In addition, community-based services such as mental health, 
public health, and addiction services, which have been provided 
directly by the Health department, were transferred to the 
districts. This meant the reassignment of more than 1,400 staff 
to the district health boards. The way we did this, working with 
the unions involved, demonstrated our government’s 
commitment to cooperation rather than confrontation. 
 
I might mention, Mr. Speaker, that in this budget the funding 
equivalent for 135 people has been shifted from people in the 
Department of Health to the user end in the districts  a rather 
significant downsizing of the department as a result of the 
district boards’ infrastructure being put into place. 
 
So bringing this whole range of services under the direction of  

the 30 district boards was a very, very important step. This 
structure made it possible to set up services across boundaries; 
for example, coordinating hospital maternity programs with 
public health nurses so that new mothers can return home from 
hospital sooner and get the services they need right at home. 
Districts can also fully integrate preventative services into the 
health system. Prevention of injuries and disease and health 
promotion are recognized as priorities, alongside the treatment 
system. 
 
Instead of knocking on dozens of doors to find the health 
services they need, we think people should have to knock on 
one door, and it shouldn’t always be the hospital door. In fact in 
many cases these days, the health workers are knocking on your 
door, bringing services to the homes of people who need them. 
 
Now a little bit about stage two, Mr. Speaker. Stage two of 
health renewal is under way. We are now expanding 
community-based services and making the system more 
responsive to the community. The money that’s been saved by 
reducing the cost of acute care has been put into community 
alternatives. Since 1991, funding to health service in 
communities has grown by 41 per cent. Funding for 
home-based services alone has increased 90 per cent. There’s a 
wider range of home services, more respite and support for 
families and other care-givers, and home services have been 
reduced in cost, all of which makes it possible for more people 
to remain in their homes longer. 
 
Health districts have funding to enhance services like home 
physiotherapy and to provide 24-hour access to home care. 
Quality of care coordinators are being placed in each district to 
respond to consumer complaints and concerns, to act as 
advocates to people using the health system, and to recommend 
improvements. And many of these are now in place. 
 
We’ve taken steps towards more community control and 
accountability in our health system, because as of last October, 
Saskatchewan held the first district health board elections in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. This means better accountability and 
more public involvement in the health system. 
 
(1615) 
 
In a few short years we have accomplished a lot in 
Saskatchewan. It has not all been easy and there will continue 
to be challenges ahead. But the most important thing is that we 
have secured medicare and saved it from the certain erosion 
which would have taken place had we not taken action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to refer to some of the 
evidence that demonstrates that health renewal is working in 
Saskatchewan. First I should say, Mr. Minister, that spending 
has been stabilized while other services which we now have are 
better than before or at least equivalent. 
 
The number of surgeries that we now have has been relatively 
stable. There are some interesting changes when you look at 
some of the statistics. Some of the procedures which are in high 
demand, including cataract removal, hip and knee replacements, 
and coronary bypass, increased from ‘91-92 to ‘94-95. For  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

example, cataract surgery, as I mentioned earlier, increased by 
25 per cent. Hip and knee replacements increased by 12 per 
cent. Coronary bypasses increased by 9 per cent. 
 
At the same time, I’ve already mentioned that tonsillectomies 
have decreased, and other procedures, shown through 
utilization and research, have also decreased. And I have in this 
notice, in the statistic, that says that the number of Caesarean 
sections have decreased by 16 per cent. 
 
So we’ve got quite a shift in funding and where the demands 
are, Mr. Minister. 
 
Home care services have increased by 38 per cent across the 
province, from ‘91-92 to ‘94-95. Saskatchewan actually spends 
just slightly more per person on health today than we did in 
1991. It’s the shift that’s occurred that is very significant. 
 
Funding for home and community services increased by $40 
million in those four years, whereas the savings in acute care 
were decreased by $42.6 million in those years. A lot of this 
came about because there was a change in technology and a 
change in medical practices. 
 
The day surgery system and the same-day admission for surgery 
has resulted in much shorter lengths of hospital stay than used 
to be. Actually we found that when you compare the years ’91 
to 94, day surgery actually increased from 50 to 55 per cent of 
all surgeries for urban residents. And for rural residents, the 
proportion of day surgeries increased from 40 per cent of all 
surgeries to 50 per cent at the same time. 
 
Now these are significant things to look at, Mr. Speaker, when 
you’re trying to measure a health system. You need to have a 
way of accessing whether or not things have been improving or 
have not been improving. And I do believe that some of these 
statistics tell us that the health changes that we’ve put into place 
actually helped a great deal. 
 
Right now, the way the system works is more people can be 
served using the same number of hospital beds. That is . . . or 
the same number of people can be served with fewer beds. And 
over the period from 1991 to 1994, we’ve had a reduction of 
375,000 hospital days. And while at the same time the number 
of hospital bed days . . . that is, at the same time the number of 
surgeries has remained stable. Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s 
rather an amazing statistic, and that our health care-givers  
our doctors, our nurses, all of their assistants, and the 
administrators of the hospitals  really ought to be 
congratulated on that effort. It’s quite amazing, and it’s one of 
the things that’s going to help us save medicare. 
 
We know that the patterns of nursing home use are changing as 
well. And while these changes have all occurred, I want to 
emphasize that there is no indication whatsoever that the quality 
of health services has been affected. One of the ways to 
measure quality of health services is to see what happens in the 
case of readmission rates to hospitals. When somebody leaves 
the hospital, do they have to come back within a day or two or a 
week or two, because something has not healed properly? The 
statistics show, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial rates of  

readmission within 30 days of discharge have remained very, 
very steady. In 1991-92, 13.99  nearly 14 per cent of patients 
 were admitted to hospital again within 30 days of discharge; 
13.99 in ‘91-92. However in 1994-95, that has gone down 
slightly to 13.26 per cent. 
 
Now that statistic in itself, Mr. Speaker, decries any claim that 
anybody might have that the procedures that our doctors and 
our nurses are using in the hospital are not thorough and are not 
effective. 
 
Now what we’re finding is, in addition to what’s being done in 
these big centres, that actually in the community health centres 
the services that they have now are much better than the 
hospitals that they replaced. And I’ve been speaking to some 
people in places like Meath Park, Birch Hills. And I find that 
where they have changed the total nature of the services 
provided . . . and they’re quite pleased with what has happened, 
Mr. Speaker, because they have now the best of both worlds. 
They’ve still got access to the best technology in the bigger 
hospitals, and then they’ve got the first responders care and 
respite beds right in their own district. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a moment and give a couple 
more statistics about what’s happening in terms of patterns of 
usage, how people are . . . what people in Saskatchewan are 
doing when it comes to utilizing the health system. We know 
that more and more rural residents now work and shop outside 
their home communities, and in many cases, they leave their 
districts to do their shopping and their working. 
 
And we’re finding that they’re doing exactly the same thing 
when it comes to obtaining health services. There are seven 
districts that provide most of the province’s hospital services. 
These districts are Battlefords, East Central, Moose 
Jaw/Thunder Creek, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Swift Current. They only contain 61 per cent of the province’s 
population, but the stats show that they do 94 per cent of all 
surgery. And they do 77 per cent of all hospital in-patient and 
day surgery services, and they do 79 per cent of all deliveries of 
newborns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1994-95 there were 31 hospitals which 
admitted fewer than 10 people per day on the average and now 
. . . as compared to 25 in 1993-94. So these rapid trends 
continue to change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give you an indication of something 
that’s happening in my own home town with respect to this type 
of change. And I want to refer to the Prince Albert Health 
District report of February 1996, volume 5. And in here they 
talk about how nursing services have changed. They say that 
nursing services have increased from 5,000 in 1991-92 to a 
projected 15,000 in the current fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, if the 
health board was not given the autonomy to do that, these 
changes would not have come about. And if the funding 
formulas had not changed, these changes which are so 
important to people and people’s health needs would not have 
come about. This was a tripling of nursing care services. 
 
And they also say in this report that homemaking services have  



1282  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

increased by 40 per cent from almost 33,000 per year to 46,500 
per year. They have added $1.1 million to their home care 
budget to take care of these services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that if we had done nothing in 1991, we 
could have been spending $400 million a year more over the 
’95-96 budget than we are this year. If we had not acted to 
change the health system, the funding crisis would have 
continued, and the result would have been an erosion of 
universal medicare and a threat of a two-tiered privatized health 
system. 
 
There are those after all who are not unhappy to see a funding 
crisis in public medicare. For people like Ralph Klein, it fits 
right into their agenda. And as Ralph Nader has pointed out, the 
giant private health care industry in the United States would be 
happy to see the subversion of Canada’s universal medicare 
system in order to make way for profit medical services. Mr. 
Speaker, their argument goes something like this. Private clinics 
will take the pressure off the system. They won’t harm 
medicare; they’ll simply make more services available and keep 
specialists in Canada. 
 
So in Alberta, we have a company called Hotel de Health who 
is trying to make inroads into two towns in Alberta, the town of 
Galahad and the town Islay. They want to lease some hospitals 
for $160,000 a year, and then they want to sell procedures to 
Americans and Canadians, procedures including gall bladder 
surgery, stomach stapling, anything that people will pay money 
for on their own to jump the queue. Along with this, Mr. 
Speaker, it would bring in health insurance companies, 
American style. This would be just a simple foot in the door. 
And to that we say no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The truth is that private clinics cannot keep the overall costs of 
medicare down. When someone has private surgery, they pay a 
hefty fee over and above what medicare pays, so the overall 
costs go up. The costs go up to cover the profit in the system. 
And it follows that health services will be based on where the 
profit is and not where the need is. 
 
So the costs of the system will go up, and the needs of ordinary 
people will suffer. And it won’t be too long before the people 
who are paying more for private services just aren’t interested 
in maintaining a public, tax-based system. Mr. Speaker, the 
two-tiered health system is like a cruise ship with an upper and 
lower decks. The people on the upper deck can afford the fine 
dining-room, and they simply aren’t very much concerned about 
the quality of the fare in the cafeteria below. 
 
The truth is that privatization cannot save medicare. Saving 
medicare requires the kind of health renewal we have had in 
Saskatchewan. We have changed the system to make it better. 
We are putting in place health services based on the needs of 
people, and we are managing the system to get better value for 
health dollars. We are working to improve people’s health and 
keep them well, instead of just fixing them when they’re sick. 
And we’re preserving our publicly funded system of universal, 
accessible health services of the highest quality for everyone in 
this generation and the ones to come as we prepare for the 21st 
century. 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this time to give my thoughts on 
the current changes in our medicare system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy to 
stand in my place and speak against the motion moved by the 
member from Wood River. Mind you, considering the history 
of the Liberal Party and their lack of constructive support for 
medicare, I am not surprised to see this negative, regressive 
motion proposed by that member. 
 
After all, my oldest daughter was born in 1963, and I will never 
forget the antics of that party and of their leader, Ross Thatcher. 
Etched in the memories of my mind is Ross Thatcher, the then 
premier of this province, kicking at the door of the legislative 
buildings like a child. Also etched in the memories of my mind 
since 1963 was the KODs (Keep Our Doctors committee) and 
how the Liberal Party supported them. Also etched in the 
memories of my mind are the user fees that they put upon the 
people of this province when we were trying to get medicare 
going. 
 
We see in these present Liberals the same lack of cooperation in 
developing an effective  effective  efficient, preventive 
health system. Again they have to be dragged, kicking and 
screaming, into health renewal. They’re not interested in 
building a good health system. They’re interested in scoring 
cheap political points. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, of all the 1967 . . . 1966-67 health budget 
has been protected from full impact of the federal Liberal 
transfer reductions. There will continue to be changes and 
challenges due to the continued emphasis on community 
services as my colleague, the member from P.A. said, and the 
rural to urban migration pattern of people using the health 
services. 
 
The communications challenge is to reassure the public that the 
government is demonstrating its commitment to protect health 
services and that changes are a continuation of health renewal, 
which will take us towards the sustainable health system. And 
as my colleague was saying previously, that was our objective. 
Home and community-based service will continue to improve, 
and the location of hospitals will reflect the needs of rural and 
urban residents. 
 
Health renewal is working. People in Saskatchewan are among 
the healthiest people in the world. More illness prevention and 
support services are available at home and in the community, 
and more health services are being delivered now than ever 
before, without costing more. 
 
People told us health services are a priority. Medicare is a 
priority with people in Saskatchewan. We have reduced 
Saskatchewan health administration, reviewed all programs in 
order to protect health district funding from the cuts that we got 
from their Liberal cousins. And our overall funding will be 
protected, and health will remain in good repair. 



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all across Canada people are debating the 
future of our national medicare system. The debate results from 
several trends. Rapidly growing health costs have affected every 
province, not only Saskatchewan. And in Saskatchewan, for 
instance, our health budget nearly doubled between 1981 and 
1982. I think that’s worth repeating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 
health budget nearly doubled between 1981 and 1982. Ageing 
populations, changing health needs, and rapid technological 
change have created a consensus that the health system needs to 
adapt to new realities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask 
for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, some 
special people seated in the west gallery, and I’d ask them to 
stand when they’re introduced. From Swift Current and from 
REM Manufacturing  a well-known company in the 
south-western part of the province that manufactures grain vats 
which the Deputy Speaker, being a farmer, would be well aware 
of, and also spring tines for a number of harrow operations, as 
well as springs for some of our main air-seeders producers  is 
Frank Rempel from REM Manufacturing. Frank, if you would 
stand up, Leanne Rempel; and George Adair. George, if you’d 
stand up and be recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will want to join with me in 
welcoming representatives from REM Manufacturing to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6  Hospital Closures 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Stanger:  Just to go back, Mr. Speaker, so that we have 
some continuity in our thought . . . All across Canada, people 
are debating the future of our health and medicare system. That 
debate results from several trends, and these are facts not 
something that I made up in my mind. Rapidly growing health 
costs have affected every province. In Saskatchewan for 
instance, our health budget nearly doubled between 1981 and 
1991. Ageing population, changing health needs, and rapid 
technological change have created a consensus that the health 
system needed to adapt to new realities. 
 
There’s a growing recognition that health is more than just 
health care, a realization that our health depends much on jobs, 
on housing and supportive communities, as it does on the 
number of hospitals and doctors. A total shift in the mind set of 
people has to take place. 
 
And finally, health systems are facing financial pressures 
resulting from the need to eliminate government budget deficits  

and reduce public debt. And remember, this is a fact in no 
matter what province that you live in. 
 
Preserving medicare is the ultimate goal of the changes to 
Saskatchewan’s health system that we call health renewal. We 
think of it as health reform, a more familiar term which has 
been used to describe changes to health systems across the 
country, but I like to refer to changes in Saskatchewan as a 
health system renewal. In Saskatchewan our goal is not simply 
to reduce costs but to renew the health system and to make it 
affordable, sustainable, and appropriate for the next century. 
We are involved in a fundamental, structural renewal of the 
health system which is transferring the way services are 
delivered. 
 
And I would ask the members opposite to join with us to build 
one of the best health systems in the whole country of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Together we can work together to build a 
constructive, effective, efficient system that will serve our 
people well into the 21st century. Ultimately the issue is not 
how much we spend on health; the issue is how to spend our 
health dollars to provide the best results. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in December 1995, this government took 
some polls. Contrary to the members opposite, 80 per cent of 
the people of Saskatchewan that responded believed the current 
level of health services provided in Saskatchewan is good or 
excellent. It’s also particularly important to note that almost 
three-quarters, 74 per cent, of respondents rated the quality of 
health service they or their family have received over the past 
year as good or excellent. In other words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
three-quarters of respondents who actually used the system, 
actually used the system, were happy with the health services 
available to them. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I use the health 
system, when I use the hospital in Maidstone, I am proud that it 
was my father, my grandfather, and people before us that built 
this system, and we are going to sustain it despite the whining 
and the reduction . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Premier . . . despite the whining and snivelling of 
the members opposite and despite the cuts of the federal 
government. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After that dry 
speech, I’m a little thirsty. Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the 
members opposite bemoaning the fate of the federal 
government and how they continue to hurt the province and 
blame the province . . . or blame the federal government for 
their cuts in health care spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just wondering when this government will 
realize some of the benefits that they can get from the federal 
government, such as the announcement made this morning 
about the hospital in La Loche. And I’d like to, Mr. Speaker, if I 
could, quote from a newspaper clipping with the headline:  



1284  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

“Macklin big winner.” And in it, it states the town of Macklin is 
the big winner in a Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works 
announcement Thursday on health care spending. About $4.1 
million will be spent there to construct a new facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to talk about Vanguard where 
they’re going to spend $545,000 to expand and renovate the 
existing health centre which houses some long-term care 
residents. It also goes on to talk about Neilburg who will get an 
$808,000 health centre and one in Norquay that will get a 
$600,000 upgrade. A lot of these projects, Mr. Speaker. are 
funded by federal funding. 
 
We also go on, Mr. Speaker. We talk about 58 million in total 
from the Government of Canada under the Canada 
infrastructure works program. Mr. Speaker, that’s $58 million 
 $58 million, Mr. Speaker, from the Government of Canada 
under the Canada infrastructure works program. The program 
has triggered investments totalling more than $270 million 
through 1,183 local projects, and generating some jobs for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We can go on and on, Mr. Speaker, about the money that the 
federal government has pumped into Saskatchewan to bolster 
up this government, to bolster up this government when they’re 
not doing their job for the province. I talk about $125 million in 
the heavy oil upgrader, so the federals’ funding goes on and on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If I go back to the start of health reform, Mr. Speaker, of which 
I was involved a bit in the local community and through the 
province, we talk about the way health reform was started in 
this province. Mr. Speaker, we go back to health reform at its 
outset, under the guise of the wellness model, Mr. Speaker, and 
how the process was started, so that we can arrive at today’s 
scenarios that we’re at, where the health care system in 
Saskatchewan is just about at the verge of collapse. 
 
We went back . . . and when this government started its 
wellness model, they went about it by splitting the sectors into 
three groups so that they couldn’t get agreeance on any 
particular issue. And of course when you have long-term care 
and acute care and the home care sector all competing for 
dollars and for turf, it fit right into this government’s health 
reform policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it went so far as to split communities, as they tried 
to fit into the picture, into districts, so that they didn’t have to 
lose any services for their community, which is very 
understandable and certainly not the way that the health reform 
should have come about. 
 
As the member from Wood River stated  it seems like hours 
ago  that the small communities in Saskatchewan don’t have 
the luxury of having two or three facilities in their communities, 
and therefore services are being provided out of one facility. 
 
For years and years, we have not done what is, under I guess the 
strict definition of acute care, done that in rural Saskatchewan, 
but we’ve provided the services for the people in the province 
in a small community and to meet their  

demanding needs. 
 
What has happened since then with some of the closures to 
some of these small facilities  and I can quote from headline 
after headline: “Hospital closures”, “Moratoriums”, “Acute care 
beds close”, “Long-term care next to hit the axe.” I could go on 
and on, Mr. Speaker, but I won’t. 
 
The point is that these small facilities that we had in rural 
Saskatchewan provided a very valuable service and continue to 
do so, as long as we can keep this government’s budget axe 
away from them. 
 
Again, as the member from Wood River mentioned, Mr. 
Speaker, only tonight there’s a issue on the eastern side of the 
province where a town is fighting to keep its home open. Yes, 
and I’ll just quote from an article in the Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker, of April 30: 
 

“From our perspective, it isn’t doable  the district can’t 
afford to continue to operate the home,” Pederson said. 
“We’re not blaming anyone, but difficult choices had to be 
made.” 
 

Currently what we have here is an example of where the 
provincial government is lacking in its duty of providing 
necessary funding to the districts so that they can meet the 
needs of their community. This is one example. The member 
from Wood River gave many, many; I’ll just give the one. 
 
(1645) 
 
The problem that we have is one of petty politics, Mr. Speaker, 
as pointed out by Murray Mandryk on Wednesday, April 24 
when the opposition questioned the Health minister on many 
serious issues such as waiting-lists, closures, and all those types 
of things. 
 
The minister has continually shrugged it off, almost laughed at 
the people of the province and blamed the federal government 
for everything. Finally, as we suspected, it caught up with him, 
and the media and the people of the province . . . and I’ll just 
quote from Mr. Mandryk’s column: 
 

There again, petty politics is the one thing Cline does seem 
to have a healthy working knowledge of, which is about 
where his problems begin. 

 
But the minister’s short tenure has brought about a 
politicization of . . . (inaudible) . . . level we haven’t seen . . . 
Tory days, Mr. Speaker. The Health minister finally realized 
this week in the House that he cannot continue those antics and 
actually tried to answer a question on Monday. 
 
As our small facilities try and survive, Mr. Speaker, we also 
have what we have called in this province the Health Services 
Utilization Research Commission, called HSURC, who have 
been doing some studies on long-term care, acute care, and 
some other issues. They did a study on long-term care some two 
years ago and when questioned on the study, we found out that 
the survey that they had done was very small and only  



April 30, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

included a small portion of the province. 
 
When they talk about our small communities not utilizing their 
facilities for what they were for, they’re absolutely right. 
Because as I stated earlier, that our health facilities, which were 
formerly called integrated facilities, provided many services to 
the people of the province. It provided acute care  what we 
formerly called acute care. They provided long-term care, Mr. 
Speaker. They provided lab and X-ray. 
 
They also provided some respite beds, as the member from 
Prince Albert talked about being relatively new, but it’s not. It’s 
something we’ve had to use in rural Saskatchewan for years, 
and it’s been a valuable tool in relieving the stress from our 
families when they have loved ones that need extra care. 
 
We also provided many out-patient services, Mr. Speaker, and 
continue to do so. 
 
So when the HSURC Commission stated that these small 
hospitals are integrated facilities and not doing their role 
because we were doing many, many things, they were right. 
Except the problem is, is that’s exactly what we need in rural 
Saskatchewan and should be striving to reach that and create 
more of them instead of closing them down. 
 
As I said, together with these multifaceted agencies that we had, 
Mr. Speaker  certainly met the needs of the community and 
continue to do so  and we need to work toward creating more 
of them and not less. 
 
I talked about the long-term care being a problem and where the 
next, as the members opposite talk about, the next phase of 
health care . . . and I’m a little worried about what’s going to 
happen to long-term care beds in the province, in particular to 
our small facilities out there, such as the one that we’re talking 
about tonight in Kamsack which is under the axe. 
 
To quote from the Leader-Post, back in the winter, where Bill 
Doskoch speaks of long-term care . . . and in this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a chart that shows the decrease of long-term 
and acute care beds since 1991-1992. We’re in 1994-95; we’re 
down to 9,743 long-term care beds, and we’re down to 3,383 
acute care beds, Mr. Speaker, from 10,141 and 4,671 in 
1991-92. 
 
Mr. Doskoch goes on to say: 
 

‘Long-term care will be the next hot spot in health 
reform,’ predicts the chairman of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations or SAHO (Mr. 
Speaker).  

 
The chairman of SAHO goes on to say they haven’t the money 
they need to break some new ideas. So here you have the 
former chairman of SAHO stating that some new initiatives, 
some new ideas, some new programs to meet the changing 
needs, moving into the new century, they don’t have the money 
for. And this government isn’t prepared to fund them, it 
appears. 
 

The article goes on to say: 
 

Susan Wagner, a University of Saskatchewan nursing 
professor (and chairman of the Saskatoon Health District 
Board, by the way) agreed with McPherson that shrinking 
funding is going to force districts to eliminate nursing 
home beds. 

 
Now here’s the chairman of the Saskatoon Health Board talking 
that we’re going to have to close beds in the small communities 
strictly because of funding, has nothing to do with the needs of 
the community or needs of the people, Mr. Speaker. It’s all on 
funding. 
 
She goes on to say it will likely lead to the closing of whole 
facilities because so many districts have small homes with 10 or 
15 beds that are uneconomical to operate. Economics seems to 
be the driving force . . . Well it is the driving force of this 
government’s health reform, Mr. Speaker. And the needs of the 
community and the needs of the people, the needs of the people 
in the rural areas, are not being met. They’re not even being 
considered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would hope that I would have a few more minutes here, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll try and be brief as I can to allow some of the other 
members opposite to talk about health if they can. 
 
We go on to talk about health care was top worry. Another 
Leader-Post article from January, Mr. Speaker. Another 
Doskoch article where he goes on to say: 
 

Anxiety about health care in Saskatchewan reached a 
higher point in September than any other point in recent 
polling history.” 

 
Now the member opposite from the North talked about what 
their polls show and how people are so happy with health and 
health services, Mr. Speaker, that I’m just wondering what 
survey she was quoting from because it seems to be quite a 
variance, quite a variance in opinions on the surveys, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
As I said, when the government started the health reform and 
the wellness model, they split the sectors, they split the 
communities as they were trying to fit into the system. And in 
fact I understand, as I read through Hansard, the Minister of 
Agriculture, who’s now from Watrous, stated in his maiden 
speech that small hospitals, small health centres, should have 
even more services, should have more power and more money 
to do some of the things that they need to do in small 
communities. I wonder where the minister was when the 
cabinet made the decision on health reform in this province. 
 
As we’re seeing the dollars for health being segregated to 
long-term care, and acute care, and home care, and the districts 
not being able to shift money from the institutional side to the 
home-based services, is creating many problems for a lot of the 
districts where they’re trying to meet the needs of their people. 
 
They also based it on everything being done in the home. Home 
care, as we all know, home care is a wonderful thing if we can  



1286  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1996 

keep, especially our elderly, and, Mr. Speaker, in the homes as 
long as we can. We all want to see that happen. And that’s most 
appropriate. Unfortunately it’s very costly to keep people in 
their own homes in rural Saskatchewan. It’s miles and miles 
apart, Mr. Speaker, from health workers to these homes, and it’s 
very costly. 
 
Now this government based the health reform model on . . . 
based health reform . . . their wellness model on . . . based their 
reform on home-based services, Mr. Speaker, and continue to 
try and strive toward that. Unfortunately it was an unproven 
area and it still hasn’t been proven that that’s the most 
cost-effective way to provide services, let alone being able to 
afford to provide those services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to quote again from the Leader-Post on February 24, 
and if I can, this is the report from the former president of the 
SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association). 
 

“People get sick,” Dr. Roberta McKay, president of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, said sardonically. 

 
That’s one of the problems that we have, Mr. Speaker, is that 
people do continue to get sick whether the beds are there or not 
and whether this government thinks everybody can be treated in 
their home. Mr. Speaker, they can’t be  they can’t be treated 
in their home, Mr. Speaker. They need the beds. And as our 
population ages and ages and ages, we’re going to find the need 
for some of these long-term-care beds even more important. 
 
The former president of the SMA goes on to say when talking 
about the district process and the health reform, Mr. Speaker, 
and in evaluating it, which the start of health reform there were 
no yardsticks put up, Mr. Speaker, and so we don’t have 
anything to relate that to from ’92 until the present time. 
 
Unfortunately, Dr. McKay goes on to say: 
 

It begs the following question: Wasn’t it a bit bold to stake 
a major part of health reform on something that no one is 
sure works better than the old way? 

 
Absolutely, that’s the problem. 
 
She goes on to say: 
 

“That’s what we’ve been saying, that this is a massive 
social experiment (with people’s lives and) with no 
evidence (that) it will work or be less expensive,” . . . 

 
Just as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that there is no proof that it 
will work. We’re seeing in fact that it isn’t working. We’re 
seeing it’s costing us more because we’re having to close down 
beds; we’re having to reduce services in particular rural 
Saskatchewan, and it’s causing all sorts of problems for our 
rural people. 
 
One other point, Mr. Speaker, before I close, is we talk about 
the stress line that we have in Saskatchewan. The calls are up. 
People talk about having a happy . . . talk about a happy 
farming climate. 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to this Assembly that things aren’t so 
rosy in agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. That there are many, 
many problems out there and we’re going to continue to see 
more of them as we move into the next two or three years when 
some of the farm foreclosures come to fruition as we see some 
of the lenders of last resort moving out of the province such as 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) . . . 
will create further hardship for many of these farm families, and 
without a health system to support them, it can only get worse 
and be detrimental to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to support the motion put forward by 
the member from Wood River. There’s been many good points 
made on his behalf, through him and through some of the other 
speakers on this side of the House, and with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
will sit down. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seeing as it’s now 
5 o’clock, I ask that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1255 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1255 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Trew ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
Whitmore ..................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1264 
 Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1283 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
NATO Delegation  

Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
Regina Economic Development Authority Launches Web Site  

Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
Recognition of Heroic Actions in Blizzard  

McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
Student Internship Program at Estevan Comprehensive High School  

Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre Closure  

Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
La Ronge Health Centre’s Official Opening  

Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
Cypress Hills Regional College Graduation Exercises  

Wall ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre Closure  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 

Changes to Security Guard Legislation  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 

Future of Eaglestone Lodge  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1260 

SaskTel Tentative Agreement  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1261 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................1261 

Workers’ Compensation Board  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
Anguish ...........................................................................................................................................................................1262, 1263 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1263 

Unfunded Pension Liabilities  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1263 

 
 



 

ROYAL ASSENT  
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 78An Act to enable Northern Municipalities to Name Airports within their boundaries  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1264 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1265 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE  
Partnership for Growth  

Thomson ..........................................................................................................................................................................1265, 1274 
Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
Osika ................................................................................................................................................................................1269, 1275 
Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
Gantefoer ........................................................................................................................................................................1271, 1275 
Belanger ..........................................................................................................................................................................1273, 1275 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1276 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS  
Motion No. 6  Hospital Closures  

McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1276 
Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................1278 
Stanger ......................................................................................................................................................................................1282 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1283 

 


