













































March 8, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 163 

 March 8, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

once again on behalf of responsible firearms owners. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to challenge Bill C-68 in court, 

refuse to allow the federal government to take over 

enforcement in Saskatchewan, and not allow the 

implementation of Bill C-68 in Saskatchewan while the 

Bill is being challenged in court. 

 

And the names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Lemberg, 

Ituna, Kelliher, Norquay, Neudorf, Churchbridge, Willowbrook, 

Esterhazy, virtually all over east-central and central 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

from all throughout Saskatchewan: Melville, Willow Bunch, 

Assiniboia, a number from the riding of Wood River, Canora, 

Lemberg; and I see that there are some, Mr. Speaker, from 

Regina Elphinstone constituency and Regina Albert South, of 

course, because they would like to have their members deal 

with these also. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

various communities: Yorkton, Regina, Meadow Lake  from 

all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 

present to the Assembly today. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

The people that signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Balcarres, Lebret, Regina, Goodeve, and throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily 

from Guernsey, but also Lanigan, Humboldt, Nokomis, and 

others. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Leroy, Lanigan, and Watrous area of the province. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina. 

They’re from Balcarres, from Simpson, from Lipton, Fort 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too to present 

petitions of many, many, many names of people, regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, once again, 

are from all over Saskatchewan; many, many of them from 

Regina, Estevan, Alameda  all over the province. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 



164  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Estevan, Lampman, Frobisher, Bienfait. And I’ll table these. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

petitions today dealing with SaskPower, and I’ll just quickly 

read the prayer for you: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until an 

all-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Broadview, all of 

them from the Broadview area of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to 

present on their behalf. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions to present today. The pray reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the people of 

Carievale, Unity, and Blaine Lake, across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions to 

present to the Assembly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I am presenting have been 

signed by individuals from Dysart, Kelliher, Lestock, Regina, 

Yorkton, Ituna, Wishart, and many other communities in this 

province. I so present them. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 

petitions relating to SaskPower, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these all come from Rocanville. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 

morning to present petitions on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to revise the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party review committee is in place in order to debate, 

review, and revise any utility rate increases in the future in 

order to restore fairness to the utility rate process in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These all come from the beautiful town of Unity, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: . According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

challenge Bill C-68 in court; and 

 

The citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

repeal the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 12, ask the government the following 

questions. To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: 

 

Firstly, regarding the fuel tax: what percentage of the 

projected revenue generated from the fuel tax for the fiscal 

year 1995-96 will be used for the construction, upkeep, 

and maintenance of the province’s highways? 

 

Secondly, regarding the total projected expenditures on 

provincial highway construction, upkeep, and maintenance 

programs for fiscal ‘95-96: what percentage of the total is 

projected to be spent on projects that are in the northern  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

part of the province, which we shall define as being north 

of the 54th parallel. 

 

And thirdly: what is the present status of the benefit/cost 

analysis priority ranking of provincial highway upgrading 

projects, commonly known as the BCA (benefit cost 

analysis) project ranking, which ranks the priority which 

his department assigns to upgrading projects for highways 

across the province; and ask if he will table a copy of the 

most recent BCA project ranking. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question. 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower: (1) How much 

has SaskPower collected in additional revenue from 

Saskatchewan home-owners since the 12 per cent rate 

increase took effect January 1, 1996; (2) how much has 

SaskPower collected in additional revenue from 

Saskatchewan farm customers since the almost 13 per cent 

increase took place in effect January 1, 1996; (3) what is 

the total amount of additional revenues collected from 

SaskPower rate increases since January 1, 1992, to date? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask 

the government the following question regarding SaskPower 

Commercial: 

 

(1) What investments have been made by this company 

both inside and outside the province; (2) what projects 

have been undertaken by this company both inside and 

outside the province; (3) with regards to these projects and 

investments, which have received financing or investment 

from additional sources besides the company itself, and 

what are the names of these sources; (4) could you provide 

details of the amounts invested in SaskPower Commercial 

projects by outside sources; (5) could you provide details 

of additional investments in SaskPower Commercial 

projects made by other government departments, agencies, 

or Crown corporations. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly a member of Regina City Council who is seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vic McDougall, who is 

accompanied today by his wife, Dawn, and a friend, Tom. And 

unfortunately I wasn’t able to hear the last name, but he assures 

me he’s only related to Vic through Adam. I’d ask them to rise 

and be acknowledged, and ask members to join in welcoming 

them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure as 

well to add my greeting to Dawn and Victor McDougall who 

also are from the Elphinstone riding. But more importantly I 

think, all members will be interested to know that they are also 

the mother and father of our page, Leasa McDougall, who is  

present here in the Assembly. 

 

Tom Shkwarek, I believe the name is, also with them, a friend. 

Welcome to the Assembly and I look forward to seeing and 

working with you in the levels of endeavour that you’re 

involved in. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

always gratifying to have young people to introduce in this 

Assembly and it’s particularly so today to have in your gallery 

seven young women who are here to visit. And it’s particularly 

wonderful to have them here on International Women’s Day. 

 

Now I know that they’re planning a tour of the building later 

on, and if I have a moment to meet with them, I look forward to 

doing that. I’m delighted to see them here, thank them for their 

interest, and I’m going to introduce them and ask them to stand. 

 

They are Ana Maria Fuentes, Ella McIntyre, Michelle Sanchez, 

RaeLynn Strand, Tenille Thompson, Mariel Cabrera, and 

Barbara Cabrera. I will ask all members to give them a warm 

welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure 

today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly my very good friend seated in the west 

gallery  Fred Kress. 

 

Fred worked with me for three years and once we got it sorted 

out  Fred was my constituency assistant who’s recently 

moved on  once we got it sorted out where if it was good 

stuff done it was my responsibility and if there was an error it 

was Fred’s, once we got that sorted out, we got along just great. 

 

Anyway, I ask all members to join me in welcoming my good 

friend, Fred Kress. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise to introduce to you 

and through you, Councillor McDougall. A large part of his 

ward for which he’s responsible is in my area of Regina 

Sherwood, and I recognize his wife Dawn and Tom Shkwarek, 

if I’m not mistaken, because Tom and Vic and I served together 

years ago on the planning committee for the North West Arena 

in Regina, and I just want to acknowledge their presence here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise today in recognition of this very important day 

which is Women’s Day. Elizabeth Kady Stanton was born in  



166  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Jamestown, New York, in 1815 and isn’t too well known in our 

time, but few women have had a greater influence on women’s 

issues. 

 

She was one of the earliest feminist leaders and author of the 

historic declaration of settlements at the first women’s rights 

convention in 1848 and also spearheaded the successful efforts 

to give women in New York State joint guardianship of their 

children, the right to own property, and the right to sue in court. 

 

Just listing the rights she did so much to win is an indication of 

how bad things were for women before she came along. 

Unfortunately she did not live long enough to see women win 

the right to vote, but on days such as International Women’s 

Day she deserves to be saluted for the way she fought for 

equality and justice. 

 

Several years later in 1869, the territory of Wyoming became 

the first government virtually anywhere to adopt women’s 

suffrage and give women the right to vote. Wyoming, Mr. 

Speaker, was considered way out west, Mr. Speaker, where the 

men were men  yet they were half a century ahead of the rest 

of the world in rights for women. That was well over a hundred 

years ago, and although women have made great strides over 

the past century there are still much more to be done — 

problems such as equal work for equal pay. And we are also 

quite well aware of the physical abuse of women and children 

that need to be corrected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it certainly is a pleasure to stand in this Assembly 

today in recognition of International Women’s Day. I would 

like to congratulate all of the men and women who have 

worked diligently over the many years to address the needs of 

women, to strive for equality and fairness, and in the end to 

make the world a better place to live. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, today is International Women’s 

Day, formally proclaimed by the United Nations in 1975. This 

is the day set aside for people around the world to 

commemorate the struggle of women and to celebrate our 

achievements. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after 21 years of commemoration, perhaps 

this would be a good time to take a moment to clarify our terms. 

This is so the member for Moosomin will clearly understand 

women’s roles. 

 

Today we do not celebrate how far we’ve come away from our 

traditional and biological role  far from it. We have gained 

confidence in our feminine identity. Rather today we celebrate 

how far we’ve come in addition to our traditional place as 

protectors and nurturers. And as the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley said last year, great progress has been made 

in the 66 years since we were legally declared persons in 

Canada, which in turn reminds us that much remains to be 

done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to celebrate by thanking the 

women that have gone before us: women legislators, women  

farmers, women professionals, and women that are our mothers, 

grandmothers, sisters, and friends. They have our undying 

gratitude and respect. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mary Batten 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of today’s 

celebrations for International Women’s Day, I would like to call 

the members’ attention to the remarkable accomplishments of 

one of the first women of this Assembly. 

 

Forty years ago, in 1956, Mary John Batten was the first woman 

elected as a member of the Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Humboldt. She was already an established 

lawyer and soon brought her own sense of style and grit to this 

Assembly. In one of her maiden debates in this Assembly, 

Batten told the Speaker of the day: Mr. Speaker, my people in 

Humboldt are not too impressed with the standard of debate in 

this House. My people feel that wit is not a good substitute for 

wisdom. They do not feel that to be clever is necessarily to be 

wise. 

 

Mary Batten was an hon. member of this Assembly from 1956 

to 1964. She was then appointed as a District Court judge in 

Saskatoon, and she was eventually named as the Chief Justice 

of the Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan in 1983. She 

served on a wide range of provincial committees and was 

always the champion of justice for all. 

 

I rise today to commemorate Mary John Batten, one of 

Saskatchewan’s finest women. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Souris Valley Child Care Corporation 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On International 

Women’s Day, I also want to speak on an important event that 

happened in my constituency. And there have been many 

comments in the Assembly about cooperation and partnership. I 

want to point out another example of how people and 

organizations work together to improve the quality of life and 

provide necessary services to the community. 

 

I was happy to attend the official opening this week of the 

Souris Valley Child Care Corporation, the first 24-hour day 

care centre in Weyburn. The centre, a non-profit corporation, is 

situated in a previously unused space at the Souris Valley 

Regional Care Centre and has 41 child care spaces. Mr. 

Speaker, it would be nice if we all could work from eight to five 

and then go home. But the reality of the modern work week is 

that many people work night shifts, split shifts, or both, and 

these people need child care as much or more than other 

parents. This day care will also offer very flexible arrangements 

for farm families as well. 

 

The genesis and development of this project is the 

responsibility of many people and organizations: Sara Irwin of 

the Souris Valley Centre, who recognized her staff’s need for a  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

safe place for working parents to bring their children; the 

volunteers who sit on the day care board; the city of Weyburn; 

the Department of Social Services; SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation); the board of the South 

Central Health District; Salvation Army; Wesley United 

Church; and many more local businesses and individuals. 

 

Under the direction of director Terri Stocker, the child care 

centre will employ 6 full-time and 6 casual workers. 

 

We have jobs, we have cooperation, we have affordable, quality 

day care for the families, the children, and the community of 

Weyburn and area. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in 

Saskatchewan and around the globe we acknowledge 

International Women’s Day, a time to commemorate the 

struggles and applaud the achievements of women in attaining a 

more fair and equitable place in society. 

 

Although our province, our nation, and our planet have come a 

long way in addressing this issue over the past century, much 

work remains to be done by both women and men regarding 

gender equality. This is a cause to which the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Party is committed. 

 

As we sit today in the Assembly, I am very proud of the fact 

that the first woman ever elected to the Saskatchewan 

legislature was chosen by the citizens of the old Pelly 

constituency, part of which is now included in the Canora-Pelly 

riding that I represent. On July 29, 1919, Sarah K. Ramsland 

entered the history books in the province when she became an 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly join 

me in paying tribute to the accomplishments of this pioneer in 

the movement for equality in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farmer of the Year Award Presented 

 

Mr. Ward:  Mr. Speaker, there was a special award 

presentation yesterday in Estevan to recognize the contributions 

of a farmer from my area. The Hon. Minister of Economic 

Development was on hand to present the Farmer of the Year 

award to Ernest Tedford. The presentation took place during 

Estevan Farmers’ Day, which was organized by the Estevan 

Chamber of Commerce and the Estevan Agricultural Society, a 

perfect example of urban-rural cooperation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The purpose of this award is to recognize excellence in farming 

achievement by considering the contributions to agriculture and 

to community life. When I look at Ernest Tedford’s 

background, it is easy to see that he has made a significant 

contribution to all of these areas and more. 

 

He was born and raised on his father’s farm and has farmed all 

of his life. Today the Tedford farm is 3,200 acres and their 

cattle operation consists of 250 head of pure-bred cattle. They 

have sold breeding stock to nine provinces in Canada, six U.S. 

(United States) states, as well as Australia, England, Brazil, and 

Columbia, putting Saskatchewan on the world map, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tedford’s other achievements are too many to mention, but 

I would like these members here and my constituents to 

congratulate Mr. Ernest Tedford and his family for the 

contribution to the agricultural industry and to our community. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Housing 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

commend the residents of Cumberland House on the new 

housing program  11 families built their own new homes in 

Cumberland House under the remote housing program. While 

this is a progressive program, much more needs to be done. 

 

The people of northern Saskatchewan are still facing incredible 

difficulties when it comes to housing, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

estimated that there’s a shortage of 600 housing units. This is 

putting a tremendous strain on housing that already does exist 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

To compensate for the shortage, hundreds of northern families 

are crowded into existing homes, many of them which are built 

with substandard materials. So the problem grows worse. 

 

While I commend the families at Cumberland House, I would 

like to say that more of these types of self-help programs are 

direly needed to help the thousands of others currently living in 

substandard housing in northern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Lights Casino Opens in Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  This week in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, 

there are 120 people with jobs who one week ago were among 

the unemployed. This week, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

significant business opening in Prince Albert, one that involves 

a partnership and collaboration between the city of Prince 

Albert, the Prince Albert exhibition society, the provincial 

government, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, and the 

Prince Albert Grand Council. 

 

Those 120 jobs, Mr. Speaker, came with the opening of the 

Northern Lights Casino; 85 per cent of those jobs, Mr. Speaker, 

are filled by first nations employees, and with the 120 jobs 

comes an annual payroll of more than $2.5 million to boost the 

Prince Albert economy. The spin-off benefits will help our 

community through the multiplier effect which the member 

from Weyburn mentioned yesterday. 

 

At the opening, our mayor Don Cody of Prince Albert  



168  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

emphasized that this business is a positive step towards 

economic development. It is also a positive bridge to the racial 

divide which exists in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that this partnership was forged 

with . . . which will help us confront the racial issue. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to congratulate Chief Blaine Flavel, Chief 

Alphonse Bird of the P.A. (Prince Albert) Grand Council, 

Mayor Don Cody, and the minister of Gaming, who have all 

brought this project to completion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

School Board Amalgamation 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is again to the Minister of Education. She is out 

floating trial balloons asking school boards to pick a buddy to 

amalgamate with. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is not kindergarten 

and the buddy system is too simple. 

 

I would hope the Minister of Education is willing to understand 

that school board amalgamation is a very complex issue which 

requires strong leadership. Trustees, teachers, parents, and 

communities are looking to the minister for that leadership. And 

to sit back and say pick a buddy just doesn’t cut it. These 

affected parties want leadership, but they must be allowed to be 

very active in the consultation process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is: will the minister commit to 

consulting with teachers, trustees, parents, and communities 

before she even considers school board amalgamation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

that very important question. The Minister of Education is, as 

the member has observed, out going to various communities 

discussing some options with respect to the K to 12 system and 

the regional college system. And these must be regarded as very 

preliminary consultations to sort of obtain the preliminary views 

of people involved. And I understand these meetings are being 

attended by school trustees and municipal leaders and interested 

people. 

 

That will, in due course, lead to a more formal consultation 

process, probably based upon some documents that set out 

options or alternatives that the minister is hearing about as she 

goes about her consultations now. 

 

But I can say to the member that this process, we’re aware, this 

process will require extensive consultation and great sensitivity 

and a lot of work. And we fully intend that that will happen, 

and at the end of the day we will have a system that everyone is 

relatively satisfied with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, trustees and teachers, directors  

of educations and secretary-treasurers are anxiously awaiting a 

firm direction from the minister. School boards may be entering 

into agreements with school bus operators, financial 

institutions, and many other service providers for two- or 

three-year contracts. These stakeholders are forced to rely 

heavily on government decisions. These stakeholders are forced 

to sit back on pins and needles and wait for the minister to 

provide some leadership. One day she alludes to forced 

amalgamation. The next day she says she will consult with 

affected parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister. Does she have a set 

of criteria that she intends to use as guidelines for 

amalgamation, and if so, will she table that criteria today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the minister and the 

government are trying to deal with this important matter in a 

sensitive a way as possible, and we have not seen that as being 

that the government would provide the kind of firm direction 

the member seems to be referring to. We don’t want this to be 

purely a top-down exercise. I don’t think it should. It should be 

as much as possible a bottom-up exercise, and that’s what the 

minister’s out there trying to do now. 

 

We believe that some leadership is going to be required in this 

situation, but I don’t know whether we would go as far as the 

member’s question seems to be implying. Perhaps, if necessary 

at the end of the day, some kind of a leadership role like the 

member is suggesting may be necessary, but at the present time, 

we think that there are a lot of people out there with a great 

interest: trustees, parents, teachers, a lot of other people who 

have to be heard on this. And out of all those consultations will 

hopefully come a solution that we can all live with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Education has on occasion indicated that September 1, 1996 

was the deadline for school boards to submit a proposal for 

amalgamation. After that date the minister may decide on 

amalgamation for all the boards regardless of their input. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Education said in this Assembly on 

April 25, 1991 when in opposition, and I quote: 

 

. . . how on earth can you say to the public of this province 

that education is a priority of your government when we 

see massive school closures in rural Saskatchewan, 

massive teacher lay-offs in rural Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is leading the people of 

Saskatchewan down the road to school closure and teacher 

lay-offs. The one which resulted . . . Mr. Speaker, I am asking 

the minister if the health map, the one which resulted in 

massive hospital closures and lay-offs of health care 

professionals, is going to be the one used for school divisions, 

as unknown government criteria will mean that school board 

initiatives will be a waste of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it is certainly not the 

government that will be determining whether there should be 

any school closures or what action should be taken at the level 

of the school division. 

 

The member himself has said on at least one occasion, if not 

many occasions, that school closures are inevitable. I take the 

member’s point. I think that that will happen. The member says 

as a result of enrolment; I think that will happen. But we’re not 

about to start directing that. 

 

What we’re trying to do is to provide leadership, as the member 

has suggested, in a public consultation where everyone will be 

heard and where we will try to arrive at the best quality K to 12 

education system that we’re capable of sustaining in this 

province. We all have an interest in that. I do, the member does, 

the citizens of this province do. We want this to come out the 

best we can for our kids. 

 

That requires a lot of cooperation, a great deal of discussion, a 

lot of exchange of ideas, and a resolution to the problem within 

a fairly tight time frame because of some of the matters that the 

member has mentioned in his questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Fuel Tax Rebate 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, today has been designated 

International Women’s Day, and as the minister responsible for 

Agriculture knows, women work as equals on many of the 

Saskatchewan farms. Not only do they help on the day-to-day 

management of the farms, but oftentimes women are 

shareholders in the farms and do at least 50 per cent of the work 

required to keep a family farm viable. 

 

The treatment of women, and specifically married women, 

under the farm fuel tax rebate program is anything but fair and 

equal. In order to be eligible for a rebate under this program, an 

individual must control and be responsible for a farm, the 

individual must own or lease his or her own land, an individual 

must contribute to the growth of the farm, and the individual 

must hold a permit book issued by the Canadian Wheat Board 

or raise farm products generating an annual gross revenue of at 

least $10,000. 

 

Under this program, if two farmers live under the same roof and 

fulfil the qualifications, they each are eligible for a rebate. They 

could be a father and son, brothers, or sister and brother. The 

only exception is married couples or common law couples. 

 

My question is: will the minister responsible for Agriculture 

stand up and admit the farm fuel tax rebate program is 

discriminatory, and will he assure all women of this province, 

rural and urban, that he will eliminate these exceptions for 

married couples? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I thank the member opposite for the 

question. We’re currently looking at this issue with the Human  

Rights Commission. What I would say to the member opposite 

is that the people, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, provide to 

farmers more than $100 million in tax exemptions for fuel of 

various kinds. And we base one of the exemptions on family 

income. 

 

And I would remind the member opposite that my counterpart 

in Ottawa, Mr. Martin, just a few days ago announced that 

family income will also be the basis for making decisions about 

pensions in Canada. So there are many governments across 

Canada that say the most fair way to deal with taxpayer money 

going to a particular group of people is to look at the income of 

the whole family. She may want to raise this concern with Mr. 

Martin in Ottawa. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government has time and time again ignored the plight of 

women in this province as well as the plight of small business. 

It ignores an issue as blatant as farm fuel tax rebate programs 

and the discrimination against women. 

 

My question to this minister is, if a married woman meets all 

the qualifications of owning or leasing land, contributing to the 

growth of the farm, and holds a valid permit book, why is she 

not eligible for the farm fuel tax rebate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, what I would say is this. I would say, first of all, we 

are working with the Human Rights Commission to see if there 

is a problem here. But I would also say that it is a fundamental 

principle of many governments, including her counterparts in 

Ottawa, to look at family income when determining taxpayer 

benefits to a particular group of people. There is a fairness to 

looking at the income, the status, of the whole family, rather 

than just one member of the family. 

 

So it’s not a principle exclusive to this government. What this 

government is committed to is to using taxpayers’ money as 

fairly as possible and we will continue to apply that principle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. 

Minister, the latest report card on your government’s job 

strategy is out and once again you get a big, fat F. From 

February ’95 to February of ’96, Saskatchewan has lost 4,000 

jobs. That means for the first two months of ’96 Saskatchewan 

is averaging 4,500 less jobs, not the 4,000 new jobs you’ve 

been predicting. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit today that you are not going to 

reach your target of 4,000 new jobs this year? Will you admit 

that your job strategy is failing and start taking some action to 

get these dismal job figures turned around? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



170  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I know the member 

expects quick turnaround but the job strategy was announced 

last week and of course these numbers are for the first two 

months of ’96. But seriously, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 

strategy Partnership for Renewal which was announced in 1992 

led . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well you can say it’s failed, 

but you’re doing a grave disservice to those business people and 

the people who have created 10,000 jobs since Partnership for 

Renewal was announced. 

 

Now you may want to look at the statistics and see where the 

job numbers have actually gone up 1,000 jobs since January to 

February. You can take your negative side all you want, preach 

gloom and doom, attack Crown Life, attack Husky Oil, attack 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and create an atmosphere that’s 

negative for job creation. Or you can join the thousands of 

business people, hundreds of them who came out to meetings to 

plan the strategy Partnership for Growth, planning for the next 

century, or you can continue to bury your head in the sand and 

think of those good old days of give her snoose in the Devine 

government, loss of thousands of people from this province. 

The population continues to grow with the support of the 

business community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you’ve 

announced job numbers time after time. Your Partnership for 

Renewal talked about 30,000 jobs. The next year it was 16,000. 

Now it’s just down to 4,000 jobs. 

 

Over the last few weeks, Mr. Minister, we’ve seen hundreds of 

Saskatchewan people lose their jobs. At Crop Insurance, at the 

newspapers here in Saskatchewan, at Agrifoods International. 

These people need some hope that other jobs are there to go for. 

There are no new jobs being created in Saskatchewan presently. 

 

Mr. Minister, since you introduced your Partnership for 

Renewal, Saskatchewan has created about 3,000 jobs since 

1992. In Alberta there’s been 110,000 jobs created in that same 

time frame. Your economic strategy is creating jobs. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, it’s in Alberta is where they’re 

being created. And that’s probably where many of the displaced 

people in the last few weeks will be having to go. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to admit that your economic 

strategy is failing and failing miserably? Why don’t you take a 

lesson from Alberta and develop some policies that gets 

government off the backs of Saskatchewan people and really 

create some jobs here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talks about all of the jobs that are lost, refusing to realize that 

CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) has just 

announced in the very months that you’re talking about, the 

sod-turning for a call centre here in Regina. The member from 

Weyburn announced in the House yesterday the expansion of 

Alcatel in Weyburn. You remember, if you can remember back 

this far, Shuttlecraft’s announcement a week ago. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we had an election in June,  

1995 which was the report card on Partnership for Renewal and 

this government’s job creation and governance policy. And 

what they said to that member opposite is that you deserve five 

seats in the legislature because of the actions and the 

over-exaggeration that you carried out while you were sitting in 

the official opposition. So talking about credibility, I’d have a 

look in the mirror to see whether or not it’s credible what 

you’re seeing here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Firearms Legislation 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday 

we heard the Liberal members almost gushing over the federal 

budget, and I wonder if that praise extends to the $14 million of 

new money that’s being budgeted this year to implement the 

new gun control law, Bill C-68. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 

Minister, it’s clear that this legislation is tremendously unfair to 

Saskatchewan’s responsible firearms owners. It will do nothing 

to reduce crime, and it will not make our streets any safer. And 

we now see the evidence that this is also going to be a colossal 

waste of taxpayers’ money. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you be following up on the commitment 

made by the previous minister, who understood this issue, to 

challenge the legislation in court, and when can we expect this 

process to begin, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 

member for that question. The situation is, with this 

government, our position has not changed, and I think that the 

hon. member actually knows that. The federal government has 

. . . the federal Liberals have provided us with a wait-and-see 

position because the regulations that were supposed to be in 

effect by January 1 of this year have not been prepared. We’re 

waiting to see what happens with these regulations. We’re also 

very concerned about some of the budgetary questions that are 

involved. 

 

The discussion with the ministers from Alberta, Manitoba, 

Ontario, and the Territories are continuing as we monitor this 

situation. And it’s very clear that a constitutional challenge is a 

strong possibility, but we are not going to make any clear 

decision on that until the regulations have been released. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m glad 

to hear that the minister says there’s going to be no change, but 

unfortunately there’s also no action. 

 

Mr. Minister, the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus 

believes that we must take every step possible to fight this 

ill-conceived piece of legislation, and that includes a legal 

challenge, and that includes provincial legislation that will 

protect the rights of Saskatchewan firearms owners. 

 

In a few minutes I will be introducing a piece of legislation  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

designed to protect Saskatchewan firearms owners from 

confiscation without compensation under Bill C-68. Will you 

support this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for the second question. I also very much appreciate his support 

for our initiatives. We will be dealing with this matter in a very 

straightforward and a clear manner and we look forward to the 

support of the hon. member. 

 

It’s very clear in this whole situation that our counterparts, the 

Liberals in Ottawa, have caused a great deal of difficulty for 

people in Saskatchewan and people in western Canada. It 

appears they’ve also caused a great deal of difficulty for their 

own Members of Parliament . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And the MLAs, that’s true. And we are in a position whereby 

we will be reviewing all options as we look at this whole 

situation. And it’s a possibility that we would look at the option 

that the member has provided for this House, but we will not be 

making any commitment about that until we have reviewed all 

of the regulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Protection Services 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Minister of Social Services. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Judge 

Thomas G. Gove recently released the report of the Gove 

inquiry. The Gove inquiry dealt with the neglect, abuse, and 

death of five-and-a-half-year-old Matthew Vaudreuil of British 

Columbia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Matthew was failed by the system in British 

Columbia. Throughout his life, Matthew was under the care of 

the Department of Social Services, yet his life was lost at the 

hands of his abusive mother. 

 

I would like to read an excerpt from volume 1, page 123 of the 

Gove Report. This excerpt is from a woman who visited the 

Vaudreuil home a week before Matthew was suffocated to 

death by his mother: 

 

I said, “Where’s little Matthew?” and Vaudreuil said, 

“He’s in the bedroom.” . . . So I went in there (and) he was 

underneath a pile of blankets. I took it off of him, I wasn’t 

sure if he was okay  and he sat up. He was  all sweaty 

and scared-looking and that’s when he said, “Help me,” 

and called me grandma. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to protect our children, would it not be 

responsible to review the recommendations of the Gove . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. I’ll ask the 

member to put her question directly if she would, please. The 

hon. member for Humboldt, put the question directly. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, Matthew asked for help and no one 

was there to protect him. Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, have  

there been in this province deaths of children who are part of 

Saskatchewan’s Social Services child protection case-loads, 

children whose deaths were similar to Matthew’s? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member raises a very, 

very important issue. I think . . . I don’t think; I know the 

Department of Social Services has been very cognizant of the 

Gove inquiry in British Columbia and some of the 

recommendations and the issues which led to that. We are very 

cognizant of those issues in our own province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, as you well know, since being 

elected in 1991, has set the needs of children in our province as 

one of the highest priorities of this government. And as a result, 

Mr. Speaker, we have pioneered in all of Canada the 

Saskatchewan action plan for children, pioneered and led by my 

colleague, the former Minister of Social Services. 

 

There are today across Saskatchewan hundreds, literally 

hundreds, of programs and projects devoted to the needs of 

children. To that member, Mr. Speaker, I say we are very 

cognizant of the Gove and we are very sensitive to these issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, it is your responsibility to know the 

facts about the numbers of abused and neglected children that 

have died in this province under your ministry. Do you have, 

Mr. Minister, those numbers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I will provide to that 

member the information if it is . . . I believe in her question she 

is making some accusations that children may have died under 

protection. Mr. Speaker, we will provide that information if 

there is that information to be provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very concerned about this line of 

questioning. If the member would come to me, as I have invited 

her to do on a number of occasions if she has concerns about 

individual cases in this province. I have invited her to come to 

me directly and we’ll be very open with information. This, in 

my view, Mr. Speaker, is not the kind of forum where we 

should be bantering through politics this kind of issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I have been notified by 

a number of people who have gone through the ministry and 

have of course been disappointed with the results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in British Columbia the present case-load for 

children protection workers is 33 to 35 cases per worker. This is 

compared to the recommended 12 cases per worker. Could the 

minister responsible for Social Services please tell me what the 

average case-load would be for a Saskatchewan child protection 

worker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



172  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, it is a difficult 

circumstance when this member wants to play politics with this 

kind of issue. I think we should be dealing with fact in this 

House, not innuendo and accusation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member would be better served, and so would 

her whole caucus, if they would direct their attention to their 

Liberal friends in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do you know the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, in this current 

budget of the federal government? Seventy-three per cent of the 

cuts in this federal budget are to health, social services and 

education  73 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here the tale of the whole budget is told and the 

Liberal Party in this province should be bearing some 

responsibility to explain it. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, right from the pie chart right from the 

Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, the total revenues to the federal 

government, total revenues to the federal government from 

corporate income tax, Mr. Speaker, represent 11.2 per cent. 

Total revenues to the federal government from unemployment 

insurance premiums, 13.9 per cent. 

 

These are the people that they would stand in this House and 

defend. I think, Mr. Speaker, they should direct their attention 

where it should be directed, that being their cousins in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I would just ask the Minister of 

Social Services whether he would be prepared within the next 

two days to give me the statistics so that I can answer to the 

people out there who have been prompting me to come and find 

out about these things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I assured that member 

moments ago we would provide whatever information is 

required and is of fact. I ask again, why didn’t that member 

come to me and ask, because I’ve made her that offer  I’ve 

made her that offer in person. She will not take advantage of it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan will remember 

how this party in past has voted around issues affecting women 

and children in our province. 

 

They have voted against every positive and progressive 

initiative advanced by this government since 1991. They voted 

against the children’s action plan. They refused to speak up on 

behalf of Saskatchewan children and women to their federal 

cousins in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are endeavouring to utilize the resources that 

we have at our disposal to provide the very best of life for 

children in our province. 

 

Each time we bring forward a progressive idea, that group of 

people vote against it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 2  An Act respecting the 

Property Rights of the People of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill respecting the Property Rights of the People of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:55 a.m. to 11:05 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  47 

 

Romanow Van Mulligen Mitchell 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Anguish Tchorzewski 

Johnson Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Koenker Trew 

Bradley Lorje Nilson 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Kasperski 

Ward Jess Flavel 

Murrell Thomson Osika 

Aldridge McLane Draude 

McPherson Belanger Julé 

Krawetz Gantefoer Boyd 

D’Autremont Toth Heppner 

Goohsen Haverstock  

 

Nays  Nil 

 

The Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to ask leave of this 

Assembly to bring forward a matter of the utmost importance to 

me and a matter that should be of great concern to all members 

in this House. 

 

The Speaker:  Would the member just briefly indicate the 

subject matter that he wants to introduce to the House. 

 

Mr. Osika:  It has come to my attention, Mr. Speaker, that as 

a result of some intimidation tactics by the Hollinger 

Corporation, threatens 13 weekly newspapers in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker:  It’s not clear to the Speaker. Is the member 

requesting leave to introduce a motion under rule 46? The hon. 

member has requested leave to make a statement. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

Intimidation tactics by Hollinger 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I received a 

call from the publisher of the Melville Advance, and what he 

told me disturbed me a great deal. Newspapers in east-central 

Saskatchewan are in the midst of setting up a mass market 

community newspaper to compete with a similar mass market 

advertising publication the Yorkton paper has been distributing 

for years. Mr. Speaker, this is what I call fair competition and 

free enterprise. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton This Week’s new owner, the 

Hollinger Corporation, obviously doesn’t believe in fair 

competition because yesterday representatives of the 

corporation threatened the futures of newspapers in Melville, 

Wynyard, Canora, Kamsack, Preeceville, Norquay, Watson, 

Moosomin, Carlyle, Carnduff, Kelvington, Langenburg, and 

Watrous. 

 

As I said, for the last 15 years, Yorkton This Week & Enterprise 

has been publishing a free distribution mass market publication 

that robbed much of the advertising from many of the 

communities surrounding Yorkton with cut-rate costs. The 

other newspapers in the region have grown tired of fighting this 

Goliath alone so they combined their forces to create this new 

regional newspaper in an attempt to keep more of their 

advertising revenue in their communities. 

 

However, the publishers of these newspapers did not count on 

the cutthroat, unfair, monopolistic approach adopted by the 

Hollinger Corporation and Conrad Black. Yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, representatives of Hollinger told the publisher of the 

Melville Advance if plans for this new newspaper aren’t 

dropped immediately, Hollinger will open an office in Melville, 

distribute free Yorkton newspapers in the community, and 

undercut the Melville Advance ad rates by 50 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a blatant attempt to put the Melville 

Advance out of business and it won’t stop there, I can assure 

you. Publishers in the other communities involved are living 

under a similar threat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hollinger has been a corporate citizen in our 

province for exactly one week. In that time it has not only put a 

quarter of its own workforce on the streets, it now threatens the 

very futures of the very weekly newspapers in our province  

papers that have been around for six, seven, or eight decades. 

Clearly we as provincial legislators cannot let this situation go 

on unnoticed. 

 

We in this party are in favour of free enterprise and fair 

competition. But, Mr. Speaker, what Hollinger is attempting to 

do is far from fair. It is trying to choke the life out of these 

weekly community newspapers as it tries to extend its 

monopoly in this province. 

 

It already owns all the dailies and now is setting its killer 

corporate sights on the weekly newspapers. Mr. Speaker, this 

situation is absolutely unacceptable to me and it should be for 

every member of this House. Weekly newspapers employ 

hundreds of people across this province. 

For someone like Hollinger to waltz in and threaten to shut 

down these very community papers that we all rely on for fair 

and unbiased reporting, as the Minister of Agriculture had 

noticed in a newspaper article from the Fort Qu’Appelle Times 

last week . . . I’ve worked with these newspapers. I know how 

hard they try to serve the communities and I feel this is totally 

unfair. And I wanted the members of this House to be aware of 

this. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, for a brief response. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I’ll be quite brief in responding 

to the member. In listening to the member’s comments, we 

expressed the same concern ourselves, the concern about the 

concentration of corporate power in this particular area, the area 

of information in newspapers. 

 

The incident, if accurate . . . And I have only the press release 

from the community newspapers to go on. I assume it’s 

accurate. But assuming the information to be accurate, it does 

indeed suggest predatory pricing and should be a matter of 

concern. And so I rise, in large part, to echo the concerns 

expressed by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

We are concerned about community newspapers. They are 

indeed the lifeblood of small communities. The member from 

Moosomin may recall a publisher in Moosomin, Bert McKay, 

who was fond of saying that you never found the community 

newspaper in the garbage pail; it was always read. You might 

find flyers, but not community newspapers. They’re not only 

the lifeblood, they’re relevant. 

 

I just want to say to members opposite though, that as 

disturbing as this is, combines . . . and lack of competition in 

Canada is constitutionally squarely within the jurisdiction of the 

federal government. There’s really not much we can do except 

bring the matter to the attention of the federal government. We 

have our means of doing that, and we are in fact considering a 

formal letter which might go out to the Hon. John Manley. 

 

You people, I think, have some fairly effective links with the 

current federal government, and you might want to bring your 

concerns to the concern of your party brethren who are in office 

in Ottawa. So I advise the members opposite, while the 

statement’s certainly of interest, the only government which can 

effectively deal with this problem is the federal government. 

 

(1115) 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’d like to ask leave, Mr. Speaker, for a  



174  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

statement of interest to all members. 

 

The Speaker:  Will you please advise the House of the 

subject matter. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Pertaining to International Women’s 

Day. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and I thank the other members of the House for giving me this 

opportunity. 

 

March 8, International Women’s Day, is recognized around the 

world as a day to commemorate women’s struggles and all of 

our achievements. Since women first got the vote in 1916, I 

believe we’ve made unprecedented gains. We strove for and 

won important legal rights and protections. And, working 

together, achieved tremendous improvements in wages and 

conditions of work. And when women’s conditions improve, 

often the conditions of all people in society improve. It tends to 

have quite a spin-off effect on the rest of the social network. 

 

Unique services have been created, such as shelters for battered 

women, sexual assault centres  establishing hard work and 

commitment of many community members. Wages for working 

full-time, full-year, have gradually increased for women over 

the past decade, and many more women today are graduating 

from universities and technical schools. I was interested to note 

a statistic, that there’s many more masters’ program graduates 

and many more doctoral graduates than there were some years 

ago. And of course higher wages for men and women . . . or 

higher education commands higher income in the labour 

market. 

 

More women are participating in public life. Fifty-two per cent 

of the people elected to health boards this year were women. 

And in the House, Mr. Speaker, there are 13 able women who 

are now here. And it’s interesting to note that when the 

legislature was built was prior to when women were even 

considered persons in the eyes of the law. In fact our 

personhood was in such question that they never even installed 

bathrooms for the women members of the legislature. So I’m 

pleased to see that we’re here today. We still don’t have our 

bathrooms, but I’m thinking of changing the sign on the men’s 

washroom, so we may get around to that yet. 

 

In Saskatchewan today, women from many backgrounds work 

together to raise awareness. Because of course we do have farm 

women; we do have immigrant women, aboriginal women. And 

although we share many bonds in being the centre, quite often, 

of family life and supports for extended care of family 

members, we also have many differences, depending on our 

circumstance and our opportunities that are available to us. 

 

The 1990s does present new challenges, but women are firmly 

entrenched in the labour force now. Sixty per cent today work 

for pay. And one item that’s very interesting is women in  

child-bearing years; 80 per cent of Saskatchewan women 

between the ages of 25 and 34 are in the workforce. And that 

really stresses the importance of employers to be sensitive to 

family-friendly workplaces, to policies that give the flexibility 

for the workplace to benefit from the contribution of able 

people but also to look after family responsibilities. And I will 

note that many parents these days are taking the opportunity to 

decide that one or the other parent might be the main support in 

the home, and that’s not just a role relegated to women any 

more. 

 

There’s sometimes harassment in the workplace, and women 

are passed over for promotion. Their work is too often 

undervalued. So I’ll just note that we’re committed to 

continuing to work together  men and women  on 

achieving full equity for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Members’ Statements 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I would like to draw 

attention of the members of the House to one of the rules 

regarding members’ statements. I’d like to remind the House of 

rule 10(4) which says, and I quote: 

 

Statements are not debatable and are not responded to by 

any other Member. 

 

And I will ask that all members will take note of that and 

cooperate with that rule of the House regarding members’ 

statements in the future. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murrell, seconded by Mr. 

Thomson, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Boyd. 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour and 

privilege for me to address the Legislative Assembly here today 

as a member of the new constituency of Regina Sherwood. I 

wish to extend my congratulations to all members on their 

election or re-election to this Assembly. As previous members 

for both sides of the legislature have acknowledged, it is a very 

humbling yet gratifying experience to be elected here as a 

member from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of congratulatory 

acknowledgements that are now in order. First of all, allow me 

to congratulate yourself on your election of Speaker of the 

Assembly. In our close association since last June, I can attest  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

to the fact that you will do your utmost to preside judiciously 

over the deliberations of this Assembly. 

 

I also wish to congratulate the hon. member for Regina Victoria 

on his candidacy. As a new member it was an exciting process 

to go through in the election, and we had two excellent 

candidates. 

 

Congratulations to the hon. member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood on his election as Deputy Speaker. And 

also to the hon. member for Moosomin for his candidacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to 

acknowledge the Clerk and assistant Clerks of the Legislative 

Assembly, the new Sergeant-at-Arms, and the new pages. On a 

personal note, it is a pleasure to become reacquainted with the 

Clerk of the Assembly, Gwenn Ronyk, who was a fellow 

history student of mine at the University of Regina. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate my rookie 

colleagues, the members for the Battlefords-Cut Knife and 

Regina South, the respective mover and seconder of the throne 

speech, for their excellent presentations here at the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, bear with me. I just lost my page here for a 

minute. I had so much good to say that I misplaced it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I first of all wanted to talk a little bit about my 

constituency of Regina Sherwood. Regina Sherwood consists of 

a number of wonderful communities and areas. These areas are, 

respectively, from north to south the communities of Walsh 

Acres, Normanview West, Prairieview, Normanview, Dieppe, 

Rosemont, Mount Royal. 

 

The community of Walsh Acres, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

maybe to talk a little bit about some of these communities in 

more detail, but I’ve lost the notes, so I’ll maybe just continue 

on and say that, Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina Sherwood 

have a tradition of being a sincere and hard-working class area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tradition of this area . . . this area has also been 

an area of important political . . . has also had important 

political representation. Except for the time period of 1986  

or sorry, ’82 to ’86  this constituency has always been 

governed by New Democrats. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  My predecessors have included, Mr. 

Speaker, Ed Whelan, Bill Allen, John Solomon, and Bob 

Lyons. I intend to do my utmost to continue that excellent 

tradition of the constituency service that has been provided by 

these people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take a 

moment to acknowledge other elected representatives from my 

area of the city of Regina. Parts of three city of Regina wards 

have components in Regina Sherwood. Wards 8, 9, and 10 are 

respectively represented by Councillors Vic McDougall,  

Darlene Hincks, and Bill Wells. In addition, two Regina Health 

District wards are included in Regina Sherwood. Wards 3 and 4 

are represented by Pat Danforth and Steve Paul. 

 

My service to the constituents of Regina Sherwood, Mr. 

Speaker, will also include close consultation and cooperation 

with these elected officials and with the officials of Regina’s 

Public School Board and Separate School Board. 

 

I would like to note, Mr. Speaker, as well, that His Worship 

Mayor Doug Archer is a constituent of Regina Sherwood, 

residing in the Prairieview community. 

 

And last but by no means least, I would also like to point out 

that the current president of the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Bill Allen, and former member of this 

Assembly for Rosemont, is also a constituent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, most of all I would like to 

thank the voters of Regina Sherwood constituency for their 

support and trust. Having received 63 per cent of the vote in the 

last election  the most of any first-time MLA on either side of 

the House  I will do my utmost to reciprocate and work hard 

on behalf of all constituents. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is a proud moment for me and my immediate 

family  my wife Barbara and my sons Dan and Jay; also for 

my parents Mike and Sheila of Regina, my sisters Diane in 

Saskatoon, Janet in Wilkie, and Susan in Regina, and their 

families. 

 

In my immediate family I also include my in-laws, notably my 

brother and sister-in-law, Glenn and Betty Coleman of Regina 

and their family, and my father and mother-in-law, William and 

Mary Reilley of Meadow Lake, who are now deceased. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of them for 

their support, their understanding, and their patience over the 

years, especially as I’ve become involved in active politics over 

this last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is also a proud moment for my extended 

family and my forebears. My paternal grandfather, Wojciech 

Kasperski, emigrated from the province of Tarnopol in eastern 

Poland to Weyburn, Saskatchewan in the spring of 1927. My 

grandmother, the former Kunegunda Wityk, followed a year 

later with three young children, which included my father. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I learned only recently that the parents of the hon. 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale, Michael and Tekla 

Romanow, also came from this same province in the very same 

year. The only major difference in our family histories is that 

the Premier’s family history will say his family came from 

western Ukraine whereas my family history says he came from 

eastern Poland. 

 

After re-establishing the family in Weyburn in 1928, the 

Kasperski family produced nine more children. I am proud to 

point out that during this same time period a young Baptist  



176  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

minister, namely T.C. Douglas, was also a prominent Weyburn 

resident who impacted our family greatly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  My grandfather worked for the CPR 

(Canadian Pacific Railway) for over 30 years and then for the 

city of Weyburn before retiring. Both grandparents passed away 

in the late 1970s. And as our family historian and genealogist, I 

wish to acknowledge my family on this side, my surviving 10 

aunts and uncles and 31 cousins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my maternal grandfather was Archibald Campbell, 

who came from Argyll, Scotland and homesteaded in the Lake 

Alma district, where he was the founding councillor and the 

reeve of the Rural Municipality of Lorraine. 

 

My maternal grandmother, Gladys, was born in North Dakota, 

of Norwegian and English parentage, and moved to 

Saskatchewan and homesteaded in the Amulet area near 

Pangman. My mother was the second of seven children, most of 

whom were raised in Lake Alma and Weyburn. 

 

My grandfather is deceased, but my grandmother, Gladys 

Campbell of Regina, I am proud to say was here in attendance 

for the reading of the Speech from the Throne here last week. 

To her, to my aunts and uncles and cousins on that side of the 

family, I wish to extend my sincere thanks and appreciation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my father started a 47-year career with the 

Canadian Pacific Railway in Weyburn during the Second World 

War, a career which took him to Regina, Moose Jaw, Wilkie, 

and then back to Regina. He retired on January 16, 1991, 

immediately after completing a trip as the engineer of the last 

VIA Rail train to travel from Moose Jaw to Swift Current, 

which was the last trip that was made by the old southern 

transcontinental route. I was equally proud that my parents were 

also in attendance last week for the reading of the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was raised in Moose Jaw and graduated from 

Central Collegiate. And I am pleased to point out that your 

good wife Karen was a contemporary of mine and one of my 

contemporaries at that high school. I went on to attend the 

University of Saskatchewan, Regina campus, where I received a 

Bachelor of Arts degree in history and French in the year 1970. 

From ‘70 to ’72 I completed the course requirements to a 

master’s degree in history. It was during this time while 

working as a summer student at the provincial archives of 

Saskatchewan that I first became acquainted with this great 

Assembly. 

 

In June of that year the NDP came to power under the 

leadership of Premier Allan Blakeney. I was one of the two 

employees sent over by the Provincial Archivist of the time, Mr. 

Allan Turner, to collect the ministerial papers of members of 

the Ross Thatcher cabinet. Mr. Speaker, those were interesting 

and memorable times. 

 

In early 1973, Mr. Speaker, I obtained the position as 

multicultural program coordinator in the old Department of  

Culture and Youth. This was a new department whose first 

minister is today one of my colleagues here in the legislature, 

the hon. member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

(1130) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  As subsequent minister is the hon. member 

from Regina Northeast. It was interesting to note at the time the 

deputy minister of our department is the current deputy minister 

of the Premier, Mr. Frank Bogdasavich. 

 

In that position I was part of all the major multicultural 

initiatives in those years and I am pleased to say that many of 

these initiatives still survive today. Major multicultural festivals 

in all Saskatchewan centres, notably Regina’s Mosaic, 

Saskatoon’s Folkfest, and immigrant settlement and orientation 

groups, like the Regina Open Door Society, and similar 

organizations in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, and 

Yorkton are all thriving today. 

 

After seven years in provincial civil service, Mr. Speaker, I left 

government to enter private business in 1979. And since 1984 I 

have worked as a economic development and small-business 

consultant, having worked on a variety of projects throughout 

and across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a newly elected MLA, I have taken this 

opportunity to demonstrate the depth and breadth of my 

commitment to this great province and my sincere wish to work 

to make this a better place for all of us to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a new member of the Legislative Assembly, 

I’m excited because Saskatchewan is again on the threshold of 

substantial improvement of its economic and fiscal situation. 

We stood on this same threshold in the early 1980s. 

Unfortunately, adverse economic conditions coupled with nine 

years of Conservative government fiscal mismanagement 

brought us to the edge of complete ruin. 

 

Yet during the first term of this NDP government, 

Saskatchewan has experienced a drastic and substantial 

turnaround. Our government, with the support and sacrifice of 

the people of Saskatchewan  all of the people of 

Saskatchewan  has once again achieved for our province a 

degree of financial independence which should allow us to 

rebuild our province in a way that was unthinkable just four 

short years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during 1995 it became evident that the 

Saskatchewan economy is growing significantly. We are 

creating jobs by diversifying into new products and new 

technologies. The provincial economy continued its robust 

growth in 1995 bolstered by healthy commodity prices and a 

good year in agriculture. Retail sales climbed 5.1 per cent in the 

first nine months of 1995 reaching a total of $4.7 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the first seven months of 1995, production of 

oil rose 8.4 per cent; production of gas rose 9.3 per cent; potash 

by 17.7 per cent. The value of the province’s 15.5 million  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

shares in Cameco Corporation also rose significantly in 1995. 

 

In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 23.2 million tonnes of major grains, 

oilseeds and speciality crops were harvested, 6 per cent above 

the 10-year average. Over 85 per cent of the spring wheat crop 

of 1995 is expected to grade in the top two levels. Prices are 

buoyant and this winter’s severe weather across much of the 

American winter-wheat-growing area have put upper pressure 

on prices. Just recently the Canadian Grain Commission 

predicted a steady increase in Canada’s share in the world 

wheat market over the next five years. 

 

Here in the city of Regina the tourism sector was one of the 

main driving forces of the local economy in 1995. Out of a total 

of 1 billion spent by tourists in Saskatchewan almost a quarter 

of that or 250 million are made in Regina. This supports almost 

10,000 full- and part-time jobs. 

 

The most successful Grey Cup ever generated profits for the 

CFL (Canadian Football League), the Saskatchewan Roughrider 

Football Club and large numbers of local businesses. 

 

The opening of the Casino Regina a little over a month ago 

marks another important component in Regina’s tourism 

infrastructure, as early indications are that Casino Regina will 

be a success having considerable positive impact on the local 

economy. 

 

Building upon the establishment of the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Authority, Mr. Speaker,  a product of the Partnership for 

Renewal economic development strategy of the first term  the 

Partnership for Growth outlines continued cooperation 

between the Tourism Authority and Department of Economic 

Development to develop strategies in tourism growth areas such 

as aboriginal tourism, eco-tourism and agri-tourism. This 

partnership will work together to develop a provincial tourism 

strategy to outline tourism growth for the future. 

 

The government’s participation will involve plan consultations, 

legislative changes to reduce business regulations over the next 

10 years. Because most tourism businesses are small 

businesses, these regulatory changes are needed to improve the 

business climate and will have a definite impact on our tourism 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the point of public consultation, it is important 

that our government strive to consult with as many of our 

citizens as possible as important decisions are being made as 

Saskatchewan prepares for the 21st century. 

 

The consultation process  Making Choices, Preparing for the 

New Century was extensive and a good example of how 

successful the consultation process can be. It is through this 

kind of cooperation that Saskatchewan residents are working 

together in helping to make difficult choices which will build 

stronger homes, neighbourhoods, and communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Our government, Mr. Speaker, is committed  

to this process, a process based upon the basic principles of 

community, cooperation, and compassion which have been the 

basic principles of New Democratic Party governments which 

have governed here in this province. 

 

This same consultative process is also under way or is being 

announced in the following areas: the Redesigning Social 

Assistance initiative launched by the Minister of Social Services 

before Christmas last year; public consultations for the new 

crop insurance program launched by the Minister of Agriculture 

in February; and the Crown corporation review announced by 

the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation last week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne sets a realistic, 

practical course for Saskatchewan as it prepares for the 21st 

century when it addressed jobs and economic growth, 

agriculture, forestry, and development of the North. It also 

addressed the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan in the 

areas of health, training and education, and social programs. 

 

Finally, it talked about other areas of concern for Saskatchewan, 

namely justice and good, efficient government. 

 

Most important of all, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne 

reflects what could be realistically and practically attained 

under the present economic and fiscal realities. 

 

As I have listened to the contributions of the hon. opposition 

members in the debate of these last few days, I am not sure that 

they have understood, let alone made any meaningful 

contribution to, our province’s fiscal and economic challenges. 

I am disturbed somewhat at the tenor of the debate of the hon. 

members opposite which pits elements of our society against 

each other. 

 

It attempts to drive a wedge between rural Saskatchewan and 

urban Saskatchewan, between our aboriginal and our 

non-aboriginal communities. Mr. Speaker, I find this approach 

to be shameful and I am confident that the citizens of 

Saskatchewan are in agreement with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has demonstrated that it can 

govern on behalf of all the people of Saskatchewan and for that 

reason I am pleased, on behalf of all the residents of Regina 

Sherwood, to support wholeheartedly the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on 

being the first elected Speaker of this Assembly. Significant 

Saskatchewan history was made by this election, and 

democracy has been advanced to a new level within our system. 

Our caucus is confident that your impartiality will provide a 

level of order and a new type of decorum in the Assembly. With 

your guidance, this legislature will be elevated to a new level of 

respect in the eyes of our constituents. 

 

I would also like to add my congratulations to the newly elected 

Deputy Speaker as well as to the elected members on both sides  



178  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

of this House. I look forward to the dealings that lie ahead in 

the next few years, and I appreciate all the help from the 

dedicated staff working in the various departments, offices, and 

hallways in this legislature. 

 

I would also like to thank the team that worked in our caucus 

office. With all the help my colleagues and I are receiving, we 

are confident it will not take long before we will live up to the 

expectations of the people who have entrusted us with the great 

responsibility of being their elected member in the legislature. 

 

It is with great pride that I stand here today representing a new 

constituency of Kelvington-Wadena. My area is an 

amalgamation of parts of five constituencies. I have listened to 

a lot of the members refer to their areas as being unique in this 

province. I too believe that I have the honour of representing a 

unique area, not only in the varied landscapes but in the culture, 

heritage, and interest of its people. 

 

The farmers in the western section of my constituencies are part 

of the area known as the sharecrop district when I was young. 

In north-east area I have the Porcupine provincial forest. In 

between the two are farmers involved in extensive cattle 

operations as well as hog operations. Tourism industries and 

manufacturing and processing plants employ more people per 

capita than any other place in the province. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I represent people with the 

basic values and integrity that makes Saskatchewan the best 

place in the world to live. Kelvington-Wadena is the best of 

both worlds: the world of rural people committed to a way of 

life and to each other to ensure a quality of living envied by 

people in every walk of life; the other is the world of progress 

and business that ties to the fast-paced global economy through 

our industries and technology. 

 

I am honoured to represent the people whose most common 

bond is their diversity from each other. The German immigrants 

of St. Peter’s Abbey settled in 1903 in that area, bringing with 

them work ethics and cultural responsibility for establishing 

many of the industries in this area. The French immigrants from 

Brittany, France, who settled in St. Brieux still retain their 

language; in fact they have a French television network. 

 

The Wadena area was settled in 1904 and was named after 

Wadena, Minnesota, by the Tolen family. The drive and 

determination of the people in this area is obvious when you see 

their accomplishments in constructing the north-east grain 

terminal. Wadena is also the home of the North American water 

fowl management plan. It is one of only two places in Canada 

to achieve recognition as a Western Hemisphere Shorebird 

Reserve Network.  

 

The Endeavour area was settled by immigrants from the 

Ukraine and many of these residents are involved in the logging 

industry as well as mixed farming. Rose Valley, besides having 

one of the nicest museums in the area, is the home of country 

singer Gary Fjellgaard. Naicam area was settled by immigrants 

from Norway, and the Porcupine Plain area was settled by the 

English. The Kelvington-Wadena constituency has three Indian 

reservations. 

The needs and the dreams of the people of this area, the area 

where I was born and lived my whole life, is the reason I ran in 

the election last June. This election was the first time in over 45 

years that a member from the opposition party has won a seat. 

The last time a Liberal was elected in the Kelvington area was 

52 years ago. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the very large number of people 

who made it possible for me to be standing here today. My 

husband, my children, my son-in-law and granddaughter and 

sisters and brothers  I thank you for your understanding and 

your love and for being there. To my old friends and some 

special new friends I have made during the election as well as 

to my constituents, I say thank you. The only way I can possibly 

repay your support and loyalty is to be the very best MLA 

you’ve ever had. And today I pledge to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  People from Kelvington-Wadena have sent me 

to the legislature to bring the government a message. That 

message is clear and it is simple. The people have lost 

confidence in the NDP government; the people have been 

betrayed by the very people they have elected. The policies and 

message the NDP government have given the people of this 

great province since ’91 are killing the rights and ability of 

people to set goals and to achieve them. Government policies 

are depriving people of the dignity to reach for a dream. The 

people’s faith in the future is being massacred, and either the 

government is failing to see this death or they’ve chosen not to 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments that use their power to deprive their 

citizens of the right to dream and plan take away their heart, and 

life becomes meaningless. Where there is no hope, there is no 

confidence. I may be a rookie, Mr. Speaker, but I do know what 

happens when people have no confidence in their government. 

The terrible voter turn-out in the June election should be seen as 

a warning flag from the people of Saskatchewan. The no-show 

vote was not a sign of confidence; it was a sign of apathy, a 

sign of disgust, a sign of cynicism. People will not trust a 

government who does not trust them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier obviously does not trust the 

people of this province. If he did, he would allow them to 

control their own lives. This government has decided it will 

control every aspect of people’s lives, especially their money. 

Control of every dollar in the pocket of every working person, 

every dollar in the hand of every senior, and every dollar in the 

hand of every business person. And the government flaunted its 

control by choosing to close hospitals, choosing to ignore 

agriculture, and choosing to raise taxes. And then they chose to 

allow our highway system to fall into a disgusting state of 

disrepair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave of the 

Assembly to introduce a guest. 



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the member 

for interrupting her presentation. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

is Mr. Andy Iwanchuk of Saskatoon. Andy is the president of 

my constituency association. He is a staff representative of the 

Canadian Union of Public Employees, in Regina to attend a 

convention. And I’d like to introduce him to you and through 

you to my colleagues in the legislature, and make him feel 

welcome here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1145) 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Draude:  The NDP government chose to sacrifice rural 

Saskatchewan and offered up their Minister of Agriculture as 

the sacrificial lamb to remain in power in June. 

 

The NDP government used the farmers’ GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) money and gouged every citizen with 

stifling tax increases and utility rate increases. These actions 

resulted in an apparently balanced budget. I say apparently 

because, using these methods, anyone could balance an 

overdrawn account. The previous government tried to borrow 

enough money to buy the province out of debt, and this 

province is trying to tax the province out of debt. But, Mr. 

Speaker, neither scheme works. 

 

The Liberal Party knows, as do the citizens of Saskatchewan, 

that the only lasting solution is to allow the citizens the 

opportunity and freedom to produce themselves out of debt. 

The element that is missing before this can happen is the NDP 

government’s commitment to share in the belief that people 

have in themselves. What I mean by this is the mere rhetoric 

that was provided in last week’s throne speech was not enough. 

 

As we begin a new session, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

to deal in a concrete and positive way with the single and most 

important issue facing the people of this province. That crucial 

concern is economic development and job creation; the two go 

hand in hand. Without economic development, there can be no 

sustainable jobs for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  The Speech from the Throne  I’m sorry to 

say  gives me no confidence that this government knows how 

to address this difficulty. This government talks about economic 

development, and they talk about jobs, but they don’t see it as 

the same thing. They don’t see that their past four years has 

created an environment of pessimism and distrust, and there is 

no foundation to start the building process. 

The Minister of Economic Development proved that he is lost 

and wandering in the wilderness on this issue by tabling his 

latest so-called strategy for economic development. The 

minister promised the government to create 20,000 jobs in the 

next four years. In his last strategy, tabled in November ’92, he 

promised to create 30,000 jobs. My mother always told me not 

to make a promise I couldn’t keep, Mr. Speaker. It’s too bad 

someone didn’t tell the government that that is a good ideal to 

live by. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Broken promises for this government is a way 

of life. Mr. Speaker, we are going to examine the record, the 

real record for job creation. And in doing this we will see how 

the Premier, his ministers, and the NDP government break one 

promise after another, on and on. Maybe it is easier to break 

promises if you have no respect for the people to whom you 

make the promises. This government is driven purely by 

political expediency. 

 

The Partnership for Renewal  as they called it  promised to 

the people of this province in the 1991 election, was finally 

presented to them in November of ’92. In that paper, mixed 

with lots of grandiose rhetoric, was a promise to create 30,000 

jobs by the end of the decade. That was four years ago and you 

would expect that halfway through we’d have 15,000 jobs in 

the bag. Right? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in November of 1992, based on the Bureau of 

Statistics and Canada Statistics reports, there was 443,000 

people working in this province. Similar reports with figures 

from January 1996 this year, there were 445,000 people 

working. A little quick math by any grade 2 student will tell you 

that’s not 15,000. And it’s not 10,000 and it’s not even 5,000. 

The real number is 2,000. There is really only 2,000 more 

people working in this province than there was in November of 

’92. Mr. Minister, that means you have 28,000 more jobs to go. 

 

And if the hon. minister wanted to use a real measuring stick 

he’d compare it to our neighbouring province, that of Alberta. 

Do you know how many more people are working in that 

province? — 103,000. 

 

This party would like to challenge your government to work in 

a real world and compare your goals with other provinces. 

Don’t just pick a pie-in-the-sky number. This government has 

set a goal of 6.7 per cent increase over eight years. Any 

business person in the world would be at a loss if they went to 

their banker and said they were only going to increase that 

much in eight years. The banker would be breathing down our 

neck before the ink was dry on the paper. 

 

In other words, the government is stagnated and in fact knows 

they are stagnated. This government knows it has stifled the 

provincial economy to the point where the only way it can 

create a few jobs is by selectively retracting the repressive 

taxation policies. 

 

A case in point stated by the Minister of Economic  



180  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Development in his Partnership for Growth, is the fact that to 

entice CIBC call centre to Saskatchewan they not only approved 

a grant of $3.4 million but they also eliminated the provincial 

sales tax on 800-number accounts. Does that mean the minister 

is actually admitting there can be no economic development or 

job creation under the stifling taxation policies of this 

government without tax elimination? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would like to challenge us 

on our job numbers. They say our numbers show that there are 

thousands more jobs created in that time. Of course there were, 

but they are not sustainable jobs. Jobs fluctuate with seasons. 

And seasonal jobs are just that, here today and gone tomorrow. 

Not the kind of job people can build a future on. 

 

And that brings us even more up to date, Mr. Speaker. The 

latest unemployment figures serve to underline how far off 

target this government’s job creation is. There are 5,000 fewer 

people working in this province in January of ’96 than in 

January of ’95. And you don’t have to take my word for it  

ask StatsCanada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should be ashamed for 

trying to deceive the people of this province into believing that 

the difficult time we have lived through will continue because 

of circumstances beyond their control. It’s time the hon. 

members took responsibilities for their actions, from the 

Premier on down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Just look what the Premier did in his recent 

television address, which incidentally we have to pay for. Our 

Premier used a kind of Grecian Formula approach to confuse 

people and colour the issue to suit his taste. In review of the 

fiscal situation the Premier talked about, with the help of the 

people of this province, he said, he managed to wrestle the 

deficit to the ground, saving the province from bankruptcy. Mr. 

Speaker, our Premier gave nothing. The people of this province 

gave it all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  The deficit was fought solely on the backs and 

in the pocketbooks of the real people of this province. We are 

taxed and taxed and taxed some more; then we lost our 

hospitals and our highways and our farms and our businesses, 

and on top of it all, our children, as they left to search for work 

in a province where there is real hope and real growth. 

 

Continuing his remarks, Mr. Premier, the Premier went on to 

line us up for even more cuts. He said, and I quote: 

 

We were the first to present a balanced budget in the ‘90s 

with your help. And just as we thought we had turned the 

corner, just as we were ready to breath a little easier, 

wouldn’t you know it, the federal government has come 

along with huge cuts to transfer payments. 

 

Good heavens, Mr. Premier, wouldn’t you know it. What 

terrible luck. That nasty old federal government is doing awful  

things to us again. And now you’re going to have to stay on our 

backs and get into our pocketbooks again. Again you’re asking 

for the people to make up for cuts, not the government. 

 

The NDP government can continue to speculate on the stock 

exchange with Cameco shares and sell them after they’ve 

dropped $100 million. Obviously the government still hasn’t 

learned a lesson. The government is still playing slot machines 

with the Crown corporations. 

 

The government prefers to sit on potash shares so they can 

pretend they’re real business people. They can hold on to the 

ownership of SaskPower and SaskTel after it has benefited the 

province. With the record of this NDP government in their 

stock market speculation, we’ll probably hold on to them until 

after the competition comes in to ensure they have . . . the value 

has declined sufficiently. 

 

People in this province are wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the 

province is broke, why the government added four new cabinet 

ministers  one a duplication in the education area when in 

fact this is one area where we hear over and over again is being 

cut federally. It doesn’t make sense to the real people of this 

province. 

 

Why did we waste $650,000 on a SaskPower review which 

really only delayed the original plan? Why did we waste 

$50,000 on a public review to see if people wanted a decrease 

in SaskEnergy rates? That was questionable, all right. And why 

did the government waste $100,000 for a smoke-and-mirrors 

road show for public input on the budget when they knew that it 

was just a manipulation? The turn-out was very low. Mr. 

Premier, and Mr. Ministers, please give the people of this 

province more credit for intelligence. 

 

Even more frustrating is the fact that people know your 

government was well aware of the fiscal situation a long time 

ago. The transfer payment formula was determined years ago. 

The fact that the province’s revenues were up was known last 

fall, just as your budget was. 

 

The game you are playing with the people of this province is a 

dangerous one. Misrepresentation and deceit is costing the hon. 

members in the third party dearly. The only way they can get 

attention is by grandstanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier added insult to injury after his 

television address by stating, “I really say we’ve got to get off 

this business of concentrating on small costs.” I’m talking about 

$30,000 for the cost of the broadcast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier should ask the people on the street if 

they think $30,000 is a small amount of money. They probably 

won’t agree with you. Better yet, ask any farmer who received a 

GRIP bill. If $30,000 is a small amount of money in the 

province’s budget, then let’s just forget the GRIP bills. We’ve 

been asking for that for weeks now. In fact most bills are much 

smaller than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency the decline of health is very 

evident. Hospitals are closing in Rose Valley, and there are  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

further cut-backs in Spalding, Porcupine Plain, and others. 

Families live in fear of losing their livelihood. My parents had 

to move out of the province after spending 50 years here 

helping to build this province. They had to leave, Mr. Speaker, 

to get the level of health care required to make their life 

bearable. 

 

The cut-backs are being done by the same people opposite who, 

a few years ago, were accusing others of having an agenda of 

hospital closures. It was politically expedient at that time, so it 

was okay for them to say whatever they wanted. 

 

And what do these very same people talk about today in trying 

to justify their actions? Well they say we’re closing hospitals all 

right, but we shouldn’t worry. We should trust them because 

they’re establishing wellness centres, whatever that is. 

Somehow they want us to think that wellness centres are almost 

as good as the hospitals they’ve closed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the NDP love to take credit for 

medicare. Well the standards of health care are being eroded at 

an alarming rate, day after day, by this government. This NDP 

government can take credit  credit for killing the care in 

health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  There’s no compassion here. There’s no 

caring. Their own buzz words don’t apply any more. There’s 

just cold, calculated chopping, and some day this government is 

going to pay the price for their actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government tries to project an image of being 

fiscally responsible. Nothing could be further from the truth. 

All you have to do is look at the election campaign of 1986. 

They were trying to out-Tory the Tories, and you know how far 

you’d have to go to do that. 

 

Just look what they offered. They offered a housing program to 

Saskatchewan residents that made the Tories’ mortgage 

protection program look like a drop in the bucket. 

 

Our fiscally responsible Premier knows that. The Premier 

helped devise this ludicrous plan, or at least he didn’t object to 

it because he was eagerly selling it during the campaign. It was 

the 7-7-7 program  sounds familiar doesn’t it?  7 per cent 

mortgages up to a maximum of $70,000 over at least a 

seven-year period. Add to that a $7,500 matching grant for 

home renovations. 

 

Heaven forbid if they’d been elected. Their lavish and 

extravagant spending would have put the province even deeper 

in debt than the Tories did. Estimates at that time put the cost at 

$1.4 billion. And these same people sit across from us today 

telling us how fiscally responsible they are, and they do it with 

a straight face. 

 

They were prepared to spend like drunken sailors just to gain 

power, and they were prepared to put our province deeply in 

debt. But of course they don’t like to talk about that today; 

today they’re fiscally responsible managers of our province.  

That’s what they would like us to believe. In reality though, it’s 

hard to know exactly what they are because they go back on 

their promises so often. Take the ’91 election campaign. To 

gain power, they said there would be no tax increases, that we 

should be able to live within the budget parameters of the day. 

Did they remain true to their word? No. In the 1995 campaign, 

they said that the farmers wouldn’t have to give back their 

GRIP overpayments. Did they keep their word? No. They broke 

another promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne doesn’t enunciate any 

vision for Saskatchewan. And without vision what is there to 

look forward to? Mr. Speaker, we’re losing the best of what we 

have. Our brightest young people are going elsewhere to fulfil 

their dreams. Our youth, the leaders of tomorrow, are leaving 

Saskatchewan at the rate of 27 per week. We’re second only to 

Newfoundland in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said a moment ago this government lacks a 

vision for the future and a vision for developing this province to 

its full potential, but we in the official opposition have a vision 

for Saskatchewan, and we do care about the future. Our vision 

is based in part on what people have been telling us. Our 

business community, for example, has some very good advice 

for this government if they would listen. They just want 

government out of the way. Quit meddling, they say. Cut back 

on the red tape. Get rid of silly regulations, and allow us to 

move on to develop the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can anyone make this government listen? 

Governments can’t create jobs, particularly this government. 

That’s been proven by their own sorry efforts over the last few 

years. Only the business community can create jobs, but they’ll 

have to be given the opportunity. And they have to know that 

government will get out of their way so that an atmosphere of 

optimism can return. 

 

(1200) 

 

Right now business people are very pessimistic, and there’s a 

feeling out there in the business community of frustration. The 

government’s union-first tendering policy which adds millions 

upon millions of dollars in premiums to capital projects, 

meddling with workmen’s compensation rates, the constant 

efforts to increase minimum wage levels, environmental 

regulations that make no sense, high taxes, and exorbitantly 

high costs of power and other utilities are a few of the things 

bothering businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone that had known me for longer for a couple 

of years would state that I was a positive, up-beat person. I’ve 

been in business for over 25 years, and I have a strong belief in 

the potential of people and opportunity. I share this belief with 

a number of businesses in my community who are successful: 

Bourgault, Doepker, Schulte, Koenders, Michel, Dyna Fab, and 

Hogeman, and many more. These are successful businesses 

contributing much to the economy. But they elected me, Mr. 

Speaker. They elected a Liberal to tell this NDP government 

that there is a better way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



182  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  They’ve asked me to tell the ministers and the 

Premier that the businesses have given all they can give. 

Businesses cannot create the jobs the Premier is promising 

unless he truly listens to the people and gets out of the way. 

 

I believe wholeheartedly that success stories are possible in 

many parts of rural Saskatchewan if people were encouraged to 

use their ingenuity and their talents and were given the 

opportunity to move ahead. I believe we could revitalize much 

of our rural landscape if we would let our people do it. 

 

The role for government would be to help identify opportunities 

and perhaps help with research and development, but that’s it. 

Governments always talk about diversifying our agricultural 

base. Well we’ve diversified a little, mostly under previous 

governments, but we can do more, a lot more. We could add 

value to our agricultural products by doing more of the 

processing and packaging right here in Saskatchewan. We could 

increase the number of meat packing plants operating in the 

province. We could open up markets, so we can produce more, 

process more, and add more value right here in Saskatchewan. 

We can and we will if the government will step out of the way 

and let our people make it happen. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan has a lot to offer if given a chance. It has a 

particular lifestyle that you cannot find in cities. The lower cost 

of housing is a tremendous advantage and . . . is a strong 

community bond among the people who live in our towns and 

villages. Our crime rate is lower. Our environment is cleaner, 

and our people in communities make life worth living. But this 

government is doing virtually nothing for rural Saskatchewan 

and farm families. In fact it appears to be determined to 

eliminate our kind. 

 

In 1979 in his first speech to this Assembly, the current 

Minister of Economic Development, then representing 

Shaunavon, had to say this about the farm sector. Mr. Speaker. 

He said, agriculture is the single most important segment of the 

Saskatchewan economy. It seems to me that when farmers have 

needed help from the provincial government in recent years, 

that help was there. 

 

He also said  best of all, Mr. Speaker  the policies and 

programs of this New Democratic government have always 

been designed to fit the needs of the family farm. I believe my 

party believes that the family farm is the foundation of the 

social fabric. My, what a difference a passage of time makes. 

This same member now represents an urban riding. He travels 

the world in important government missions and talks a lot 

about wonderful things he’s doing. He still talks a lot now, but 

it isn’t talk about the family farm any more . . . neither does his 

government because that’s not important to them. 

 

And it’s not just rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that needs a 

lift. The whole province is suffering because the entire 

economic picture is out of focus for this government. Anytime 

this government talks about a partnership approach to economy, 

business is sceptical. They look to the past and see the real face 

of the NDP. The NDP are the people who expropriated half of 

the potash industry out of the province in the ‘70s. And they 

virtually forced the oil industry out of Saskatchewan by their  

excessively high royalties. They’re the people who believe in 

control not partnership. 

 

The Premier has no clue how to work with business because, 

aside from a brief moment in ’82 when he was defeated, he’s 

been nothing but a professional politician. He can’t know about 

jobs or economic development. 

 

The government thinks that economic development is building 

gambling casinos all over this place. You see lots of money 

rolling in, but where is it coming from? Probably in the end just 

from the local economies and they will pay the price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed with an abundance of 

natural resources. It has potash, uranium, oil, natural gas and 

coal. We also have renewable resources such as our northern 

forests. I believe that the potential for this province is limited 

only by the people in whose hands the power lies, but that 

potential will never be realized under this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government wants the people of this 

beautiful province of ours to believe that its party is going to 

change. Premier Romanow says there’s an evolution happening. 

His party intends to be what it should have been five years ago. 

The Premier says that his government is suddenly going to 

acquire a social conscience. It’s going to suddenly acquire the 

ability and the knowledge to run this province’s economy in a 

sensible business-like way. 

 

Private entrepreneurs are the social conscience. Does that sound 

familiar Mr. Speaker? What would the Premier have us believe? 

Would he have us believe that he and his ministers and party 

will evolve into a Liberal-thinking party? I think not. I am a 

Liberal, Mr. Speaker, and I care about people’s potential. I 

believe there are people who have unlimited energy and talents 

and will shine in the business world but are willing to help 

those who are not as fortunate. 

 

I will work diligently with the government when they are 

creating an environment where all people will be proud to call 

this province home. I will work with a government who 

believes in ability of people to perform and to outperform the 

rest of the world. I don’t see this belief in the Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker, and accordingly I cannot support it. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a new 

member I want to tell those members present, and especially the 

Leader of the Third Party who was concerned the other day 

about the costs and the time that this exercise takes, and I want 

to assure him that I won’t be as costly or time-consuming as he 

was in his reply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker 

on your election on behalf of my constituents and myself. And 

the members of this Assembly, I believe, will be well served by 

you in your new positions as will the people of Saskatchewan. 



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the members from 

Battleford-Cut Knife and Regina South for the fine and 

eloquent way in which they moved and seconded the throne 

speech, and I especially want to thank them for doing this job. I 

realize it is an honour to be asked to do this, but as a new 

member I did feel some relief it wasn’t me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  I also want to thank the constituents of Estevan 

for giving me the honour to represent them on the government 

side of this House. We are very proud of our constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, for I believe it is one of the most diversified in the 

province. 

 

The agricultural sector produces some of the finest and highest 

protein wheat in the province. The people of the oil sector have 

given their industry new and innovative ideas used throughout 

the world. The mining operations produce some of the best 

lignite in Saskatchewan, and it is exported across the country. 

And the business community, Mr. Speaker, that has never been 

afraid to compete with cross-border shopping; in fact it is a way 

of life. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a Crown sector that 

generates and distributes the majority of Saskatchewan’s 

electricity run by employees who are not afraid to speak out 

when they feel something is wrong but in the end are 

reasonable and receptive to change. 

 

Just as diversified as the economy is the political profile of this 

constituency. Over the past number of years we have been 

represented by all parties in this House, and the people are very 

astute, Mr. Speaker. The member elected is usually on the 

government side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to respond, on behalf of my party and 

my constituents, to the throne speech today. Our government is 

offering promise and hope for the future of Saskatchewan, and 

the throne speech provides a framework for new opportunities, 

and province-wide, including the constituency of Estevan. 

 

For the last several years the Saskatchewan economy has been 

improving because we have been building on our strengths, but 

we must plan for the future, Mr. Speaker, to meet the challenges 

of a global economy. There are many challenges we face which 

include new directions in education and local governance. We 

recognize that the very system that has served us well in the 

past must continue to serve us well for future generations. And 

to do that, we must meet the needs of a changing society. 

 

Saskatchewan has some of the finest educational institutions in 

the country, Mr. Speaker, but if we don’t keep up with 

increased demands on the system, we will be left behind. 

Post-secondary education and training are under pressure to 

adapt to a rapidly changing economy. Today people must learn 

to work with new technologies, and they must constantly 

upgrade their knowledge and skills. Federal funding reductions 

limit our capacity to offer an abundance of quality programs in 

Saskatchewan. Despite these reductions, we must always ensure 

that post-secondary education remains accessible if we are to 

meet the demand for a highly skilled workforce in the years 

ahead. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Our challenge is to chart a new course and make 

improvements while reducing costs. We must look at cost 

savings which can be achieved through more cooperation 

among institutions, such things as joint administrative services, 

improved credit transfers, and shared information systems. This 

concept is already taking place in some sectors and is having 

positive results. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, our education system is responding 

to the needs of today and tomorrow. We have training programs 

that are tailored to the workplace, and we are using long 

distance computer and video education to bring selected 

courses into the communities where students live, saving 

students and parents in rural Saskatchewan thousands in 

housing costs for first-year university courses. 

 

Just recently we announced the Partnership for Growth 

program which is in the second phase of our long-term strategy 

for the Saskatchewan economy. Partnership for Growth 

recognizes the importance education and training have in our 

new economy. One of the initiatives outlined in the program, 

Mr. Speaker, is to match training to job opportunities through a 

flexible learning system. 

 

We will be enhancing the province’s skills, training, and 

employment system by undertaking pilot projects with the 

federal government to test innovative approaches to regional 

labour-market information, community-based career services, 

and work-study partnerships. In 1997 we will propose to 

develop training based on regional and sectorial needs, provide 

better services to improve the link between training and jobs, 

and provide flexible learning approaches to training. Mr. 

Speaker, over the next three years we will be working with 

industry and training institutions to develop new strategies for 

work-based training in Saskatchewan. The people of 

Saskatchewan have said they want these types of initiatives to 

help people get into the workforce, and the government has 

responded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Mr. Speaker, just as education faces new 

challenges, so do many local governments in Saskatchewan. We 

have an opportunity to make changes to a system of local 

governance which has not seen significant change since our 

province was settled about 90 years ago. It is a fact of life that 

our communities are changing, and the rural population is 

declining. As people move to larger centres, this trend is 

expected to continue well into the future. 

 

Our province, Mr. Speaker, has a higher proportion of local 

governments that any other province in Canada. There are 847 

municipal governments and 119 school boards in 

Saskatchewan, and in some of our smaller communities we 

have one elected official for every two or three families. Mr. 

Speaker, people are saying that it is time to review government 

structures and make some changes  changes such as reducing 

local administration costs and forming partnerships. 

 



184  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Recently our government consulted the public about the future 

direction of the province, and they responded. The results of the 

consultation demonstrate the need for change. Mr. Speaker, 79 

per cent of respondents said the number of local governments 

we have is too high, and 73 per cent felt that the rolls and 

structure of our governments should be reviewed. During our 

town hall meetings, some people said that equipment, services, 

and maintenance should be shared by neighbouring 

municipalities and school divisions. And, Mr. Speaker, our 

government is responding by starting discussions with local 

governments on the best way to reduce administrative costs so 

that more money is available to provide needed public services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only five years ago we faced a deficit that had 

financial markets closing doors. But through hard work and 

with the help of the people of Saskatchewan, we were the first 

province in the ‘90s to present a balanced budget. Now we face 

new challenges which call for innovative solutions, solutions 

which have been outlined in the throne speech. Like our 

forefathers who emerged from the drought of the ‘30s, we too 

face a new set of pressures. But we can build on our strengths, 

and we are well prepared to seek out new relationships and new 

ways of doing business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the things I have said here today refer to 

changes. Change, Mr. Speaker, is not something to be afraid of, 

for change is all around us. Change is in the economy. Change 

is in programs. Change is in society and, Mr. Speaker, even 

political change. And political change is quite evident, Mr. 

Speaker, even in this House for, as I look across this floor, I see 

Conservatives that want to be Reformers. I see a Liberal, Mr. 

Speaker, that was a Reformer, and, Mr. Speaker, we even have 

a Liberal who the Liberals want to be a Liberal but is an 

independent. 

 

(1215) 

 

But change, Mr. Speaker, is not new to this government, for this 

government was originally formed over 50 years to create 

change and will probably continue to do so for the next 50 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion for the throne 

speech, and I will not be supporting the motion of amendment. 

For as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, change is not something to be 

afraid of but simply a vehicle to get us from the past to the 

future and into the 21st century. 

 

And in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a quote which 

came into my house the other day on my church bulletin  by 

Isaiah the prophet, which I think is very appropriate for this 

term and this government and the members of this House. And 

he said: 

 

Cease to dwell on days gone by and to brood over past 

history. Here and now I will do a new thing. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize that 

applause was all for me, and I want to enter this debate, this 

session, Mr. Speaker, by saying that we are very happy to have 

you elected as the Speaker and we look forward to many, many 

hours of intelligent debate with yourself keeping the order of 

the Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have contemplated the Speech from the 

Throne and the contents of it for the past several days, as we 

anticipated the direction that the government was going to take. 

We obviously realized that that had a lot to do with the 

direction that the federal government budget would take; and as 

the two came together this week it is interesting to note how the 

direction will go in the province. And we found ourselves rather 

amazed that as the week progressed we find the government 

members still saying things like, well we’re going to be short of 

money and we’ll have to keep tax rates high because the federal 

government has downloaded on us and is going to continue to 

do so many things. 

 

Well according to the reports we hear, the federal budget really 

isn’t going to do all that much that the provincial government 

hasn’t known about for a long time. So we’re really distressed 

and confused as to where this whole direction of the 

government is going. If we’re simply going to continue to 

blame Ottawa and continue to tax high and destroy business 

opportunities, then where are the opportunities for this province 

to really start to expand and grow? 

 

I think we’ve got to get back to the basic fundamentals of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in a Saskatchewan legislature, and 

start to talk about what will turn our province around rather 

then what will we do for the country or how will the country do 

for us. Let’s get back to some fundamental reasons why we are 

in the disastrous shape we’re in. 

 

Basically it started  and I was interested earlier today to listen 

to the name of Tommy Douglas come up again. And certainly I 

have the highest respect for this gentlemen; he did a lot of good 

things for our province. And I would be the last one ever to cast 

aspersions on the memory of someone who has passed before 

us. 

 

However, to continuously rattle the poor old man’s bones and 

to give him credit for things that have happened that didn’t 

happen, that too, Mr. Speaker, is not fair and not right. And I 

don’t believe that the man, with the character he had, would 

want to have that happen. He would never want to be given 

credit for things that he really didn’t do. 

 

And the truth of the matter is though, that he did lead this 

province into a left-wing direction at a time when our 

neighbours to the west found themselves electing governments 

that decided that a more moderate approach to reality and life, a 

life of freedom, that most of the pioneers of this western part of 

Canada escaped as they escaped the tyrannies of Europe. Most 

of these people, Mr. Speaker, came to Saskatchewan and 

Alberta basically running away from tyranny. 

 

In Alberta, they decided that freedom was good and we will 

continue to go along the lines of freedom and democracy and  



March 8, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

build a capitalistic structure. And in 1930 with a population 

significantly less than Saskatchewan, they began on a road 

towards a right-wing approach to government. 

 

In Saskatchewan, of course, the war came along and we found 

Mr. Douglas in the chains of command. The chains of 

command in Saskatchewan, he decided, would be to provide 

everything to everyone. It seemed natural when people were in 

terrible straits, economic conditions were bad. However, there 

is the contrast between the two provinces  one took the fork 

down the road to the right; the other took the fork down the 

road to the left. And where are we at now? 

 

We’ve got a million people and Alberta’s got 3 million. 

Saskatchewan produces 3,000 jobs; Alberta produces 103,000 

jobs. Well, do we need any more proof than that to see that we 

went the wrong direction? Is it perhaps not time to take a sharp 

swerve to the right and try and get back on the right road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne I see no evidence 

of that happening. Quite frankly, I want to give credit where 

credit is due. We are believers in Conservative philosophy and 

we believe in fiscal responsibility and we see this government 

having done some things that are proper in that area. We have 

said in our caucus that we will compliment the government 

when they do good things and we will oppose them when we 

believe they’re wrong. 

 

And today I want to give credit to the Premier in the direction 

that he’s led this province in the past year in terms of economic 

development. He has come up with a balanced budget. 

Unfortunately that was all done with taxation. And 

unfortunately it was not designed after the example of Alberta 

where they also tied it not just to balancing the budget, but to 

stimulating the economy. That’s where the Premier missed the 

boat. But balancing the budget was good. We applaud him for 

that. That’s the thing we needed to do, and maybe you could do 

it one way, maybe you could do it another way. 

 

They used to tell me you could kill a cat more ways than one. 

You could choke it with butter or you could drive over it with a 

car. Well you see that’s the thing; we didn’t make the right 

choices. But the Premier did well. He did manage to get the 

budget balanced, and we’re happy about that. 

 

And I want to remind members opposite that if they had let me 

talk yesterday, I would have used the really good speech, but 

because I don’t have time to really get into the meat of the 

thing, I might just as well tell you some of the facts as we see it 

from the perspective of how this week is unfolding. 

 

First of all we give the Premier a C for his economic direction. 

That’s not bad. It’s report card time. I’m a father, have got lots 

of kids, and we try to read things that way. Well, Mr. Speaker, a 

C for economic direction, balancing the budget, that’s not bad 

in terms of political things, especially coming from an 

opposition party. 

 

Unfortunately though, we still look at these labour laws and we 

still look at the Workers’ Compensation Board fiasco, if you 

could ever call it anything better  never. And then you take  

all of the calls and all of the letters that we’re receiving and you 

listen to folks all over the province tell us about how this person 

got laid off and how that person is getting a notice and how the 

best opportunity left yet is to go to Alberta. 

 

Then we come up with a plan where we thought we might 

encourage the government to do better. And we did it of course 

with private members’ Bills because there’s not a very much 

better vehicle to give a message to the government than that 

vehicle, for a third party. So we did that, and we’ve introduced 

those things. Immediately the press comes that the Premier was 

upset with us. Well I can’t see why. We were willing to give 

him credit where credit was due. We’re happy that he balanced 

the budget. Now what he has to do is build an economic base in 

this province. 

 

Unfortunately he can’t do it the direction he’s going, so we 

thought we’d try to help him and show him where to go. But 

instead of that, he gets upset with us and starts to throw around 

rhetoric about how it’ll never work. Well let me tell you, there’s 

a couple of mistakes in the things that he did and said. And we 

want to correct those, Mr. Speaker, because I think perhaps if 

the Premier really understood what we were saying and if he 

really knew the facts, he might reconsider. And I know that this 

government has done that sort of thing in the past. 

 

Now they do get a little confused sometimes and they do 

neglect to research their material. The Premier says we attached 

our right-to-work legislation that we are proposing to an 

Alabama solution. Well let me point out that it probably is true 

that Alabama has this legislation. Twenty other states in the 

United States also have this kind of legislation; there are 21 

examples. There are enormous amounts of variations of this 

kind of program that you can put into effect. You don’t 

necessarily have to have the one that is the worst. We could 

perhaps pick out the one that is the best. And the best of this 

whole thing is that you might, you might still be able to get this 

government to turn the corner and head in the direction to the 

right road and get back onto stream with building Saskatchewan 

to the same way that Alberta is now. We could still catch up. 

 

Why could we catch up? You might ask, how could we? People 

will say, oh, Alberta’s got so much more than we’ve got. 

Alberta’s so much greater. They’ve got mountains. Well 

whoop-de-do, they’ve got mountains. We’ve got prairies. 

We’ve got trees. Most important, of course, is the measurement 

that of wealth between our province has to be. And I know all 

of you folks realize this  the measurement is our resources 

and our people. 

 

We’re short about 2 million people of course. But we do have 

the resources. People will say, well Alberta’s got all the oil. No, 

they don’t have all the oil. We’ve got lots of oil here to. 

 

Has Alberta got any uranium? Probably a few bucketfuls. But 

reality is that we’ve got more. 

 

Can they grow wheat? Not nearly as good as Saskatchewan 

farmers can. 

 



186  Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1996 

Cattle? We could out-produce them any day of the week if we 

just had good policies that would allow our beef producers to 

be able to compete with the things that are going on in Alberta. 

They don’t have any more pasture land than we’ve got grain 

land that we could produce barley on and feed cattle. 

 

The truth of the matter is that we’ve got everything in 

Saskatchewan that they’ve got and more. Except we’ve got the 

wrong direction, the wrong direction in all areas except the 

balancing of the budget. 

 

And so now we come to the grade on job creation and 

economic development. Unfortunately our leader has been right 

when he says here, it is an F. We have failed  failed 

miserably. And I’m asking you, I’m asking you, on this week 

when you’ve put in your Speech from the Throne, when you’ve 

delivered the direction you want to take the province, think 

about the budget coming up in a couple of weeks. 

 

You’ve got a second chance here. Design that budget to go 

along with the introduction of legislation that will change some 

of the fundamental ways that we do business in Saskatchewan. 

Design that, my friends, so that we can turn that corner and 

recover from the disaster that we are in. 

 

The way to do this is quite simple. All you have to do is 

improve the business climate of our province. Improving the 

business climate of Saskatchewan would be so simple you 

wouldn’t even have to totally offend your union friends. All 

you’d have to do is re-educate them and bring them back to the 

reality that they have a job to do which is to serve their 

membership, not to try to be the number two government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Right now you’ve allowed the union leaders to take over the 

administration of this province. By threats of not supporting 

you as politicians, they have surely done that. And you have to 

stand up to them and tell them where their place is  serving 

their membership, not running the government. 

 

Then you have to change the legislation necessary to make our 

business climate that which is in Alberta. It’s as simple as that 

my friends. We can compete with Alberta. We’ve got more 

resources. And within five to ten years, we could have a 

population of 3 million people and a tax base that would 

support this province and give us the same kind of prosperity 

that Alberta people enjoy now  $5,200 less taxes and utility 

bills for an average family of four. That’s what you could offer 

the people of Saskatchewan You could win every election from 

here until eternity if you only had the sense to follow some of 

the basic examples of business principles, those things that this 

government has tragically lost sight of. 

 

My friends, you can do this. You are the government. You have 

the ability to make that turn. You’re in the first year of your 

mandate. Three years from now, the NDP folks that I’ve talked 

to tell me that after three years it doesn’t matter what you do; 

people will have forgotten. Well if they’re going to forget 

anyway, then do something right. You might be surprised. 

Maybe you won’t even need all of the supporters you presently 

have. You might get some of ours. 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to take just a brief moment to say how 

much I appreciate the people from back home having allowed 

me to come back to this Assembly. I didn’t know how much I 

enjoyed it until I stood up here this last few minutes, so I thank 

them . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I must inform the Assembly that under 

rule 14(3) it is my duty as this time to interrupt debate and put 

the question on the amendment which is before the House. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:30 p.m. until 12:38 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  13 

 

Osika Aldridge McLane 

Draude McPherson Belanger 

Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 

Boyd D’Autremont Heppner 

Goohsen   

 

Nays  30 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Wiens 

Lingenfelter Shillington Anguish 

Tchorzewski Johnson Lautermilch 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Koenker 

Trew Bradley Lorje 

Nilson Serby Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Langford 

Kasperski Ward Jess 

Flavel Murrell Thomson 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I have a number of remarks 

to make about the Speech from the Throne, but I would prefer 

to do that on Monday. So I do now move that debate be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:42 p.m. 

 


