




















































June 18, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2787 
 June 18, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the Premier to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. 
I’d like to introduce to the colleagues of the legislature, my 
staff, who will be giving me assistance in answering these 
questions tonight, this evening. 
 
First of all, to my left is the deputy minister to myself, Mr. 
Frank Bogdasavich. To my right is my chief of staff, Mr. Garry 
Aldridge. Behind me is the director of operations and executive 
services, Don Wincherauk. And behind him is the manager of 
administration, Bonita Heidt. And right behind Mr. 
Bogdasavich is Mr. Bogdasavich’s executive assistant, Mr. Jim 
Nicol. And that is the team. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I’d like 
to welcome your officials this evening and express appreciation 
for them to assist us. With the indulgence of the House, I want 
to open up today’s set of estimates with just some opening 
remarks, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It’s now been over three months since I first took my place in 
this spot to deliver my reply to the throne speech. I’ll be the 
first to admit that it’s been a learning experience for me, just as 
it has I’m sure for all new members in this House. Because I’m 
so new to politics, some might say I’m at a slight disadvantage 
this evening, going up against a man who’s sat in this House 
almost constantly for so many years, having first been elected 
when I was barely out of diapers. 
 
But I don’t look at it as a disadvantage, Mr. Chairman. I see 
myself as still one of the people we are here to represent. A year 
ago, that’s what I was  an outsider looking in on this place, 
wondering what the heck was going on in here, why some of 
the decisions were being made, why there were so many games 
played here, games that do nothing to benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan. And after sitting here for a session, I can see 
how those things can happen. I can see why games are played, 
why comments are made, but I also know that these games 
don’t benefit the people of Saskatchewan in the least. And I 
think that’s what we all should be aware of. 
 
The people are worried about what affects them. Can they pay 
their bills? Do they have access to a hospital? Are their roads 
passable? And the list goes on and on. But too often, as 
members of this House, we get caught up in the blood sport of 
politics and forget about the problems that face the people  
or, even worse, we see members of this House, members of the 
cabinet, the Premier himself, do nothing to fix these problems.  

Instead the government seems to be fixated on playing politics, 
and that means finding others to blame. 
 
I find it frustrating that every time we stood in this House to ask 
a question of the government about very real issues facing 
people of this province, the political switch clicked on and their 
blame game began. They know how ludicrous it is as well. They 
know they are being less than totally honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan, but who can blame the government, I suppose. 
On a political level, what they’re doing makes sense. The 
NDP’s (New Democratic Party) bread and butter for years has 
been to blame others. 
 
The federal government, be it Conservatives or Liberals, has 
always been a prime target for this party and this government. 
And why wouldn’t it be? There’s no chance their own party will 
ever be in power federally, so it’s safe to blame those nasty feds 
for every cloud in the sky. Just as it’s easy to blame just as 
many of this government’s own problems on the long-past 
Conservative government of Grant Devine. 
 
Obviously, that corrupt and incompetent regime is a big target 
that any good politician would go after. Obviously, the debt that 
government racked up is something that will harm our province 
for years to come. However, enough is enough. It’s time to stop 
the excuses and bring on the answers, and that’s something the 
government opposite has simply refused to do. They haven’t 
been able to stop playing politics long enough to level with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
A few months ago we heard the Premier in his $30,000 
infomercial tell us that the government had some difficult 
choices to make. Well what government doesn’t have difficult 
choices to make? 
 
Saskatchewan is not alone in that, and the people would 
understand about the difficult choices when it comes to issues 
such as health care, or education, or social services. But the 
people would also like to see a government that stands by their 
choices instead of coming up with every excuse in the book to 
say their choices aren’t their responsibility. But that’s what 
we’ve been subjected to. The “blame game” as my colleague 
from Thunder Creek called it earlier in this session. 
 
When we ask the question, it’s the federal Liberal’s fault. When 
the Tories ask a question, it’s Grant Devine’s fault. Mr. 
Premier, can’t you see the people of Saskatchewan aren’t 
interested in whose fault it is. Can’t you just stand up and tell 
the people here, here’s the problem and here’s our solution to 
fix it? Can’t you give the people of Saskatchewan this courtesy? 
 
No. Instead, we see the NDP playing much the same game as 
the Tories did. Say one thing before an election; say another 
after. The Tories mastered that and I’m afraid so have the NDP. 
 
The litany of broken promises we’ve seen in this session alone 
is stunning and the government is just so blatant about breaking 
their promises you just have to shake your head and wonder if 
they think the people of Saskatchewan are so ill-informed that  



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

they can’t see what’s going on. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to get into those broken 
promises in a moment or two; but first, Mr. Chairman, I just 
want to begin my questions to the Premier this evening by first 
reading back a quote. It’s a quote from September 21, 1991 and 
it goes like this: “We will make no promises we cannot keep.” 
We will make no promises we cannot keep, and the speaker of 
that quote, the Premier himself. 
 
So my first question this evening, the first of many, is a very 
general one. It’s this. Does the Premier feel he’s done a good 
job in keeping this, his first promise, his promise not to break 
promises, especially in this last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, let me first of all 
say that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition talks about a 
learning experience for him, and I must tell the Leader of the 
Opposition that it remains a learning experience, I think, for 
every one of us. Certainly it remains, being a member of this 
House, a learning experience for me. For example, I didn’t 
know until I heard you tonight that I’d been in provincial 
politics so long, so I learned something tonight. And all of us, I 
think, if we keep a mind that is open, and a heart and a spirit 
that is open, we’re going to be learning. I have found that to be 
one of the great experiences of political and public life. 
 
I think the Leader of the Opposition started out fairly strongly 
when he said, let’s not play political games, and then very 
quickly got derailed by saying that he was going to do exactly 
what he started out by saying he was not going to do  namely, 
blaming us for breaking promises and for making statements of 
one sort or another that we didn’t follow up, and attacking us 
on the fact that we somehow tried to divert our actions onto the 
federal Liberals or onto the provincial Progressive 
Conservatives. 
 
I don’t believe that to be the case in any excessive fashion. 
Although I think the Leader of the Opposition will have to 
agree with me in all honesty that if the shoes fits it must be 
worn. And certainly the offloading that the federal Liberals 
have imposed, not only on Saskatchewan but all of Canada, and 
what the Progressive Conservatives in this province have done 
to this province, certainly is a pretty factual circumstance and 
rather a tough tale of woe that the people of Saskatchewan have 
to carry. 
 
But leaving that as an aside, and with those few preliminary 
opening remarks, the question is, do I feel that we have done a 
good job in making, in keeping, the promises that we’ve met. 
And the answer is, obviously I do. This is not quite yet, I don’t 
believe, the first year anniversary of our election in the second 
term. 
 
We have, in the 1995-96 period since our election, a series of 
commitments that we have made. And I believe that as I look 
down this list  which time does not permit me to recite at any 
length  but: balancing the budgets, ‘95-96, ‘96-97 through to 
‘98-99; a commitment to reduce the total debt by $1.2 billion, 
promise met; by 1999 the provincial debt will amount to 51 per 
cent of GDP (gross domestic product), actually we’re predicting  

44 per cent of GDP; more than 100 education sites to be 
connected on the information highway, over 100 sites now 
connected; elimination of deficit surtax to lower income 
earners. 
 
As I say, I have several pages here where we keep a little check 
mark and checklist of the commitments that we made, and 
whether or not they have been fulfilled by our programs. And 
we’ve gotten off to a very fast start. I would have to admit to 
the Leader of the Opposition that not all of the promises made 
have been fulfilled, but we have three to four years yet to go on 
our mandate. But certainly on the major areas that we have 
promised action, we have undertaken them and we are well on 
the way to keeping the promises. Some are further down the 
road and more successfully attained than others, but on balance 
I think this is a very impressive record indeed. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Chairman, I’ll 
return to a few more broken promises later and I’ll try to get 
through them all, but I understand we’ve only got a few hours 
this evening so I’ll just get through as many as I can. Any I 
forget, I’m sure my colleagues in the opposition or in the third 
party will remind me of them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, over and over again we’ve seen this 
government’s game plan to blame everything on the nasty feds. 
That works rather well, given they are our namesakes and we 
are now the official opposition. It makes perfect political sense 
to blame the feds. It’s been done in Saskatchewan for years. 
 
And yes, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan has received a cut-back, 
and by my calculations that cut-back is about 1.5 per cent over 
the next two years and that’s taking in total revenue of about $5 
billion. Of course we hear the government spinning those 
numbers in the worst possible fashion they can muster, but in 
the end, Saskatchewan will lose 1.5 per cent of its revenue over 
the next two years. And this at a time when the farm economy is 
doing well, the resource sector is doing well, and if we are to 
believe the Economic Development minister, Saskatchewan is 
doing well economically. 
 
That’s open to question, Mr. Chairman. But for the moment 
let’s use a huge leap of faith and accept this as being so. So I 
wonder if the Premier can tell us how a cut of 1.5 per cent can 
cause such apparent distress for this government. How can so 
many of our programs and government services depend on the 
same 1.5 per cent? 
 
(1915) 
 
I mean this 1.5 per cent has been blamed for everything from 
potholes on Highway No. 35, to the lack of sewer and water in 
the North, to the closure of nursing home beds, to the breaking 
of VLT (video lottery terminal) revenue promises  you name 
it. And it’s because of this cut from Ottawa. 
 
Again I ask the Premier, how can a 1.5 per cent cut have such a 
detrimental effect on a $5 billion budget? It’s like saying, it’s 
just like saying, Mr. Chairman, I can’t pay my rent this month 
because my salary cheque has been cut by $5. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the 
way to answer the Leader of the Opposition is in the following 
manner, by giving the Leader of the Opposition some hard 
numbers. These are numbers from the federal budget. 
 
And may I begin by saying that it is not my job to fight the 
federal government. I want to serve as, if I may put it in this 
way, an ally, a Canadian, to find Canadian solutions to 
Canada’s problems  whether it’s a national debt, whether it’s 
restructuring the health care program or the social safety net or 
whatever. There’ll be areas of disagreement and we have 
ideological differences to be sure. But I don’t enter into 
political life and I don’t adopt the position as Premier, that my 
mission in life is to attack everything that Mr. Chrétien and the 
federal Liberal government does. 
 
But here are the raw numbers. In 1995-96, the cash transfers to 
Saskatchewan amounted to $624 million  ‘95-96, ending the 
period of March 31, 624 million. This year that we’re debating 
estimates under review, that has dropped by $114 million to 
$510 million. 
 
By 1997-98 the transfers will drop to 418 million or $206 
million less. In ‘98-99 the transfers will drop to 396 million or 
228 million. By ‘99-2000, the time of the next election, the 
transfers will drop all the way to 372 million or $252 million 
less in 1995-96  $252 million less; $252 dollars for every 
man, woman and child in the province of Saskatchewan less. In 
total, 800 million less. 
 
And by the way, I am not here taking into account, although I 
could very well do so, the question of the offload of the federal 
government, forcing the provinces to carry the responsibility, 
for example, for status Indian people off reserve or the changes 
to the UI (unemployment insurance) or for the moment even 
leaving aside the transfers reductions which took place before 
Mr. Chrétien took office. This actually started before 1993 
under the former prime minister, Mr. Mulroney. So let’s just 
deal with these numbers. 
 
Now that’s $252 million, $252 per capita less a year, but in four 
years time. Now here’s our situation. The amount of money that 
we’ve got incoming in taxes and the amount that we’ve got out 
in expenditures for program are equal. All of a sudden, we’re 
252 less in revenue, 252 for every man, woman and child in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if I’m to listen to you people, I’m not to run a deficit. I 
don’t want to run a deficit either, although I’m 252 a year, each 
and every year, in a deficit if I do nothing. If I’m to listen to you 
people, I’m not supposed to raise any taxes, so I don’t want to 
raise the taxes. So I’m still short $252 million. 
 
If I listen to you people, I shouldn’t be cutting back in any 
government service or restructuring in any government service 
either, because that is in fact, as the Leader of the Conservatives 
says . . . add more if you listen to the Liberal Party  this 
doesn’t square  your circle doesn’t square. 
 
And when I say $252 per man, woman and child, please 
understand I’m working on a million people in the province of  

which probably maybe 450,000 are taxpayers. That $250 per 
capita is much higher for the actual taxpayers. 
 
And when you have an ageing population and a youthful 
population and you’ve got a population which requires training 
and education and all the various other components, this 
compels the government of the day to do one of two things  
sort of say, well to heck with it, we’re going to run up deficits, 
we’re going to ignore the problem. Or roll up its sleeves and say 
to everybody in Saskatchewan, including the official opposition 
parties, look, join us in making sure that we balance, that we 
don’t increase taxes, that we save as best as we can our core 
programs in education, health, and social services, as best as we 
can. 
 
They’ll be pinching in other areas. We know the municipal 
governments are concerned. We know there’s a highways 
problem and situation. But we’re trying to manage this offload 
that is the case. 
 
So when you say to us, it’s only 1.5 per cent or whatever the 
percentage of the figure is, that’s not the question. The question 
is, where do you find that 252 million which, if I may say 
before I sit down, leave it for one year is 252 million deficit; 
leave it for another year, it’s a $500 million deficit; leave it for 
four years and you’re back to a billion dollars deficit and you 
know what that does on interest payments on the public debt. 
 
Right now our interests on the public debt are $860 million a 
year. And that money goes out of your taxpayers’ pockets, out 
of your pockets or the taxpayers’ pockets, and goes down to 
Hong Kong and Zürich and New York and London and Paris 
and Montreal and Toronto  and if you’re lucky to have a 
Saskatchewan savings bond, well thank goodness, then you get 
the interest payments  money for them to get rich when the 
money should be here at home for our schools, our hospitals, 
our roads, our highways, our infrastructure. Well that’s the 
circle that you have to square. 
 
And you can attack us all you want, but in this debate you’re 
going to have to at some point or other  I don’t mean tonight; 
maybe tonight if you want to  at some point or other, you’re 
going to have to tell the people of Saskatchewan where is it at. 
Is it deficit? And if it isn’t deficit, how are you going to make 
up the shortfall? Is it going to be cut-back? Where and how? 
And if it’s not going to be cut-back, you’ve still got the deficit. 
You’ve got to square the circle, and you can’t be all over the 
ballpark in this debate. And that’s the problem for the Liberal 
Party. 
 
Now when the Conservatives come at me in these estimates, 
we’ll have a different kind of a debate because they have a very 
specific agenda. We know exactly where they stand. And at 
least we’ve got a clash of philosophy, ideology, and practical 
economics. But with the Liberals, it’s straddling both sides. 
 
So I’m not trying to blame the Prime Minister. I am saying to 
the Prime Minister  I’m going to sit down on this  look, 
we’d like to join with you in tailoring a new suit to match the 
cloth which is available. We know that Canadians are in debt 
too. We know you’ve got to solve your national debt too. 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

But can we not sit down as premiers and prime ministers and 
territorial leaders and work out a sensible deficit/debt reduction 
strategy and devise redesign of health care programs  not just 
simply chopping  in order to do the best that we can to save 
the core values, the values of community, compassion, and 
caring and sharing which are the hallmark of Saskatchewan and 
Canadian life? And when the answer is no, the answer is 
simply, we’re cutting back, that’s the impact. 
 
And if you were sitting here in the treasury benches, if you were 
right here, as my colleague, and you had to sit there every 
Tuesday in cabinet and you’re lying awake at night worrying 
about where the next cut should not be made because of what 
the hurt is going to be to the people, then you’ve got a tough 
choice to make. In opposition, to be credible, you’re going to 
have to tell us what choices you are going to make. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. I agree with you; you 
do have some tough choices to make. We’re not just totally 
convinced that some of the choices that have been made are the 
right ones, particularly regarding health care cuts. 
 
Now it seems to me that your Health minister has been 
responding in somewhat of a confusing manner. On the one 
hand he says so much of the heartache and so much of the fear 
we see going on in health care today, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, is due once again to the 1.5 per cent federal 
cut-back. It’s all their fault that there’s that shortfall. But that’s 
only answer number one. 
 
Answer number two for the Minister of Health is to say there 
actually is no shortfall in health care because the provincial 
government has back-filled the cuts. So I’m a little confused, 
Mr. Premier. If these so-called cut-backs to health care have 
been back-filled by the government, why is there a health care 
problem today? Some would call it . . . some would even call it 
a crisis. If the provincial government has replaced all this 
money this year, one can only assume there is a crisis because 
there hasn’t been enough money in the system for several years 
prior to the federal transfer payment changes. 
 
Yes, Mr. Premier, we know that $1.5 billion is being spent on 
health care, just as it always was. So why do we see so many 
facilities in trouble? Why are so many health districts crying out 
for more money? Why is there such an apparent problem if the 
provincial government is funding health care so adequately? 
And keep in mind, you’ve said you’ve back-filled any cuts from 
the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Leader 
of the Opposition, we have this year back-filled 100 per cent, 
the $110 million, and it goes all the way to the 250 million that 
I told you about a few moments ago for the ’96-’97 budget. 
 
What I’ve not told you, and I could, but in the interest of time 
unless you want me to do it, to outline for you that it just didn’t 
start magically in the year ’96-97  the cut-backs from Ottawa. 
This has been a pattern which has been going on now for the 
last couple of years, and there have been all kinds of actions 
taken by other provincial governments, the cap on cap and so 
forth, which is a part of this problem. It’s been an ongoing  

situation, but you have to understand a couple of facts in terms 
of Saskatchewan Health. 
 
For example, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, this province still 
has more hospitals per capita, more hospitals per capita than 
any other province in Canada even today as I speak  77 
hospitals per million, and that’s more than double the Canadian 
average of 30.7. Nearly 80 per cent of all of Saskatchewan 
people live within a 10-minute drive of a nursing home, and 
almost 80 per cent of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan are within 50 kilometres, 50 miles . . . 99 per 
cent of the people, I’m sorry, are within 50 miles of the hospital 
in Saskatchewan. And that is way above the national average. 
 
Now what we’re doing here is we’re saving medicare in 
Saskatchewan, and health care. And I’ll tell you what we’re 
doing. This is not a new idea. If you go back to the Thompson 
commission which was the forerunner for Douglas and Lloyd 
implementing medicare, Thompson studied medicare. 
Thompson said that there was a two-part approach to medicare. 
The first part was, remove money as an obstacle between 
myself as the patient and you as the care-giver. We did that with 
hospitalization and medicare in 1962. 
 
But then they said there was a second objective  restructure 
health care into wellness. Move it away from bricks and mortar, 
pills and expensive technology where there are huge expenses, 
and try to keep people away from doctors and from hospitals. 
Take a look at the person in a holistic way, make sure that 
people understand. And the Leader of the Conservative Party 
perhaps won’t accept this, but the children’s council on health, 
Canadian Council on Children’s Health, says that a child born 
into poverty, to state the obvious, is many more times likely to 
die in childbirth, be sicker during adolescence, and die younger. 
The simple fact of being born poor, the accident of poorness  
not having a job  these are all factors which relate to health 
care. 
 
So what the second phase of health care called for was a slight 
readjustment from acute care into prevention care. And so what 
we’re doing is, for example, seeing a situation which there is a 
switch from acute care and fewer dollars going to institutions 
like hospitals and nursing homes and trying to do the very best 
for those that remain, making them the top quality, keeping in 
mind that medical technology is exploding in its cost and its 
effectiveness and range, and redirecting the money into 
community care and home care where people are available in 
their own homes in providing the care to live healthier, happier, 
more productive circumstances in their situation. 
 
Let me just give you one other fact before I take my seat. One 
million dollars in this way, as I’ve just described, will pay for 
one of the following for a year: six hospital beds; 30 people in 
nursing homes; or providing 427 people with full-service home 
care for a year. 
 
Now this is a big change. It’s a change in the way we’ve done 
business in health care. We used to build hospitals everywhere, 
and I admit this ironically. In the by-election down in . . . where 
the late Jack Wolfe took the election in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the Conservatives campaigned on  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

hospitals once every 10, 11 miles  Coronach, straight down. 
And we argued that they were going to close them down. And 
in order to prove us wrong, they built the hospitals. 
 
I don’t say this in any . . . I say it in a critical way. I’m saying 
it’s the nature of the way we used to think health care was to be 
organized. 
 
And people are looking at the Saskatchewan model and they’re 
saying, these people have figured it out right. It’s a proper 
balance of acute care  the bricks and the mortar and the 
technology when we need it, because that’s the fact of living; 
we’ll need it  and good doctor care, coupled with prevention 
and education, and shift from bricks and mortars into the 
question of community care, wellness centres, and models of 
this circumstance. 
 
Not only can you control the budget, but you have a longer-, 
happier-, healthier-living society. That is the principle of 
medicare. It’s the principle of the Thompson committee. 
 
(1930) 
 
And the member shakes her head in disagreement and sighs a 
great act of disagreement. And it doesn’t surprise me, because 
she’s a Liberal. She fought medicare in 1962. The Liberal 
leader of the Liberal Party in this province kicked on the doors 
of this Legislative Building in opposition to the medicare Act. 
They never understood it then. You don’t understand it now. 
You are in favour of two-tiering. You’re in favour of making 
people pay if they think they can afford to pay. That’s what 
your member from Arm River says. And you take the position 
that you take. 
 
So when you characterize this as a crisis, it’s false. It’s a crisis 
if you were to do nothing. What this is, is  in pursuit of my 
other answer  preparing Saskatchewan for the 21st century; 
preserving and protecting the values which are essential and 
core to Canada and to Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll tell you, even though we’ve made mistakes  I’ll 
admit that  in this process, the people of this province will 
nine times out of ten choose the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP to be the guardians of 
health care, than either the Liberals or the Tories, or the 
Liberals and the Tories together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, my thanks to the Premier for his 
responses. And it’s little comfort, I’m sure, to those people that 
may . . . I’m not sure that many are within 50 miles of a hospital 
 but in rural Saskatchewan, that 50 miles is more like a 100 
given the condition of the roads. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m going to read you a couple more quotes. The 
first comes from 1989 and I quote: 
 

The NDP is going to fight these health care cut-backs and 
these changes to medicare. It’s going to fight the erosion of 
the principles of medicare. I feel rather certain we’ll have a  

change of government next time around, and then the 
public isn’t going to have to worry about these problems. 
 

Mr. Premier, the speaker in this case was Louise Simard, who 
upon taking office, sought to close dozens of hospitals in our 
province without any consultation. She then set up the shams 
called health districts, which as we now know, were merely 
political deflection screens for the government as it continued 
to cut medicare  the very opposite to what Louise Simard said 
the NDP would do, Mr. Premier. 
 
And here’s another quote if I may, Mr. Premier. This one from 
yourself. 
 

New Democrats would continue to restore social programs 
such as medicare, the dental and drug plans, to their former 
place of leadership for Saskatchewan. 

 
Obviously the Premier did not follow through on those words, 
Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, so many of these promises were 
made in the very late stages of the PC’s (Progressive 
Conservative) tenure in government, and long, long in advance 
of this year’s 1.5 per cent reduction from Ottawa. 
 
Can the Premier tell us if the NDP were the only ones not to 
know the desperate mess the PCs had left this province? Did 
they not know we were already billions of dollars in debt when 
they made these grandiose promises? Did the government have 
any intention of carrying through on these promises? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this line of questioning, 
with the greatest respect to the Leader of the Opposition, is 
similar to what thankfully the Conservatives now are off. But in 
their first couple of years in 1991, they pursued in opposition. 
Their argument was that in 1991 we made grandiose promises. I 
will send over to you the 1991 election platform card of the 
NDP called “Let’s do it . . . The Saskatchewan Way” and it’s 
very simple. It’ll just take a moment to tell you the so-called 
grandiose promises. 
 
First things first, common sense financial management, open 
the books, public independent audit  we did that with Gass. 
 
Number two, comprehensive review of all PC privatization and 
business deals that determine the public interest. We’ve done 
that. We’re still working away at that and trying to manage it, 
notwithstanding, I might add, some very irresponsible 
comments by your colleague  and I do hope, as Leader of the 
Opposition, you can control him, the member from Thunder 
Creek. 
 
New directions  jobs, fair taxes, and wealth creation. We did 
away with the enhanced PST (provincial sales tax). I’ll go down 
the line. But I want to speak specifically to the health issue 
which is what you’re talking about. 
 
Here’s what we said under better quality of life: “A 
commitment to a new community-based health care system 
based on the wellness model.” That’s what we campaigned on. 
 
And by the way, talk about promises made and promises kept.  



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

You can take a look at that and see whether we’ve kept that in 
’91 because this is a tradition in the CCF-NDP  you put out 
your baseball card, as the leader of the Conservatives says  
and then in 1995 you go around to the party faithful and others 
and you say, done, done, done, or not done; it’s got to be 
worked at. Same thing why we do it in . . . the same thing we do 
in 1995, the same thing we do in 1995. 
 
Now let me make a point about the quotation that you referred 
to me about 1989. You’re doggone right we opposed it in 1989 
because you know what was happening in 1989 was this. While 
they were attacking the health care programs in a variety of 
areas and thereby saving money, in effect what was happening 
was a transference of that money out of the needs of ordinary 
people and right into the hands of the privatization Acts that the 
former PC government undertook in 1989  whether it is 
Cameco, whether it is PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), you name them. 
 
When they privatized PCS, the people of Saskatchewan 
swallowed, swallowed  for some of us it’s still here  about 
$500 million written off the books of PCS when they sold it off 
at a value . . . when they should not have sold it, even against 
their own advisers. And the way to find that money  and they 
didn’t find enough in any event and racked up the billions of 
dollars  was to cut it out of health care. 
 
That’s an entirely different situation  where people are 
making cuts in health care but not seeing the money saved, if I 
can use that word inappropriately, in health care, washed down 
the river in some form of an economic adventure which was 
undertaken, as it was prior to 1991. That is what the quote was 
referring to. That’s what the quote intends to refer to, and that’s 
what it stays for here all the way. 
 
May I also say that I must very strongly disagree with your 
comment about sham comments, sham district health boards. 
The issue dealing with the question of the district health boards. 
There were widespread consultations. Louise Simard, all of us, 
by the way, in cabinet travelled for several months, thousands 
of miles, without a word of exaggeration, to local communities 
on our first White Paper on the wellness model. That’s . . . and 
the Leader of the Opposition and the Tory opposition will know 
that to be the case. 
 
An Hon. Member:  No, I said I didn’t remember that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Oh, yes. Well selective memory, as 
one of my colleagues said, is probably the case. But that’s a 
fact. 
 
Then what happened was we introduced the district health 
boards Act. You people  Liberals and Tories  opposed it. 
And once the Bill was enacted, and then the philosophy and the 
program started to get implemented and people at their home 
town level saw the shift from bricks and mortars into wellness, 
protests arose. 
 
And I remember those too. I attended a whole variety of them. I 
was in fact with the Leader of the Conservative Party in a very 
nice, friendly meeting of about 3,000 friends and supporters at  

Eston, about the question of the hospitals there, including my 
good friend, the member from Kindersley. We all attended 
those. No one can say there wasn’t consultation. We stood on 
the front lines and we explained to the people what we were 
doing with respect to health care and saving health care. 
 
But I want to close by also saying something else. I want to also 
close by saying, and I need one of my officials just to dig out 
this quotation, this idea of health care renewal is something 
which the current Leader of the Liberal Party should, I think, be 
very familiar with. We may not be able to . . . There it is. That’s 
right. 
 
On August 24, 1994, Liberal leader Lynda Haverstock  I’m 
quoting from the Gazette-Post-News, Mr. Chairman, so this is 
not breaking the House rules  Liberal leader Lynda 
Haverstock evaluated health reform today two years after its 
implementation. “The concept of health reform was and is 
valid,” she says. 
 
An Hon. Member:  If it’s done the right way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, you see, again the member from 
Humboldt says, if done the right way. This is the classical 
Liberal line. You walk both sides of the street: I’m all for health 
care reform, but I don’t like the way you do it; I won’t tell you 
how I’d do it, but I don’t like the way you do it. 
 
Well then you get up and tell me, in my estimates now, how 
you’re going to do it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, 
don’t tell me from a seated position. You get up and tell me 
how the Liberal Party is going to support health reform in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Or, in the alternative, is that you are from your seat saying that 
you are in favour of health care reform, but the truth of the 
matter is you’re not, because you kicked the leader out of the 
caucus in one of the worst acts of political revenge ever. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the Premier. I wish he 
wouldn’t bring in family matters into this debate or this 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve seen your government cut health care 
services right across the province. Health care in many 
communities has in fact been virtually gutted, yet we’ve seen 
absolutely no savings. We’re spending as much now as we ever 
have, yet we have reduced services throughout the province. 
 
Can you explain to us how you managed to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. Because, as I was 
saying, in the early answer  and I’ll just make this very brief, 
not because it doesn’t warrant but in order to get more 
questions and answers  I’m saying to the Leader of the 
Opposition, we’re involving here a shift of funding. 
 
If you’ve got 1.5 million, it’s going in this direction, which by 
the way is not sustainable  bricks, mortar, pills, technology, 
continues to balloon up. Every province is experiencing this. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

If what you’re trying to do, because this is what the founders of 
medicare wanted you to do, shift a little bit out of acute care 
bricks and mortar and into prevention, then you will have in the 
communities that are affected by that shift concern, opposition, 
stories that you bring to the legislature. None of us likes to hear 
those. But that is the inevitability of change. 
 
And I come back to the member from Humboldt  if she and 
the Liberal Party does not like that as the form of change, as 
I’ve just said it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well forget 
about the people, you’re the one who’s speaking for the people 
here. If you don’t like it, then you have to tell us what you do 
like. And I challenge you in my estimates to get up and tell me 
what you do like. 
 
Your choices are very simple: either the status quo  which no 
province, no Liberal province let alone Conservative province, 
can afford to follow  status quo, we can’t afford it; in the 
alternative, our changes; or you come up with something else. 
 
Tell me what you’re going to come up with? Will it be a 
thousand dollars health care premiums a year for a family of 
four? It’s 860 in Alberta. It’s 900 in British Columbia. Is there 
going to be deterrent fees for every visit to the doctor that you 
make? That’s what you did the last time you were in office. 
 
Is there going to be deterrent fees for every day that you spend 
in the hospital? You had no choice, you’re a sick person, the 
doctor puts you in hospital, and the Liberal government the last 
time it was in power in the province of Saskatchewan made that 
person pay. Is that the way you’re going to have reform? 
 
Tell us  tell us what you’re going to do. 
 
Mr. Osika:  If we can just talk about the district health 
boards, Mr. Premier. 
 
Clearly, these districts do not have the autonomy or the 
decision-making ability that this government would lead us to 
believe. 
 
Clearly, the government still controls the money and so it 
dictates all health care decisions in this province through the 
back door. That’s probably not surprising, since I don’t think 
we’ve ever seen this government anywhere give up any of their 
power once they had it. 
 
Mr. Premier, these health care boards are a sham. They are very 
good people who have been elected to them, but they 
themselves will tell you they simply do not have any real power 
to make decisions. How can the Premier continue to support 
this? We agree that decisions should be made at the local levels, 
but that’s simply not the case here, Mr. Premier, and I’d like 
your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, again the member 
makes an assumption, which I will have to accept because he’s 
an hon. member of this House  he obviously believes  but 
it flies in the face of the facts. And then from the assumption he 
bases the question. 
 

Now look, I have a copy of a letter here written from the Moose 
Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District Board, January 30, 1996. 
The Hon. Paul Martin, Minister of Finance in Canada, speaking 
to your issue about how you explain this. Page 2 of the letter, 
Dale Toni, chairperson, writes as follows: 
 

We are concerned that the magnitude of the anticipated 
reductions in federal transfer payments to the province of 
Saskatchewan will erode the nature and intent of the 
Canada Health Act. 
 
We’d like to remind your government that the active 
design to preserve the principles of a national health 
system benefit of all Canadians . . . 

 
And on it goes, explaining the provision of the Bill. By the way, 
this comes right from the district, health district, where the hon. 
member from Thunder Creek has been one of the most severe 
critics of our reforms. Their own district, his own district, is 
critical of Mr. Paul Martin. I by the way could give you editorial 
writers, some from the Fort Qu’Appelle area, and I’ll spare the 
members that hearing tonight. 
 
The fact is we have less money. The fact is we’re making a 
shift. But to call the district health boards a sham is  I say 
with the greatest respect to a person that I think does contribute 
much to this House and I have to say that you approach it with a 
fairness which I like  it’s not proper or fair to say the people 
who’ve been elected, elected, are rubber stamps, are shams. 
 
(1945) 
 
The very fact that people are elected in any democratic act, they 
carry with them authority. They carry with them respect, and 
they should be given respect. And they have the authority under 
the Bill. 
 
Now they don’t have all of the powers, and we don’t have all of 
the powers. It’s like a see-saw or a teeter-totter; we’re trying to 
balance provincial and local controls. We’re quite not sure of 
the relationships, one to the other, yet. We’re going through a 
learning curve. In some areas it’s better. In some areas it’s not 
quite so good. But at the end of the day, we are working in 
partnership with the district health boards, as we are with the 
rural municipalities and the urban municipalities and other 
provincial governments and the federal government in trying to 
sort out our differences for the common good of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I dismiss the notion that they’re shams. And may I say, not 
to be political but it’s a fact, in New Brunswick they eliminated 
all hospital boards, local hospital boards. In New Brunswick 
there is one hospital board. It’s called the Department of Health 
 Department of Health, New Brunswick  Liberal. That’s 
what they did. Bango, all the decisions are made out of 
Fredericton, or Saint John. End of it. 
 
And that is not the case in the province of Saskatchewan. Well 
the hon. member again, the member who’s in favour of 
two-tiered systems of health care, the member from Humboldt,  



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

and deterrent fees, simply does not know the facts  simply 
does not know the facts. She will refuse to accept the Liberal 
responsibility. She will refuse to respect the statutory duties of 
the district health Act. She’ll refuse to respect the integrity that 
these people deserve by virtue of being elected, and their 
statutory obligations. And she will refuse to respect the 
momentous nature of the reform to save health care which is 
being undertaken here. 
 
Well there’s nothing new about that. Some people want to put 
their heads in the sand and think that the world is flat. That’s 
the member from Humboldt, not me. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I know 
many of the people that sit on district health boards. I have a 
great deal of respect for them. I commend them for the vast 
challenges that face them under the circumstances. Don’t you 
think, Mr. Premier, that a good first step in making these boards 
at least appear like they’re not under your thumb is to ensure 
that all members are elected in the future, and removing your 
own appointees, the yes-men and yes-women? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I think that the Leader of the 
Opposition has a suggestion which needs to be examined. I’m 
not committing myself to this. But I think as health boards 
evolve, as they are and they will, and as our relationship with 
them evolves and changes, I think your idea has something of 
merit that needs to be looked at. 
 
What the district health boards Act now encompasses will not 
be written for ever, and it should not be; it should be assessed. 
And we intend to do that and we’d appreciate your suggestions 
and comments and criticisms in this regard; there’s no doubt 
about it. So I think it can be changed. 
 
But look, this is just an experiment of one or two years it’s been 
operating. And experiment is not the word to use. This is a 
change of one or two years of which there are some difficulties 
I admit, that we’ve made. But these are, by and large, being 
worked out. And where there’s goodwill and a little 
understanding of the philosophy and the direction, where I 
think there is, by the way, on almost all the boards, we’re going 
to see our way out of this. And as to form of governance, if it 
requires election, I think that’s an idea which simply has a great 
deal of merit. 
 
By the way, just one point here again. I’m quoting from the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald of October 1, 1991, editorial: 
 

Haverstock indicated one way to cut costs would be to 
eliminate the construction of new hospitals in smaller 
communities, replacing them with referral centres and 
clinics. 

 
Replacing them with referral centres and clinics. 
 
In an interview which was given to the Star-Phoenix in the 
election of 1991, as she was then the Leader of the Liberal 
Party: 
 

Saskatchewan’s health care system is at risk if  

governments keep using hospitals as constituency 
patronage, according to the provincial Liberal Party. 
Universal health care should not be confused with the right 
to have a hospital in every town, Liberal leader Lynda 
Haverstock said Wednesday in Saskatoon. 
 
We should stop talking about bricks and mortar and start 
talking about what really counts, Haverstock said. 

 
Sounds an awful lot like what I’ve been trying to say in these 
estimates with you. 
 
Now this is the leader who led you people to your nine or ten 
seats. You campaigned on that in 1995. And now for you to 
shuck that over and say because she’s out, the caucus somehow, 
we’re not subscribing to this, I think is a little incredible. I again 
challenge  not you, sir, but the member from Humboldt who 
seems to be very agitated about this issue this evening  does 
she support this or not? Let’s find out where the Liberals stand. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Premier, we’ve heard members on that side 
of the House, like the member from Regina Victoria, patting 
himself on the back because of your government’s defence of 
medicare. No two-tiered health system here you say. As 
heartfelt as those comments might very well be, they also show 
an unbelievable lack of knowledge about what’s truly 
happening in this province. 
 
For members such as the member from Regina Victoria to stand 
in this House and say everything is all right with our health 
system is somewhat absurd. If he would take a trip outside of 
Regina once in a while, he’d see we already have a two-tiered 
health system here  one system for the urban residents, 
another for the rural residents. And the funding formula set up 
by the government makes sure more and more of the health care 
dollars and services move to the cities. 
 
Mr. Premier, please tell me if you believe that the health care 
system in place in rural Saskatchewan today is better or worse 
than when you took power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I say for sure that the 
health care system, whether it’s in rural Saskatchewan or urban 
Saskatchewan, for sure is not worse. I say the health care 
system is good, is as good as it’s been. And I would go one step 
further and go as far as the Minister of Health  it is on its way 
to being the best health care system in the 21st century that we 
have in Canada, because the fact of the matter is that it is a 
system of public debt which is imposed upon the change. 
 
Again the member from Humboldt is very agitated about this. I 
am challenging her . . . well I ask the hon. member from 
Humboldt to tell me, not from her seated position  please get 
into this debate so I can hear what exactly you say. You get in 
the debate and tell me  do you favour what the member from 
Greystone, when she was Liberal leader, said about referral 
centres and clinics and closure of hospitals when you ran under 
her banner less than a year ago? Tell me if you believe that 
now. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Premier, the point is that the extent to which 
health care in rural Saskatchewan has been cut is getting 
seriously dangerous. The referral to some of the so-called 
wellness centres that exist around the province, unless you have 
a quarter to phone when you get into the lobby of one of these 
centres in rural Saskatchewan, you can’t get in, and that’s why 
it’s referred to as a two-bit health care system. 
 
In 1992 your government undertook what it called the next 
stage in medicare. With the so-called health reforms, the 
province was thrown into chaos  the towns seeing their 
medicare ripped away from their communities with the 
so-called wellness model. Now to be fair here, Mr. Chairman, 
when any major reform is undertaken there are bound to be 
mistakes made, and in our opinion, and in the opinions of many 
Saskatchewan residents, mistakes were made in the health 
reform process. So I would just like to ask the Premier if he 
does believe that mistakes have been made, and if so, what 
were those mistakes and what can we do to correct them now. 
We can’t wait much longer. There is a concern in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, let’s just get this 
debate, or discussion in my judgement, properly focused. We’re 
talking here about policy estimates. We’re talking about the 
policy of health care renewal as we have undertaken it in the 
policy terms as I have described it. Now it is your obligation to 
either accept that policy or reject it, or advance some other, 
alternative policy. If you want to give me micro examples of 
where there are mistakes, fair enough. We’ll receive them and 
we’ll do the best that we can to correct them. 
 
But in principle, I ask the Leader of the Liberal Party, does he 
agree or disagree, as the former leader of the Liberal Party 
apparently agreed, of the need to shift from bricks and mortar, 
have local community control, put emphasis on wellness and 
prevention, and all of the other concepts that I’ve talked about? 
And if the answer is yes, then we have got a common meeting 
ground. Then we can get into the question of what do we need 
to do to help out Greenhead District Board or the Canora 
district health board area or whatever. 
 
Now I have here a document in front of me of what would have 
happened if we would not have back-filled the federal offload. 
If we had not back-filled the federal offload, I can tell you in 
almost every incident, in fact in every instance of the 30 district 
health boards, the shortage of funds would be dramatically 
greater than they are now. 
 
For example  just take one as an example  North Valley 
Health District. If we had not back-filled the offload from 
Ottawa onto us, there would have been a shortfall of over 
$670,000 for the year 1996-1997. Now as tough as it is now, 
can you imagine what that would have meant with that 
additional shortage of funds? 
 
Now it took every piece of ingenuity that we could, and 
reorganization of government priorities, to back-fill it. Not 
perfectly. And as our budget says, at the year 2000 we won’t be 
100 per cent back-filled; we’ll be 96 per cent back-filled. No 
other province in Canada has done that, even at 96 per cent. 

And so there’ll be gaps and there’ll be pinches and there’ll be 
difficulties, but that is the impact of the offload and flipping the 
coin, the positive impact of our back-filling of the operation. 
 
Now should we be electing? I’ve said that’s a suggestion that 
merits a lot of consideration. Should we be doing some other 
things? Let’s hear them. But that’s not what you people are 
about in this session. You are raising everything fundamentally 
in objection to the health care reform, I argue in contradiction 
to what you got elected on in 1991 and 1995, and I argue in 
contradiction of what reality is, fiscal and in fact, medical 
reality today is. 
 
So if the issue is you’re with us, say you’re with us, and then 
let’s work out the micro . . . manage the difficulties that we all 
have in these communities. None of us likes to see the problems 
that Canora has, or Fort Qu’Appelle has, the kinds of questions 
you raised in question period today. 
 
None of us likes to see that, but that’s a far different cry in 
trying to solve those than saying I’m fundamentally opposed to 
what you’re doing. You can’t have it both ways. You can’t say 
I’m for what you’re doing but I don’t like the way you’re doing 
it. That’s walking both sides of the street. That’s a classic, 
old-time, old-fashioned political game  I’m with you but I’m 
against you. So those who like the reform, you can vote for me; 
those who don’t like the way it’s being done, you can also vote 
for me. You can’t do that. And you can’t do that if you ever 
hope to gain office and to gain political credibility. Sooner or 
later  a lot sooner than you think  you’re probably going to 
have to face this; you’re going to have to face exactly where 
you stand on this issue. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. When you do have to 
make serious decisions that are going to affect people’s lives, 
there has to be some care and compassion involved when those 
types of changes and cuts are made. And in rural Saskatchewan 
it seems that that was not part of the equation when the cutting 
and slashing occurred. 
 
I just wonder if  getting back to the offloading and the 
cut-backs from Ottawa  if you could provide us with the 
exact figures from the departments to tell us how that so-called 
drastic cut has been applied. And I ask that because up to this 
point we’ve heard that this cut from Ottawa, the cuts from 
Ottawa, have crippled our health system. You say it has 
crippled our education system; it’s cut. That cut has ruined our 
highways. 
 
Your Minister of Northern Affairs says if it weren’t for the 1.5 
per cent reduction, we would see water and sewer services 
throughout the North. We hear, if it were not for this 1.5 per 
cent cut, you could have kept your promise to eliminate child 
poverty in our province. You say if it were not for this 1.5 per 
cent cut, you could return VLT monies to our communities as 
you promised. You say if it was not . . . if it were not for this 
1.5 per cent cut, you would not have had to break your promise 
to farmers regarding GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
payments. 
 
Mr. Premier, if we were to add up all the times that’s been used  



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

 that 1.5 per cent cut has been used as an excuse for your 
government’s decisions and choices  I think we’d find those 
explanations just don’t hold up. 
 
So can your government give us detailed figures as to how this 
1.5 per cent reduction was applied to the various departments 
that has caused all these shortfalls in the various departments 
that are affected? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, again this is an 
important question and I don’t mean to minimize it when I say 
that there is a very easy simple answer to this. And I just ask the 
hon. members to contemplate this. We balanced the budget in 
’94-95; that’s a fact. Provincial Auditor’s confirmed it. And we 
balanced the budget in ’95-96. That is the amount of money 
coming in, in taxes, and the amount going out for schools, 
roads, hospitals, etc., is equal  no deficit. 
 
Now we have a $110 million deficit, shortfall. If we had not 
had that $110 million shortfall  keeping in mind that we 
balanced the budget before the cut-back on the block transfer 
was announced  we’d have had an extra $110 million likely 
in surplus, likely in surplus. It may not have covered off all the 
list of items that you’ve talked about, but we would have had 
$110 million, much of which could have been applied to some 
of the specific programs you talked about, or the taxations. A 
lot of it could have been applied. It’s very simple mathematics. 
 
But when you reduce it by 110, you automatically are in the red 
by $110 million. Now look, you know, you’re critical . . . or not 
critical but by implication critical about how this small  as 
you portray it  federal Liberal cut of 1.5 applies. We’ll I’ve 
taken a little bit of liberty to ask the department people to take a 
look at what you people have been saying in this session so far. 
And by our department calculations  and we’re going to tell 
the people of Saskatchewan this in due course  in four short 
sitting months, the Liberal MLAs (Member of Legislative 
Assembly) have proposed spending measures that would have 
added $457 million a year to the provincial debt  each and 
every year. 
 
On March 4, the member for Wood River proposed reversing 
the conversion of 52 rural hospitals  cost, 16.4 million. On 
March 4, the member for Wood River proposed improvements 
to rural facilities  cost, 15.1 million. On March 4, the member 
for Wood River proposed reversing changes in the drug plan  
cost, 52 million. On March 7, the member for Canora-Pelly 
proposed to increase school board funding by 2 per cent  
cost, 5.1 million. March 13, the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena proposed spending on park services capital 
replacement  cost, 26 million. 
 
On March 18, the member for Saltcoats proposed matching 
federal road contributions to agriculture transport  cost, 85 
million. On March 27, the member for Wood River proposed 
reversing consolidation of highway operations  cost, 
$350,000. March 28, the member for Athabasca proposed a 
series of road improvements in his riding  cost, $25 million. 
On April 4, the member for Canora-Pelly proposed increased  

salaries and benefits for teachers  cost, $8 million. April 24, 
and repeatedly I might add throughout the session, the member 
for Arm River proposes the government share of GRIP be 
distributed to farmers. Cost? One time  $188 million. 
 
April 24, the member from Wood River proposed passing the 
provincial share of Saskferco profits to farmers. Cost  $22.9 
million. On May 14, the member for Humboldt proposed 
keeping the Whitespruce facility open at a cost of 1 million. 
May 16, the member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s 
right. What’s a million, the honourable member from Humboldt 
says. 
 
On May 16, the member for Kelvington-Wadena proposed 
spending on post-secondary partnership plan which would cost 
$1 million. May 21, the member for Humboldt proposed 
reversing the closure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There’s the 
member from Humboldt again. She proposed on May 21 the 
closure of the Plains hospital should be reversed, as all of her 
colleagues have been doing through the tabling of petitions  
by the way, every one of those petitions dated before the last 
provincial election or a short, slight period after the provincial 
election on that issue, but they represent them as being current 
and up to date. Cost  $10 million. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, in round numbers the official 
opposition, the official Liberal opposition, has been proposing 
$6 million a day in new spending each and every day. Nothing 
small-time about these people. They’re not small-time thinkers 
at all at $6 million a day. 
 
However, what we’ve not done yet is we haven’t, what we’ve 
not done yet is we haven’t factored, what we’ve not done yet, 
we haven’t factored in their ambitious plans for tax reductions. 
Now that is going to be worked up in the next operation. 
 
So here you have $457 million you’ve spent already this year, if 
you’re going to be elected government in 1999 or the year 
2000. And you’re going to balance the budget. And you’re 
going to reduce the taxes. And you’re going to find this $457 
million. And you say you’ve got the public credibility. 
 
I tell you the former Conservative government ain’t holding a 
candle to you, 1996 version of the Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  I agree. That was a marvellous performance with 
an impressive set of figures, and we’ll come up with some as 
well. It’s too bad there weren’t some impressive figures about 
the number of jobs that can be created so we can keep our 
young people here in this province; so we can create an 
atmosphere so business wants to come and stay in 
Saskatchewan instead of shutting down and moving to Alberta 
and to the States where we lose some very valuable people, 
because they can’t live in the atmosphere and the climate that 
this government has created with their oppressive taxes, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I want to return to this whole subject of offloading for just a 
couple of moments. Mr. Premier, we’ve heard you and your  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

government cry bloody murder over the last few months over 
transfer reductions from Ottawa  reductions that can best be 
characterized as modest. 
 
When I hear those cries of woe from the other side, it raises a 
question about what your government is doing to the 
municipalities here in this province. They’ve been hit hard in 
the last four years and will be cut by another 25 per cent next 
year. This government who calls out and cries and calls the 
cavalry after losing a mere 1.5 per cent of its budget, in the next 
breath cuts the municipalities by 25 per cent. Don’t you see that 
there’s some kind of a contradiction here, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, what I find . . . the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition said that it was quite a 
performance. I really don’t think it was quite a performance. If 
it was a performance, I tell you I think it was depressing what I 
had to read. Just when we fight our way out of a deficit and 
debt, and to think that there’s a modern day political party 
advocating this kind of an encouragement of deficit again  
this is nothing optimistic or encouraging. It is absolutely 
depressing. 
 
And I’ve got to tell you when you talk about the jobs figures, 
don’t take my figures for it. StatsCanada  agriculture, 7,000 
more jobs up one month over the next month; manufacturing, 
1,000 over a year; construction, 4,000 from a month; utilities up 
3,000; trade up 1,000; service jobs, 1,000; primary, 1,000. I 
know 470,000 jobs, people working in our economy right now 
in 1996. 
 
Sometimes it makes me wonder whether you people know 
you’re in the legislature of Saskatchewan, because you’re 
always singing the praises of Alberta. Alberta, Alberta, Alberta, 
Alberta, Alberta. You defend the medicare premiums in 
Alberta. You like that system. You like the two-tiered system of 
health care. You like that very much. You like their privatized 
car insurance system. You like their welfare reform. Put them 
on a one-way bus and ship them out to B.C. (British Columbia) 
or Saskatchewan. Alberta, Alberta. Who in the world do you 
people represent? Do you represent the people of Alberta or do 
you represent the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I tell you this is just not a very, very good way in which the 
Liberal opposition in this House is handling itself. It should 
really be looking at the facts. Look, you can argue that we’re 
not doing enough. That I think is a legitimate observation. I 
think we should be doing more. I wish I had the capacity to 
reduce the taxes. 
 
I want to give the Leader of the Liberal Party a little figure here 
which he may find of interesting note. On average, per capita in 
Alberta, on average per capita, oil and natural gas revenue from 
royalties, because they’ve been blessed by oil and natural gas, 
85 per cent on average a year is $900 royalty take from the 
companies. You know what our average . . . That’s $900 per 
capita  well not per capita because they have a larger 
population, $900 million  900 per capita, is the take on oil 
and natural gas. You know what our per capita is on 9 per cent 
sales tax in Saskatchewan  720 per capita. In this province, at 
$900 per capita of oil and natural gas, you know what you  

could do? You could do away with the sales tax and have $180 
per capita to boot, to do other things. 
 
You’ve got to be fair about the criticisms here. You’ve got to be 
fair, and you got to understand what we’re dealing with with the 
third highest yearly expenditure, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, 
of your tax bucks. First highest expenditure is health care, 
second highest, education. You know we pay third highest  
again I repeat  interest payments on the public debt  $860 
per capita. That almost matches the Alberta per capita oil 
royalty take. 
 
And they talk about some sort of ideology or philosophy in 
Alberta paving the way. My goodness, if we didn’t have that 
kind of a debt hanging around our necks and we had that kind 
of a boom of oil and natural gas around us to be able to 
distribute the largesse, we could do a heck of a lot. 
 
And I tell you what is the miracle and the great hope and the 
great optimism for this government and for this province, is that 
we have done so well, that we have succeeded so well, that we 
have preserved our core values in the Saskatchewan way in the 
face of all of those obstacles that have been placed to us. This is 
a great accomplishment for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. I guess my question 
then would be why are people just leaving so furiously, and 
whether they’re going to Alberta or wherever. Our people have 
to go elsewhere to find jobs and to create business and to 
operate their businesses. 
 
Mr. Premier, I just want to ask you about . . . on the subject of 
our municipalities, we’ve seen that you’ve withdrawn The 
Service Districts Act and that was, I’m sure, as a result of 
pressure in opposition from local government leaders. You 
stated you had no intention to force amalgamation onto 
municipalities. We’ve said that we don’t believe you. Now we 
see this 25 per cent funding for local governments is being cut 
back. Now isn’t this just a kind of a back-door method of 
forcing amalgamation, just as health reform has been a 
back-door way of shutting hospitals and nursing houses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well the answer, shortly put, is no, 
and if the answer was yes the leadership of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), I’m quite 
sure would not have entered into the accord with the provincial 
government to study, up until December 1, ways and means to 
eliminate overlap, duplication, and efficiency at all levels of 
government. We’re trying to do it provincially, federally they’re 
trying to do it, and municipally they’re doing a very, very good 
job. That’s a partnership agreement and we are wanting to work 
with them. 
 
So the answer obviously is no, I do not agree this is a back-door 
operation at all. It’s simply the fact of the matter, we don’t have 
enough money to go around. I’ve given you already the total of 
your list of expenditures amounting to $450 million. 
 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

I wish I could say yes, more for highways; yes, more for 
municipalities; yes, more for this; yes, more for that; and lower 
taxes. But I repeat again, over and over again, I can’t do it. And 
if you think that there’s a way that it can be done credibly, 
please give it to me, because if you think it’s any piece of cake 
sitting on this side of the front benches trying to juggle the 
books, we’ll take your idea and apply it. 
 
And by the way, your opening comment was about the 
population loss. That is absolutely, totally inaccurate and 
wrong. For 13 quarters in a row, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, 
13 quarters in a row, Saskatchewan’s population has grown, 
according to Statistics Canada  13 quarters in a row. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  So then, Mr. Premier, can I then . . . will you 
then stand here in the House and categorically tell us here 
tonight that you have no intention down the road as Premier to 
force municipalities to amalgamate, either through direct 
legislation or funding cut-backs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I am absolutely 
confident that the process of consultation and cooperation will 
succeed. I am confident that our municipal leaders, in 
partnership with us  we’re partners, after all; the same 
electorate  that come December 1 or some time shortly 
thereafter, there will be something that we can point to, to our 
common taxpayer base, to say that we’ve got the best possible 
infrastructure for rural and urban Saskatchewan that we can 
afford for the 21st century. I’m confident of that. 
 
There’s no use me speculating about what happens if it doesn’t 
take place, if that happens, or if something else happens. We’ll 
deal with that when we have to deal with it. Right now we’re 
working together, got our sleeves rolled up in achieving the 
success story which I think we can achieve in modernizing our 
governance system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, sir. As we all know, the offloading 
doesn’t stop at our local governments. It continues to go on and 
on. This government, which decries the evils of offloading, has 
turned it into an art form, Mr. Chairman. Again, Mr. Premier, 
I’m going to read back a quote from you: “Increased education 
is a priority for the NDP. All I can say is, we simply have to 
find the money.” Mr. Premier, that was in October 1990 when 
we were on the road to fiscal ruin set forth by the Conservatives 
that was a well-known fact. So for you to now stand and say 
you couldn’t keep this commitment either, again is just not 
completely right. 
 
Mr. Premier, funding to public schools has decreased under 
your tenure. Funding to universities has been cut. Funding for 
technical schools has been cut. Funding for the regional 
colleges has been cut. Will you explain your 1990 promise and 
how it squares with reality? Because like I say, these cuts were 
made years in advance of any federal reductions, and your 
promise to increase funding to education was made when the 
fiscal mess the Tories had created was well-known. Please 
explain this lack of commitment to education, Mr. Premier, in 
light of these facts. 

(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer 
which I gave with respect to health care is the answer which I 
give here. The $110 million roughly breaks down to $50 million 
reduction in the health care area, if my memory serves me 
correctly; $25 million in the education area; $25 million, 
roughly speaking, in the social services area. It amounts to 110 
million in total for just one year alone, but didn’t start this year. 
It’s been going on for some number of years. 
 
And every year we’re trying to back-fill and back-fill and 
back-fill and back-fill. And this is for a province which has the 
highest per capita debt, I think, of any province still in Canada, 
although I think we’re better than Newfoundland. We certainly 
have eliminated our deficit, but our debt is still one of the very 
highest. Now that’s the fact. 
 
Now I repeat again, so that you don’t think that I’m bashing 
Ottawa all the while, I’ve been talking about a national 
alternative agenda. I think we need to, at a federal-provincial 
level . . . I’ll be going down to Ottawa toward the end of this 
week to talk to my colleagues about this . . . have a truly 
national, deficit/debt cooperative game plan where we don’t 
end up passing off each other’s problems to somebody else’s 
jurisdiction  Ottawa onto the provinces, the provinces onto 
the school boards or onto the local governments. That’s no way 
to operate a railway or to run a country. I understand that. But 
we can only do that if we realize there’s one common taxpayer, 
one common way in which to handle this deficit/debt approach. 
Do it in a common sense, sensitive way and do it cooperatively. 
 
I can’t do it, however, if the federal government says to me  
bango  here’s $110 million less this year, going to 230 
million in three years, like that. I can’t do it. My people are 
taxed. Our people are taxed to the max. I can’t increase taxes. I 
got to balance the budget because the bond rating agencies  
we owe this debt of 14 billion  don’t permit us to do 
otherwise. And I think the people of Saskatchewan want us to 
do as best as we can in back-filling health, education, and social 
services. And if we don’t quite totally match 100 per cent, 
please understand the tight squeeze that we’re under. 
 
And I repeat again. If you have a solution which is better  and 
I’m not saying this rhetorically or politically  offer it to us. 
We’ll take it, because presumably you’d like to see the pinch 
eased off school boards, as we would, or health care or 
anywhere else. So give us the alternative. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Yes, Mr. Premier, and we’re all aware that the 
pressures on school boards are mounting daily in fact. And we 
all know the problems that do extend beyond government 
funding. We know dropping enrolment is also a factor, and 
trustees are forced to come up with solutions for these 
problems. 
 
However the government never seems too pleased when this 
happens. We all saw this recently with the Scenic Valley School 
Division which came up with a unique plan to save some 
money and perhaps save teaching positions or even a school. 
But they were met with resistance from the government.  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

The minister only recently agreed grudgingly to the proposal. 
 
Can the Premier tell us if all school boards and divisions will be 
met with the same resistance when they come up with solutions 
to the problems of government cut-backs and funding? If there 
are some measures that are proposed, will they in fact be 
supported? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, we welcome ideas 
from school boards, individual school boards, the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), opposition parties. Any 
idea which has merit obviously we welcome; we’d like to 
examine and to consider it. 
 
I think the Leader of the Opposition would agree with me that 
we can’t latch on to any one good idea immediately. If it sounds 
like a good idea, it needs to be analysed, and it’s got to be 
figured out as to what its impact is going to be on the entire 
school system. 
 
The four-day proposal . . . four-day school week proposal has 
merit. You can describe the Minister of Education’s approach 
in this regard in any way you want, grudgingly or in not in a 
very helpful way. I don’t subscribe to that. However you 
describe it is your right, but the fact of the matter is we are 
looking at it. We’re going to be dealing with them and looking 
at it and seeing what can be done. 
 
But it may not be a solution that is applicable to the province, 
and we’re not going to simply . . . it would be irresponsible for 
a government, it would be irresponsible for a political party, to 
simply attach to the idea and say, hey, here’s a good idea, and 
all of a sudden wake up six months, nine months, or a year later 
 oops, I made a mistake. So we’re looking at it very carefully, 
and we welcome new ideas from any source we can get. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. I’d just like to turn to a 
more recent promise made by your government, and that was 
the promise to return 10 per cent of VLT revenues back to our 
local communities. Mr. Premier, where you live it might not 
have made much of a difference when this money was promised 
and then snatched away as soon as the votes were counted in 
last year’s election. But, Mr. Premier, it does make a big 
difference where I come from. 
 
The pot of gold the government struck when they introduced 
these VLTs into our communities was in fact remarkable. They 
now take in every year more than any federal reduction in 
transfers, but we don’t hear the government talking about that. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to read some numbers to you now, if I may, 
and these figures are only up to February of this year. So you 
may want to add another few hundred thousand dollars here and 
there to the mix. In the last three years, the government has 
taken millions out of Saskatchewan communities. I just want to 
read some of those figures and these were obtained from your 
own government: Estevan, $5.6 million; Lloydminster, 
$600,000; Melfort, $2.5 million; Melville, $3 million; Moose 
Jaw, $10 million; North Battleford, a half a million dollars; 
Prince Albert, $13 million; Regina, $42 million; Saskatoon,  

nearly $50 million; Swift Current, over 6 million; Weyburn, 
nearly 5 million; Yorkton, 6 million. Those are just the cities. 
Out of smaller towns and villages, the government has taken in 
about $120 million in just the first three years of VLT 
operations. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s a grand total of over $225 million  that’s 
money taken directly out of our communities. So when the 
government committed to returning 10 per cent, the 
communities cheered. They were elated. Because maybe then 
they could do something to prop up the local fund-raisers 
devastated by the advent of VLTs; do something to fix their 
roads which have fallen into disrepair due to continued 
provincial cut-backs. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I want to point this out. That money was 
never to be. That promise made in January 1995 was never 
meant to be kept. It was simply a tool to deflect some heat from 
the NDP in the run-up to the election. And now once again we 
see the NDP citing the federal government as the main reason 
for this broken promise. Even though we have a cabinet 
document from 1994 which shows at that time they should 
expect these modest reductions from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Premier, why would your government make such a promise 
if you had no intention of keeping it? Ottawa’s cut-backs didn’t 
come out of the blue, Mr. Premier. I’d appreciate your 
comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, what I’m going to say 
at the very outset is that I think I should sit here with a 
calculator, because now by my calculation, Liberals in this 
Legislative Assembly in four months  what day is it today, 
sitting day?  in 75 sitting days tonight, they’ve just added 
another 10 million. So it’s 467 million that you have spent. And 
I could read the list again but I won’t. But it’ll be publicized 
well enough over the next months and years ahead, as you can 
appreciate. In 75 days you have committed $467 million to the 
debt. Another 10 million you want to do. 
 
So I’m going to ask somebody here to get me a calculator 
because this is getting very hard to figure out. Talk about 
tax-and-spend Liberals  this is the epitome of it. But leave 
that aside for the moment. 
 
Look, there was no agreement amongst SARM and SUMA, the 
government, and SSTA I think was at the table as well  and 
SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) 
too. We asked all of those people, we had many agreements  
what do you want to do with the $10 million? There was no 
agreement. We met and we met and there was no agreement. 
Some wanted to go here; some wanted to go there; some 
wanted to break it there. That was it. 
 
Well that’s the fact. And in the absence of the agreement, what 
did we do? We took the money back to the provincial treasury. 
And you say, you took the money back; you took the money 
away from the communities. We did? Well where does it go  
to my pocket? It doesn’t go to my pocket. This money goes 
back to public treasury and it goes right back to the 
communities. It helps the communities in health care and in  



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

education and in roads and all the things that you say that we 
should be doing more of. 
 
How in the world can it be argued that somehow you take the 
money out of the communities and pouf, it disappears in the air. 
Nobody’s got it. Or we walk away with it, you know, and spend 
it in Las Vegas ourselves. I mean this is not a logical argument. 
 
And the last point I want to make about the Liberal leader, the 
Liberal opposition leader, if I may. Something else that you 
people have got to straighten out sooner or later, and I know 
you’ve got a leadership race coming up and maybe after the 
new leader is chosen that will be straightened out a little bit, but 
this is an inconsistency which keeps on cropping up like your 
health care inconsistency, which is major. 
 
But here’s another one. Today in question period, if I heard the 
hon. member from Humboldt correctly, she was back on the 
argument that gambling and gambling addictions were terrible, 
and they are terrible where they’re affected, and we should be 
spending more money. I didn’t have my calculator this 
afternoon for question period as to how much we should spend, 
notwithstanding the fact that we spend more than anybody else 
in Saskatchewan. There she is; gambling and all of that is all 
bad. You get up this evening and say, hey, it may be bad but 
let’s use it and distribute it around, the proceeds, to the 
community. 
 
Well is it bad or is it good? And if it’s bad, what would you do? 
Would you do away with it? Would you stop the VLT program? 
Tell us point-blank. What would you do with it? 
 
Again, I’m inviting the Liberals to articulate one more time  
it’s about the fifth area now; health care, education, how you’d 
square the budget problem  I’m asking you now, on the 
gambling side, what do you think we should do with that 
particular policy? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Premier, as I mentioned at the outset, for my 
first, short time here it’s really become evident how crucial it is 
to become experienced in being able to turn around certain 
answers to questions that are asked in order that you make the 
people asking the questions look like the bad guys. 
 
I want to refer to the VLTs, Mr. Premier. They have in fact 
caused untold social problems in Saskatchewan. And we 
realize, we realize, sir, that the hoteliers throughout 
Saskatchewan lobbied the government hard for these machines, 
and rightly so. We’re not arguing that. We understand their 
position completely, and we know that Saskatchewan is not an 
isolated island unto itself. But as you well know, those 
machines are highly addictive. Yet your government has only 
agreed to set aside 1.5 per cent of your $100 million-plus 
profits for the treatment of addictions. 
 
Does the Premier see this as an adequate amount, and will you 
agree, Mr. Premier, that gambling expansion policies have in 
fact had a devastating impact on some unfortunate people in our 
province? And they have been forgotten by your government as 
you reap nothing but profits from these machines, and yet do 
not seem to be as concerned over those unfortunate people that  

become addicted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I mean with the 
greatest respect to the Leader of Liberal Party, how in the world 
can he say that? At the highest expenditure of any province 
toward those people who are addicted  that’s what we have in 
Saskatchewan, 1.5 million  no other province on a pro rata 
basis is even close, Liberal included. 
 
And he says that we don’t care. Let’s take a measurement as to 
whether or not the 1.5 million can deal with the situation 
adequately and properly the way it is right now. The situation’s 
only been operational for a year or two. You are jumping into 
all kinds of conclusions that it is addictive. It is a problem. 
Anybody who is affected by any kind of an addiction of that 
nature or any addiction needs to be looked after, needs to be 
given assistance. 
 
But you cannot jump from that statement to say that 1.5  the 
best in Canada, given our fiscal situation  shows a lack of 
caring. And if you don’t think 1.5 is adequate, tell me. I’ve got 
my calculator out; we’re at 177 million already. How much 
more would you dedicate to this issue? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Well just as I asked in regards to the health care 
reform, Mr. Premier, do you think your government has made 
mistakes in the gambling expansion program? And what would 
those mistakes be and how do you plan to address them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I think, Mr. Chairman, that on 
balance, our program here . . . Let me back up, Mr. Leader of 
the Opposition. All of us will have our personal views about 
gambling. I think the ethic that you can earn money without 
working for it is a false ethic that society generally ought not to 
be promoting. That’s my view. 
 
But you yourself in the preface of the question said we’re not 
an island unto ourselves. We have them in Alberta and 
Manitoba and the South and we have to manage as best as we 
can in the system that we have. 
 
(2030) 
 
I can tell you, with that reservation and with that fact, what we 
have done in Saskatchewan by and large has been as an 
effective and sensible and controlled and transparent policy on 
gambling as there’s been anywhere in Canada. 
 
And you don’t have to take my word for it. All you’ve got to do 
is pick up the phone to the Liberal leader in the province of 
Alberta who’ll tell you that he in the Alberta legislature 
advocated that they follow in Alberta the same kind of a model 
with respect to, for example, casinos and first nations people as 
they have in Saskatchewan. That’s what he advocated  the 
Liberal leader in Alberta, your colleague and your philosophic 
soul mate and the province that you point to all the time as the 
model. 
 
So I think that it has been as good a development, in the sense 
of trouble-free development, as this kind of a venture, which by 
necessity is troublesome, as I’ve explained in my opening  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

remarks, can be. 
 
And as I say again, don’t accept my words. Accept the words of 
the Liberal leader in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Keeping in mind, Mr. Premier, that federal 
transfer payments will increase over the next few years . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well keeping in mind federal will be 
increasing to some extent over the next period of time . . . 
Getting back to the VLTs, I would just like to ask if you can 
foresee, if you can foresee that 10 per cent or perhaps more of 
that VLT money that leaves our small communities in rural 
Saskatchewan going back to those communities, that 10 per 
cent or better. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I really have to say 
this. I see no evidence in any of the Martin budgets federally  
none  of any transfer increases to the year 2000, 2001. In fact 
I think it floors out at 2001. It continues to go down. I wish it 
were true. 
 
I told you already; we’re going from 110 million less this year 
to 230 million in Saskatchewan alone. In national terms, Mr. 
Leader of the Opposition, it is about $8 billion less for health, 
education, and social services nationally, from Ottawa to the 
provinces. Our share ends up at 230 million. I see no transfer 
increases. Now maybe you know something that I don’t know, 
but I don’t see it. I hope that you’re right. If that happens, I 
guess we’ll have to make a decision, but as my late 
father-in-law used to say, “if” is the biggest word in the English 
language. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Just to go on to something else, Mr. Premier, 
we’ve heard a great deal about government restraint over the 
years, but at the very top it doesn’t seem that much restraint has 
been practised. Mr. Premier, in the grand scheme of things, the 
number of cabinet ministers or the number of staff in this 
building don’t mean much, on paper at least. But in the eyes of 
the public, it means everything. When the people are asked to 
do with less, they say, so should the Premier and so should the 
cabinet  and quite rightly so. But now we see a situation 
where you have appointed two ministers in charge of gambling, 
and then we saw you appoint a second minister of Education  
and of course all the requisite staff that go with these positions. 
 
Mr. Premier, many people in this province no longer have quick 
access to medical service. Their highways are impassable. How 
can you possibly justify these extra ministries? Just on the face 
of it, don’t you think this type of thing gives a wrong 
appearance to the people? I just would like to point out recent 
information that your NDP cousins in British Columbia, with 
three times the population, have announced a cabinet with only 
13 ministers. Under the circumstances, you must feel 
hard-pressed to justify the size of your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, when I first assumed 
office as Premier, I swore in a cabinet of nine. That’s what I 
did. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It was 12. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  No, it was nine. Nine cabinet 
ministers, it was the first cabinet that we had. And you could go 
down to eight. You go down to seven. You can go down to any 
number that you want . . . to say that’s hard-pressed. Each 
premier will have to make a decision in each jurisdiction as to 
the size of the cabinet that they want. But the reality is, the 
simple reality is, that we lost five cabinet ministers due to 
election results and personal decisions. 
 
I added one additional, new cabinet minister, occasioned by the 
fact that Ottawa said that manpower, skills training, is now 
going to be a provincial responsibility exclusively if you want it 
 not Ottawa’s. This province, like almost every province, was 
behind the curve in getting skills training, manpower programs 
for our young people, and we need to put somebody in charge 
to do it. There’s no extra cost of substance in having a Minister 
of Post-Secondary Education dealing with universities and 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) and skills training at all, except for the fact that 
there’s a minister and one or two executive assistants and 
secretarial staff. 
 
You can do away with that. Maybe you can say that’s a big 
symbolism factor, but it does not mean very much in 
comparison to the task that’s involved, because all of those 
functions are being carried out in the unified Department of 
Education, from K to 12 all the way to post-secondary. That’s 
the size of the cabinet. 
 
Now we’re always looking at ways and means to keep this 
government very, very efficient. And I want to tell you that this 
government is very efficient. This government is very efficient. 
This government is operating it’s . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’m sorry. I can’t . . . just settle down there for a moment, 
the Conservatives. We’ll just get to you in a moment. But what 
I want to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And that from my 
former friend, he sat in the students’ representative council with 
me, if you can believe it, Mr. Chairman. I was a child student at 
the time. Can you imagine, there he was . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s right; I’m just a student. 
 
Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay now. Just 
listen to this and learn something for a change. Mr. Chairman, 
you know we run government  if I may use a lawyer’s terms 
 qua government, as government, approximately for $4,300 
per capita, 4.3 billion. You’ll say, oh no, but your budget says 
it’s 5.1 billion, and you’re right. Now you want to know what 
the difference is? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Interest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Right. You add 4.3 billion . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You’re learning. Interest payments. 
Add 850 million and you’ve got 5.15 interest payments. So 
what you have to do in order to compare expenditure of 
government is you’ve got to say to every government in the 
province, okay, let’s forget about your interest payments and the 
debts. But how do you compare in running your services  
schools, roads, the things that governments do. And you know 
what? On 4.3 per capita basis, Saskatchewan is the lowest per 
capita expenditure in the operation of government of any  



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

province in Canada. If not in any province in Canada  the 
Investment Dealers Association of Canada is the second lowest 
 I think we’re the lowest. There might be a quibble on what 
goes into a provision of service, but that’s a doggone good 
record. 
 
We’ve reduced the number of MLAs from 66 to 58; we’ve 
reduced the size of government’s administerial assistants across 
the piece; we’ve reduced the pay cuts 5 per cent, as my 
colleague points out. We’ve frozen pay cuts. We’ve made 
changes to pensions. Why you people even have done the great 
noble gesture of giving up $4,400, so you say. We’ll see at the 
end of the session. 
 
So there’s been a lot of sacrifice by a lot of people here. And I 
want to thank each and every one of you for doing it, especially 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan. But at 4,300 per 
capita, that is a tremendous record since 1991. 
 
Now if you think that it should be cut some more in real terms, 
and then I’m going to put you for the sixth time in a sixth 
different area, tell me specifically where the Liberal Party 
stands, where it should be cut. Because I want to tell you, if you 
give me this kind of an answer, oh well, you cut back on the 
cabinet ministers or cut back on the MLAs, I tell you we could 
just say right now at 8:40 p.m., roughly speaking, June 18 in the 
year of our good Lord, 1996, every one of us is fired. We’re all 
gone. Turn off the lights. You’re walking out, never to come 
back. What would we save? Eight million?  8 million a year. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And a lot of anguish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The anguish we’re already saving 
ourselves on, so that part of it is a bit of the good news. We 
save ourselves $8 million, Mr. Chairman  $8 million we save 
ourselves. 
 
You know what we do? We would pay the interest rate charges 
for Monday and Tuesday, maybe. And then you got to tell me 
how you pay for the interest charges for the next 363 days of 
the year. Will you tell me how you do that? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Premier, I’m sure you’ve heard people 
say this. I’m sure you probably told people every little bit helps. 
It all adds up. And if you agreed to turn back the monies, as we 
are going to, that little bit would help as well to help pay a 
health care worker or keep a hospital open. 
 
Mr. Premier, if I may send over the document to you, and 
you’re probably going to tell me that your calculator is better 
than mine . . . You’re probably going to tell me that your 
calculator is better than mine, but these were the transfer figures 
that I was referring to and I’d like to share them with you  
where it says that federal transfer payments will decline by 61 
million in 1996-97, by another 60 million in ’97-98, before 
increasing by 15 million in 1988-99. So the difference between 
’95-96 and 1998-99 is therefore $106 million. I’d just like to 
share those. 
 
I just want to ask you again, because I’m still not too clear on 
why it’s necessary to have two ministers of gambling for  

Saskatchewan. I mean is gambling now so important that the 
government . . . for the government that we need two ministers? 
That’s more ministers than we have for Health. Of course given 
that minister no longer takes responsibility for his own 
portfolio, perhaps one provincial Minister of Health is too many 
as well. 
 
But if the Premier would just give me his rationale for two 
ministers of gambling, and if he could as well, tell us how much 
this costs with the additional staff? It all adds up and, as I 
mentioned, every little bit goes towards what we are all 
concerned about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Look, there’s a very simple answer to 
this, and that is that when we do it the other way, you combine 
the ministries and the accusation is, oh well, you’re operator of 
the gambling and you’re also the regulator of the gambling  
same minister. 
 
And so when you try to separate . . . and the minister is 
responsible for making sure the investment at Casino Regina 
and the VLTs is operating in a commercially transparent and 
proper way, and another minister through Liquor and Gaming 
Authority has the regulatory licensing power and the 
disciplinary power and the investigatory power, which is the 
way we think it should be done, separate and apart. That’s why 
we did it. 
 
We do it that way. You say, well you’ve got two ministers of 
gambling. Well we don’t. We have a minister in charge of all 
the bingos which are involved, and the licensing, the charitable 
lotteries that go on there, and the Nevadas and the pulls and all 
of these things that are going on, including the operations of the 
government. We’re trying hard to make sure that we don’t have, 
more than we are already, in a perception of a conflict of 
interest, being operator and regulator. Thus the two reasons. 
 
By the way, this document that you gave me, I’m going to take 
a hard look at it. I don’t mean to diminish it but I see it’s a letter 
from Ralph Goodale, MP (Member of Parliament), directed to 
. . . obviously a newsletter. And I will take a look at this, there’s 
no doubt about it. 
 
Oh well, I see some of the figures here. I mean the . . . well 
there’s no use debating this for the moment tonight. But I see 
what he’s done here. What he’s done is he’s put into the 
calculations, very briefly, some areas like, for example, $145 
million assistance, he writes, from the Government of Canada 
over the next three years as further assistance related to 
transportation, including about $85 million for Saskatchewan’s 
road system over three years. 
 
So that’s not transfer payments. 
 
Mr. Osika:  But they are a part of the $20 million that came 
this week to help with the roadways and byways in this 
province, Mr. Premier. 
 
I wonder, just on a little more technical and specific question, if 
I may ask. Can you tell us how many ministerial staff your 
cabinet now employs, compared to a year ago? And I would  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

ask, if possible, if you would provide us with a list of their 
positions and their salaries. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I can undertake in the 
next few days to give this in writing. I’m not trying to escape 
the answer, but there’s a few more coming in July 1. 
 
We have, on March 31, 1996, 137 ministerial assistants  a 
decrease of 14 per cent from the previous administration. 
Average cost of ministerial assistants per minister’s office in 
April ’91 was $412,000. Average cost, ‘95-96 is down to 
341,000 or 17.4 per cent reduction. And I believe there are 
additional reductions which are going to be taking place on July 
1. That’s why I’d like to give you the additional information. 
But that’s roughly where the trend line is going. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. I notice as well that the 
full-time staff within Executive Council is now 77, compared to 
88 last year. Could you tell us which positions were eliminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, we have 11 reductions 
which represents a decrease of 12.5 per cent. As the hon. 
member has pointed out, two individuals are taking early 
retirement, one termination, and eight vacated positions will be 
simply deleted, not repeated. 
 
And in what areas are these? Mr. Wincherauk, can you tell me? 
Communications coordination, chief of staff office, and 
planning and priorities. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Just to clarify, those people from 
Executive Council, are they still employed in other departments 
within government, and how many and in what capacity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Not these, they aren’t. Some will, 
invariably, or might be. I won’t say will, but will be or might 
be. They are free to seek employment elsewhere. In this 
particular case, the answer is no. 
 
As I say, we’re trying to keep the cost very low. We 
campaigned in the 1995 election saying that we would save $40 
million a year annually . . . over four years, I’m sorry. We were 
actually criticized by the member from Greystone, the former 
Liberal leader, on that as being not enough. And we ended up in 
‘96-97 saving $50 million in administrative proceedings like 
this. That’s in one year. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. For the last couple of 
weeks in this House I’ve been discussing what I think are 
legitimate concerns regarding The Election Act. As you know, 
in our opinion we think that Act has been violated by the 
actions of the NDP and the Progressive Conservatives. 
 
Mr. Premier, you were the one who brought in this portion of 
the Act. First of all, do you think that the intent of the Act is 
being followed today, the intent that you meant back in the ‘70s 
as our attorney general? I’m referring to the PC metro fund and 
the Tommy Douglas House. 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I am not in the 
business of giving my opinions with respect to the PC metro 
fund or any funds that the Liberals may have set up or have set 
up or do have on the go. What the PCs do and how they handle 
their business is their business. And what the Liberals do and 
how they handle their business is your business. Nor am I in the 
business here in these estimates to talk about NDP funds. I have 
no problem in doing that. My job here on the floor of this 
Chamber, however, is to explain the expenditures of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan through the Executive Council 
department. 
 
But having said that, that one little caveat, I am of the belief 
that there has been compliance as far as the NDP is concerned 
with respect to The Election Act and Tommy Douglas House. I 
think that what the public wants is more compliance. That’s 
why the amendments to The Election Act are before the House. 
I think they’ve been passed already by the House. And we think 
that that’s the way that it should be proceeded. 
 
And so the answer is, this law that I introduced in 1978 was 
trail-blazing at the time. I was very proud to introduce it. I think 
it’s the right direction to go. I think in 1996 it needs to be 
improved, and we’re trying to do it. 
 
And we appreciate and welcome your suggestions as to how we 
can improve it. And I very much appreciate the fact that you 
and the representatives of the third party have met with the 
minister in charge of The Election Act to give your comments 
for improvement. And we monitor it and monitor it and 
continue to improve it in order to make sure that the political 
system, people have confidence in. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. There has been in fact 
a concern raised as well about the independence of the Chief 
Electoral Officer. He is in fact an employee of Executive 
Council, Mr. Premier  you’re aware of that. I’ve got to admit 
to you that as a newcomer to politics, I was just a little bit 
surprised by this. I just assumed that that position would be an 
officer of the legislature, much like the Clerk. If any position 
must be seen to be independent, one would think it would be 
the Electoral Officer. 
 
As I understand it, our current Chief Electoral Officer in fact 
has wisely requested that he is independent from your office. 
Do you think you’ll be following this course of action any time 
soon, and what reason might there not be for not making the 
Chief Electoral Officer completely independent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I think that there is 
merit to looking at the idea of making the Chief Electoral 
Officer independent, in the sense of being appointed by all of 
the Assembly, as we do the ombudsperson or the Conflicts of 
Interest Commissioner and so forth. I think there is a lot of 
merit in that. 
 
We have retained the Chief Electoral Officer in the current 
set-up basically for two reasons. One is not a very good one I 
admit, but none the less it’s one that is there. This has been the 
tradition for many . . . well has been the tradition every since I 
know and probably going all the way back to 1905 in  



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Saskatchewan, but that is not the major reason. 
 
In reality, the Chief Electoral Officer although I’m responsible 
and report to . . . the Chief Electoral Officer, in some ways is 
like a judge of a Provincial Court. A judge of a Provincial Court 
is appointed by a cabinet. A judge of a Provincial Court and 
that budget is responsible to the Minister of Justice. And the 
Minister of Justice has to respond in estimates to you folks 
about court judges and other thing related to Justice, much like 
I do, by parallel, have to answer about the actions of the Chief 
Electoral Officer. 
 
But no one would argue that the judges of the Provincial Court 
aren’t free and independent in the fulfilment of their duties, in 
making sure that election returns are in compliance with the 
elections law, or the laws that the judges have to interpret. 
 
And I think the same analogy applies to Mr. Kuziak and his 
predecessors. And in reality what we’re talking about here more 
is perception than fact. Perception is important, I acknowledge. 
 
So I think we need to take a look at this and I wouldn’t rule it 
out as a possibility some time down the road. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. The concerns that have 
been raised over the particular Election Act that’s in place and 
some of the amendments in the Bill 92 that will in fact replace 
that Act has just in the very recent past raised some serious 
concerns and concerns that we’ve been debating and we’ve 
been discussing. 
 
Mr. Premier, given all these related concerns and the obvious 
need to closely review what has happened, and perhaps under 
the current legislation whether or not there may have been some 
impropriety, I’m asking if you would consider . . . I guess I 
make an appeal to you that since . . . given that we do not have 
an election pending and in fact there would be no impact on any 
by-elections in the very near future, Mr. Premier, do you see 
any problem or why would there be any opposition to not 
leaving further discussion and consideration of Bill 92 until the 
next sitting of this legislature? Mr. Premier, it would give 
everyone a great deal of comfort in being allowed to adequately 
and totally review . . . I’ve received communication from the 
Provincial Auditor who indicated that during the course of his 
responsibilities there would be some questions he’d be looking 
at and reporting in his fall report or spring report. 
 
Mr. Premier, I guess to, as I say, give comfort to perhaps a 
whole bunch of people without it affecting in the near future 
anything that that legislation oversees, to delay further 
discussion and debate on it until the next sitting of this House 
next spring. That’s my appeal to you, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  What I can’t see in the submission 
that you make is why the reason for the delay. I haven’t heard 
the Liberal Party say that the proposed amendments are bad. 
I’ve heard the Liberal Party say that the amendments in their 
judgement are not necessary because the current Bill covers it 
off. But that may or may not be right. I don’t happen to agree 
with that interpretation from what I can see. 
 

But how can these amendments hurt? These amendments have 
got to be going in the direction that you yourself are calling for. 
And I don’t want to get in the whole debate again politically, 
but in the very kind of trap that you and the Liberal Party have 
found itself in as well, namely non-revelation because of 
donations through either the federal organization or through the 
constituency organizations, which is another way that one could 
argue circumventing the Act by your interpretation . . . I don’t 
think it is a circumvention of the Act. I don’t believe it to be a 
circumvention of the Act by my interpretation of the law, but if 
others do that’s an interpretation matter. 
 
But the point is the amendments go a long way towards solving 
that problem as you see it and the perception. So to me when 
you say we should delay, my argument is, if I could find 
substantive reason why the delay, why not get on with the 
improvement? Why not? 
 
I think the minister in charge of The Election Act has said that 
once the Bill is passed and the House amendments are 
introduced, there will be a period of non-proclamation where 
we’ll have a time  your party, the Conservatives, the Liberals 
 to see how it applies, because there’ll be a change in the 
rules. And there won’t be an immediate proclamation of it. This 
strikes me as being a very sensible and fair approach to take. 
 
So I hear your submission but I can’t accept it because I just 
don’t see a compelling reason why we would stop doing 
something which obviously is an improvement in the 
circumstance. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I asked that, Mr. Premier, because those House 
amendments were presented here in the recent past. And given 
the business of the House nearing, or at least leading up 
towards, the end of the session, it would then allow an 
opportunity for more adequate and closer scrutiny, not only of 
those amendments but perhaps of other areas of that Act which 
were not a concern when we had initially discussed it a couple 
of months back, or about three months ago now. These 
concerns were only raised in the very recent past, Mr. Premier. 
And I guess all I’m asking for . . . it would not be detrimental to 
anything that’s going to take place in this province in the near 
future; that it would not deter. 
 
Some of the amendments will be proposed by us as well. And 
one of them, if I may just share it with you, sir, that clause 5 
refers to the Chief Electoral Officer: 
 

may inquire into any alleged or suspected corrupt practices 
or contravention of this Act, and for this purpose the Chief 
Electoral Officer has the powers of a commissioner under 
The Public Inquiries Act. 
 

We would also like to include in there: 
 
When the Chief Electoral Officer considers that an inquiry 
under subsection (7) is desirable, the Chief Electoral 
Officer may appoint any other person to act on his or her 
behalf and that person shall have such powers of a 
commissioner under The Public Inquiries Act as the Chief 
Electoral Officer specifies in the appointment. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

I guess, Mr. Premier, that’s one area where we see it would be 
beneficial to have it included in that kind of legislation. And 
because of the extent of the Act, there may be other sections, 
other areas, that would be mutually beneficial to anybody 
affected by this type of legislation. I guess we can’t quite 
understand why the hurry to get it through this session, why it 
could not be achieved and accomplished in our next session, 
allowing, as I mentioned and I’m sorry to be repetitive, but 
everyone to take a real good, close look. All three parties again 
could sit down and ensure that it is totally complete, as we all 
feel that it should be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well the hon. member says that he’s 
sorry that he is repetitive and I don’t want to sound that I’m 
repetitive either in the answer. I give him the answer that I can 
because I believe that it is an improvement and I think it’s a 
good improvement, may end the necessity for further 
amendments. It may spawn further amendments. Who knows? 
Nothing prevents us from doing this down the road, but I think 
we should get on with it. I mean I have here a letter from one 
Dr. J. W. Melenchuk, vice-president, finance, Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party, and Dr. Melenchuk writes, amongst other things: 
 

If you’d like an opportunity to express your concerns and 
points of view to future policy makers, then I would 
strongly encourage you to join Liberal Rendezvous 1999. 
See enclosed. 
 

And then I see a Liberal Rendezvous 1999 membership 
application form and I see included in this document: 
membership benefits, amongst other things, orientation dinner, 
a social evening  fair enough  registration fee only for the 
Liberal convention 1996. March 1997, legislative reception, 
response to the throne speech; March 1998, legislative 
reception; March 1999, another legislative reception. By the 
way these are funds where the initiation fee is suggested to be 
$499  initiation fee, not membership fee  and then 
payments of $500 in ’97, ’98, ’99 for a total of 1999, to the year 
1999. 
 
(2100) 
 
So presumably somebody gets as a benefit, the chance of 
coming to a legislative reception, which benefit is applied to the 
people of Saskatchewan free of expense, as part of being an 
MLA. 
 
Now if we put these amendments into place, Liberal 
Rendezvous 1999, it may be just another fund-raising technique 
of the Liberal Party, I don’t know. It may be another 
organization of the Liberal Party. Whatever it is, at least that 
problem would be dealt with by the amendments that the hon. 
member from Fairview would take into account. It may not 
even be applicable  may not even be applicable. Well the 
Tory leader says the leadership candidate. I’m sure that Dr. 
Melenchuk is a leadership candidate because he writes in his 
letter: 
 

I also plan on being a major player in the resurgence of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party and plan to play a key role in 
forming government in 1999. 

The good doctor does not suffer from humility, that’s for sure. 
Maybe he will be a major player, I don’t know. But actually if 
you want to know the truth, Mr. Chairman, I’m putting my 
money on the member from Saskatoon Greystone to be the next 
leader of the Liberal Party because that’s what the rank and file 
of the Liberal Party wants  not Dr. Melenchuk or anybody 
else. Although I must confess the member from Melville does a 
very credible job for his caucus. 
 
Well all I’m saying is I attach nothing here. I make no 
accusations on this. I do nothing about this. All I know, that I 
see that there’s a fund with a special funding arrangement 
which is set up and the like. And it’s out there now being 
circulated in the community. Somebody’s raising money for 
Liberal Rendezvous 1999 with special membership benefits, 
memberships which are open to the public for no fee 
whatsoever. 
 
If we had that amendment into place, it probably wouldn’t hurt 
with respect to Liberal Rendezvous 1999. It wouldn’t hurt with 
respect to Tommy Douglas House or PC metro fund or anything 
else. It would strengthen the operation. 
 
If we need other changes as we go on, we would do that as time 
requires. So I’m not against your approach of measuring it and 
doing it carefully and appropriately, but I would urge that you 
should be with us in agreeing to the amendments. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Premier, you read me a letter. Why should 
we be subjected in our household mailboxes to get tickets  
raffle tickets  from the NDP to support the NDP Party. That’s 
not unlike a fund raiser, and that’s all that letter is, sir. I don’t 
know why you raise it. If you had some question about it . . . 
 
I guess if there is some question about how we’re carrying out 
our fund raisers and if there’s any question, and there has been 
some serious questions raised, what are you afraid of to have an 
independent inquiry or to delay this particular Bill until next 
session so we can thoroughly review it? What is the concern? Is 
there something perhaps that there is a fear of having 
contravened any portion of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, the issue . . . we’ve 
been around this argument for ever, and we can stay here for 
ever, for ever to argue around it. The former minister of Justice, 
who if I may say so  I’m saying this as objectively as I can; 
he’s a friend of mine and a colleague of mine  an outstanding 
lawyer, has got this figured out right. If there is an argument on 
the interpretation of The Election Act, that’s not cause for a 
judicial inquiry, an independent inquiry. 
 
I mean there are ways to handle this by way of interpretation. 
You can solve this problem by the amendment in the future. 
From here on in, that’s what happens. You pass the amendment, 
and the rules are set. People make contributions in the rules that 
are the past. 
 
Look, I don’t know what Liberal Rendezvous 1999 is. I don’t 
care. That’s your business. But please don’t compare to getting 
a raffle ticket to the NDP or the PCs and saying it’s in the same 
category. This amounts to $2,000 . . . (inaudible interjection)  



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

. . . you’re doggone right it’s a lot of perogy eating. That’s a lot 
of perogy eating. I just hope that the sour cream is as good. 
 
No, I mean, I don’t . . . I’m sorry actually. I don’t raise this . . . I 
make no accusations about this, none whatsoever. I’m only 
saying that if it is applicable to the amendments, they’re caught 
by the amendments; and if we do the same thing, they’re caught 
by the amendments; the Tories do it, they’re caught by the 
amendments. What’s done is done. 
 
The future is what we’ve got to do because that’s what the 
public wants us to do. And the interpretation is, as the former 
minister of Justice has given, that’s all I can say is for our side, 
and whether it’s right or wrong, the Chief Electoral Officer and 
other events will determine. But what we should do is move on 
to tighten up and improve the Bill. And I’d urge you to do that. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. And if you’d like, if 
you could spare me a few minutes, I could explain that 
Rendevouz ’99 fund raiser for you. You may want to buy into 
it. 
 
I just again, and I won’t . . . I guess when I was asking for, at 
least some time to allow the Provincial Auditor to submit his 
report and his views on what has transpired. That’s not asking 
too much. 
 

When we audit the Department of the Executive Council for 
the year ended March 31, 1996, we will take into 
consideration the perspectives that have caused recent 
controversy. We will report our audit findings in our 1996 
fall report or our 1997 spring report to the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Mr. Premier, it shouldn’t be too much to ask to wait until that 
kind of report can be tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Why is it too much to ask to have the 
amendment passed which it improves the law? I mean again we 
just go back and forth circularly all the way. We can look . . . 
this Bill is not written in stone. It’s not going to be there for 
ever. We strengthen the law, improve it, we pass it, we move 
on. If we need to do it next year, we move on. 
 
If the Chief Electoral studies out of all of this requires further 
amendments, so be it. If there needs to be some disciplinary  
so be it  action. But why not improve what we can improve 
by what we know obviously needs to be improved? I think it’s 
blindingly clear, and I would do this and that’s all that is the 
case. 
 
I don’t want to, because this has been a good debate we’ve had 
here, and you say about learning, and I must say, we’ve done 
well, you’ve done well here if I may say so, but I have to say 
this. I recall the debate back in 1974, I guess it was. The Leader 
of the Liberal Party at that time said the following about 
disclosure: 
 

I can see no reason why they should not have that privilege 
(referring to anonymity) and the privilege to do it without 
their names being published. It is their business as to 
which party they want to support. It is their business the  

manner in which they want to support it. 
 
Then my very good friend, the former Liberal leader Davey 
Steuart said, quote, speaking in a debate 1974, same time: 
 

Some people may decide that they don’t want to be 
exposed to supporting our party, your party; they may not 
support any party. And I say that that really has been in the 
past and should continue to be their business. 

 
And he argues for non-disclosure. 
 
Ian MacDougall . . . no, I guess this is Cy MacDonald here, Mr. 
MacDonald said, quote: 
 

I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, that the $100 is adequate (this is 
the $100 or less you don’t have to be revealed). Because 
the minute we do that, we immediately invade the privacy 
of my right to make a contribution for a political party. 

 
And the nays were, on this Bill, Steuart, Grant, MacDonald, 
Weatherald, MacLeod, Lane; MacDonald, Moose Jaw; and 
Malone. All Liberals. 
 
And I wonder if I voted for it. Oh yes, there I did. I voted for it. 
It would have been embarrassing if I hadn’t have voted for it. 
But I voted for it. 
 
Now my only point in raising this in ’74 is that when you argue, 
look let’s not do it, we need more time, for me, you’ll 
understand my history on this. My first reaction is well, you 
know, maybe things haven’t changed all that much for the 
Liberal Party. They didn’t want this better and fuller and clearer 
disclosure then, fought the Bill, and maybe they don’t want it in 
1996. You’re couching it, I know, in terms of well it’s time . . . 
take time to consider it. 
 
But maybe the real answer is because the Liberal Party deep 
down doesn’t want this improvement in the disclosure laws. 
 
In any event, I don’t want to pursue the debate any further in 
this regard. I know your point, you’ve made the request. I tell 
you we’re not going to do this. We want to get on with 
improving the law now. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Premier, you obviously saw 
something wrong with it back then, and that’s why you 
implemented these changes. I guess all we’re asking is whether 
those changes you implemented, you support. And if you do, 
why don’t we review them to make sure that nothing untoward 
has in fact occurred, whether it’s the Liberal Party, the Tory 
Party, or the NDP. 
 
That was our concern about making sure that those laws that 
you put into force, into place with your amendments, were in 
fact followed. And if they weren’t, that’s what the concerns are 
that have been raised here in the last two weeks. And that’s the 
reason that I feel that there needs to be some real close scrutiny 
of that Bill. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

Mr. Premier, I’ll go on to the fact that it’s quite obvious that 
looking at our members here in this caucus, we’ve got a big 
interest in what happens in rural Saskatchewan. And it seems 
that over the last four years, rural areas have taken it on the chin 
from your government. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I think we all remember the final couple 
years of the Devine administration and I think we all remember 
that government for the political reasons gearing all its policies 
to rural areas where the bulk of their votes were. Quite often it 
was to the detriment of urban centres. And now we see exactly 
the opposite. 
 
Can the Premier tell us how his urban-based strategy is any 
different than the Conservative’s anti-urban strategy, other than 
the fact a different group of people are being picked on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I take strenuous 
 not personal  but strenuous objection to the argument that 
we are picking on rural Saskatchewan  far from it. What we 
are trying to do is for all of Saskatchewan. This is the 
fundamental difference between us and the opposition parties. 
What we’re trying to do is prepare all of Saskatchewan for this 
rapid, changing, global economy, technological economy, 
information-based economy, which is affecting Saskatchewan. 
And it’s affecting rural Saskatchewan as much, maybe in some 
areas even more, than it is other areas. 
 
You have two choices. I don’t mean you personally, but we 
have two choices. We can either pretend that it’s not there and 
keep our heads in the sand or wish that it would go away, or 
hope that we could add more to the debt in buttressing it. Or in 
the alternative, we restructure it in a way, working through the 
community, to protect it for the next 15 and 20 and 25 years. 
 
And that’s the approach that we’ve taken. And so we have 
regional economic development authorities, and people are 
working very well there. And the economic statistics are very 
good. Thomson Meats, $4 million expansion. I don’t know 
whether Melfort is rural or not; I think it’s rural  over 30 
jobs. The Belle Plaine expansion at Saskferco, over a hundred 
jobs. Cargill at Clavet, Saskatchewan, another large number of 
jobs. Wolverine Resources, 12 new jobs, to my dear friend from 
Humboldt, the MLA. Alcatel Canada Wire  nice to know that 
she feels the same way about me too. Thirty-five new jobs in 
Weyburn, Saskatchewan. Estevan, SRI Homes, into the United 
States market, 15 new jobs. And so it goes  296 food 
processing companies mainly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Is it perfect? No. Have we reached heaven on earth in jobs? No. 
Do we need to do more? Yes. Do we need to try to reorganize 
the infrastructure and the economic developments for rural 
Saskatchewan  yes, just like we do for urban Saskatchewan, 
just like we’re looking at the universities, just as we’re looking 
at health care, just as we’re looking at job creation. This is a 
period of flux. You either have to try to influence it a bit and 
move with it or, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, it will dictate 
you. It’ll wash you right out. You’ll be irrelevant. 
 
Now those Conservatives, they’ve got a vision. They’re trying 
to dictate it. I totally disagree with their vision, but at least  

they’ve got one. 
 
You do whatever you want to do, but I tell you the one way to 
political oblivion is saying “status quo.” Nobody believes that; 
nobody believes that. And I don’t think you do either in your 
heart of hearts. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Premier, it’s great to hear the success stories 
that you’ve alluded to, and we’d like to hear much, much more 
of that. What is a bit of a chagrin, however, is the list of 
cut-backs out in the rural areas, and that’s the ones I was 
alluding to, and it’s a long one. 
 
Those are the people that are affected. It’s those people in the 
rural areas, Crop Insurance offices that have been closed in 
Wilkie, Kyle, Wolseley, Wynyard, Canora, Carnduff, Outlook, 
and Melfort; contracts for 154 crop insurance agents will not be 
renewed. That means those people are out of some work. 
 
In the areas of highways, equipment storage closures have 
affected Balcarres, Craik, Hodgeville, Kincaid, Mossbank, 
Oungre, Rocanville, Stoughton, Val Marie, Willowbunch, 
Canora, Delisle, Eatonia, Hafford, Humboldt, Ituna, Macklin, 
Meacham, Neilburg, Birch Hills, Carrot River, Paradise Hill, 
and Shell Lake. 
 
And the latest rural service centres to receive the axe are in 
Leader, Kamsack, Melfort, and Fort Qu’Appelle. Those are 
added to those offices that have been closed before. 
 
(2115) 
 
This is what the grave concerns are to people out there, that 
their services are being eroded, they’re being cut back, people 
are losing employment, and they have to go elsewhere. They 
have to bear a further burden. 
 
Ag Credit offices are closing in Watrous, Meadow Lake, 
Estevan, Moose Jaw, and Swift Current. Social Services offices 
have had their hours slashed in Wynyard, Humboldt, and 
Melville. 
 
We see more and more school divisions in trouble. There’s a 
closure of the court-houses in Melville and Kerrobert. And of 
course, there’s a growing crisis in health care. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s a long list but in reality it could in fact be 
much longer. Is there any reason that rural residents should 
believe that they are not bearing any unfair share of pain from 
your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, with the greatest of 
respect, the complete factual basis of that question is a mile off 
the mark and it is totally and completely erroneous. 
 
Listen, we have given notices in the neighbourhood of 554 
people in this budget. I’ll give you the breakdown of where they 
are. We’ll even get this typed up and mailed over to you, but I’ll 
put it for the record and it’ll be in Hansard tomorrow. 
 
You know what the biggest number of position losses have  



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

been? Regina, 306, 45.6 per cent of the lay-offs. Saskatoon, 55 
numbers, 8.2 per cent; P.A. (Prince Albert), 55, 8.2; Moose 
Jaw, 11, 1.6; Battlefords, 29, 4.3 per cent; Yorkton, 27, 4 per 
cent; Swift Current, 48 people, 48 people in Swift Current, 7.2 
per cent; Weyburn, 10 people, 1.5 per cent; Melfort, 5, 0.7 per 
cent; Estevan, 2, 0.3 per cent; Lloydminster, 0; Melville, 5, or 
0.7 per cent of the complement. 
 
And the totals breakdown in subtotals for urban, 82.4 per cent 
of the lay-offs  urban  and 17.6 rural. 
 
Now you can say okay, I’m going to draw the rural line a little 
higher. You can draw it anywhere you want  you can draw it 
at Yorkton, you can draw at North Battleford, you can draw it 
Moose Jaw  but the fact of the matter is both in numbers and 
percentage, the biggest hit has been in the urban centres. 
 
An Hon. Member:  But the impact is harder on rural people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  But that’s . . . His argument says that 
we’re attacking rural Saskatchewan and it is factually incorrect, 
it is factually incorrect. And you cannot maintain the system. 
 
And now you’re like the Liberals. You want to maintain in it 
rural Saskatchewan and balance the budget and reduce the 
taxes. Well mind you, you want to cut back on medicare and 
education and all of that, so you’re not like the Liberals totally, 
a little bit of that nature. You can’t have it both ways. You are 
totally and completely a mile off base. 
 
Look, the politics of division of rural versus urban is the old 
Liberal-Tory, Tory-Liberal game. It’s bunkum, it’s bunkum. 
Doesn’t support the numbers here. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan is undergoing change and we have to help 
it. Help it and it’ll help itself. It survives and survives very, very 
well in spite of all governments, any governments. But what 
we’re doing is putting a climate here into place where our 
finances are in order and our economic development is in order. 
 
And those are the numbers that come from the Public Service 
Commission. And we’ll clean them up in the sense that I’ve got 
a few notations on them  they’ll be the exact numbers that the 
Public Service gave  and then you can base your question. 
 
While if you turn around and say, well the impact is greater, 
well I know that one job in a smaller community has a bigger 
impact. I know that that’s the case. But don’t argue that 
somehow we’re the reverse of the Conservatives because that’s 
what your question was predicated on. You said they were 
taking the strips of skin off urban Saskatchewan and now we’re 
doing it off rural. It’s not true. The facts do not support it. It’s 
totally and completely false, what you say. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. It’s the feelings of the 
people that when they see these things happen that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . But it’s the people that feel the brunt 
of what happens. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like to just defer to my hon. colleague from 
Melfort, if I might. But I do want to thank you for the  

exchange. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier. 
Mr. Premier, as you know, most of us are very new to the 
political scene in this legislature, but I think most of us also 
have always been observers of the political scene over the years. 
 
And it strikes me that much of what you said to the Leader of 
the Opposition this evening rings a chord. I remember back into 
the 1980s and leading up until 1986 . . . and you’re very right in 
terms of saying that the Conservative government of the day 
was totally irresponsible. I recall, I believe, in one of the 
budgets where they had estimated in their budget documents 
that we were going to have a deficit of some $800 million that 
year, and I was shocked and abhorred at that kind of a figure, 
only to find out afterwards that it was $500 million off the 
mark. It was a half a billion dollar oops in terms of how 
inaccurate the budget process was. 
 
And I give you credit for the fact that I certainly am becoming 
increasingly aware that your government has gone a long way in 
improving the accuracy of the budget and things of that nature. 
And I do give you a great deal of credit for it, and my 
knowledge of that is becoming more and more acute as we 
work through Public Accounts Committee. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, I also don’t remember over those days as well 
that when this PC government of the day was spending these 
ridiculous amounts of money over what they were taking in, in 
revenue, I don’t recall in one instance that your government as 
opposition . . . or your party as opposition was saying, hold it 
folks, you’re spending too much. Just a minute; you’re 
spending too much; you’re going to put this province in debt. I 
recall in health and education, in every field, you kept asking 
for more. And so I think that it’s a little bit trivial for you to 
criticize our suggestions that we’re making in this legislature. 
 
Now the thing that it strikes me as well is that there was an 
opportunity that you had at the time, in leading at the end of the 
’80s, that the Tory government did do something I think that 
was quite constructive and that was to appoint the Murray 
Commission on health care. 
 
And the reason that I have some familiarity with it, one of the 
members of that commission was Bishop Blaise Morand of 
Prince Albert, who I believe you know very well, and you know 
and I know from my association at the time how much work he 
as an individual commission member put into that whole report 
and how much effort that whole commission went into in order 
to deliver that report at the end of the ’80s. 
 
And at 1991 after your election you moved into this new 
wellness model creation and the Murray Commission report, 
which I thought had a lot to offer, was completely dismissed. 
Mr. Premier, the question I’d like to ask you is, would you give 
your perspective on why that Murray Commission report was 
sort of sloughed off so out of hand and why we didn’t move to 
the recommendations of that report as by your government, sir, 
in 1991 when you didn’t adopt the recommendations of that 
report. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I welcome this 
comment and I want to really underline in giving my answer 
what has been, in my judgement, all night the fundamental  
fundamental  basic contradictions of the Liberal Party. 
 
Now look, the Leader of the Liberal Party, the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, all night tonight in some way or other has 
been after me about our reforms and our district health boards. 
Remember what he called them? What did he call them? He 
called them sham district health boards. He said, you know, 
they’re shammed. They don’t have any power. He said you’ve 
consolidated. Some of them are elected, some are not elected. 
The whole concept that was involved in this operation, that we 
were controlling all the purse-strings and everything that was 
tied up to it. 
 
Now here you get up and you say you know here’s the Murray 
Commission report comes along and the Murray Commission 
report was sidelined by you. Actually it was sidelined by the 
Conservative government before we got to office. They never 
acted on it. That’s the historic fact. 
 
But do you know what the Murray Commission reported by 
numbers of health districts that there should be in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member:  How many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Fifteen. No, 15. The member says 10, 
I’ll even take 10; 10 or 15, it doesn’t matter. Get this. The 
Liberal leader at the time then comes in, 1991, and she says 
this, quote: 
 

Rural health care would be regionalized (referring to the 
Liberal Party, she said), small town hospitals would be 
used for basic emergency treatment and for recuperative 
and palliative care. They would also be the basis for 
promotion of wellness in communities. 

 
What does that sound like  10 and 15. Now where do you 
folks stand on this thing? Here you’re getting up asking me the 
question that I should have adopted the Murray Commission 
report even though the Tories themselves rejected it on 10 or 
15, and on the regionalization of the hospitals, and your leader 
just finished in the last two hours giving me heck for doing 30, 
attempts at putting some order and system into the health care 
system. My goodness. Where in the world does this Liberal 
Party in Saskatchewan come from? More importantly, where 
are you going in health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Well, Mr. Premier, I know that in 1999 
we’re going to have our work cut out for us because we’ve got 
two decades of mess that has been made of health care because 
politics has come before common sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And when I spoke of the Murray 
Commission, it was not to say I automatically endorsed it. It  

was to ask you why those recommendations were not followed. 
But the report didn’t have to be . . . just because they didn’t 
implement it immediately in 1990. They were busy into the Fair 
Share nonsense. I mean you could have picked up that 
commission in 1991, looked at it, and given the people an 
answer as to why that commission’s work was invalid, because 
there were, it seems to me, some of the fundamental flaws that 
we are now finding in this process that perhaps could have been 
addressed in those recommendations. So I was asking, why was 
that report not seriously considered when you looked in 1991 
for revisiting the whole way you were going to change health 
care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The answer has got to be painfully 
obvious to you, sir. If it isn’t, I’m going to make it as simple as 
I can. We looked at the report, and we said, we think 10 regions 
 10 regions, 10 in the province of Saskatchewan  is just too 
large, too few, too remote from local control and local 
influence. It destroys the whole concept of wellness and 
community input. That’s what we said. 
 
I know Dr. Bob Murray. I know Bishop Morand and all those 
people that are very able, competent people  Walter Podiluk, 
all of them. They were doing the best they could, but it was not 
good enough. We wanted to make this a workable system where 
there would be some input by the local people. That’s why we 
rejected it. It was rejected by them in the first instance, maybe 
for the same doggone reason for all I know. I don’t know. 
 
But why in the world are you standing up, as Liberals, telling 
me now that we should have been adopting the Murray 
Commission report when, for the last hour and a half, the 
Liberal leader has been giving me what for for implementing 30 
district health boards and doing the same thing? Can you 
imagine the compounding of the problem if we had taken your 
suggestion on Murray? Can you imagine? We have problems 
with 30, as you people pointed out in question period and as 
you did in the estimates. 
 
Imagine putting it into 10 regions. How in the world can you 
stand up in credibility and say that what we’re doing is wrong 
on 30, on these isolated examples that you give, and say at the 
same breath that it would have been better with 10? I think this 
is an absolutely, fundamentally flawed, contradictory argument. 
 
I asked in my last question, I said where in the world are you 
people going? I know where you’re going. You’re going 
two-tier health care. You’re going . . . like the member from 
Arm River says, those who can afford to pay should pay, and 
they’ll jump the queue line. You’re going on the deterrent fees 
because you introduced it in 1967. You are dismantling the 
health care system on the national basis by virtue of the block 
transfer approaches, and you are the same old Liberals that 
you’ve always been. 
 
You are the same Liberals who kicked on the doors in 
opposition to Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd when we 
set up health care and medicare in the province of 
Saskatchewan and you’re doing it now. Not kicking on the 
doors, but fighting the reform. Because you know doggone well  



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

that if we adopted Murray or did nothing, we would have the 
collapse of the system and the two-tier, which is what you want. 
And it’s totally contradictory to what the Leader of the Liberal 
Party himself has been saying for the last hour and a half. 
 
Don’t you two people caucus and figure out what the strategy 
and the position is? Tell me what your health care policy is, tell 
me right now what your health care policy is  you don’t like 
ours  tell us what it is. 
 
I’m going to sit down, and I’m going to ask you to get up and 
tell us specifically what it is. Do you endorse what the member 
from Greystone said back in 1991 about regional health care 
and the wellness models  yes or no? 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Premier, as I pointed out to you earlier, 
we studied your history in the 1980s very well. And the answer 
is, is that in 1999 you will find out, because what . . . we will 
then be in a position to make those kind of decisions that you 
are making now. And the health care that will be delivered will 
not be two-tiered unless you have forced all the rural centres to 
not offer any services, so the only place people can go for 
proper care is into the two major cities. That’s what we don’t 
do. I’ll tell that to anybody in this province. 
 
I want to leave this issue and move to another one because you 
were very kind enough to say that you would like some 
alternative suggestions and if we would come up with some, 
you’d be pleased to implement them. We’ve been coming up 
with an alternative suggestion, and so have the Conservatives 
for the last number of months, and it has to do with your 
union-preference Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
policy. 
 
We have shown, by example  and we used examples such as 
the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline, we’ve used the example of 
SaskTel fire alarm system installations, that showed by actual, 
practical example where there were contracts that could be 
documented and tabled, and they were  that this was costing 
30 per cent more to the taxpayers of the province. 
 
And your own Department of Economic Development had an 
internal study that said that the 30 per cent figure indeed was a 
realistic figure. The Saskatchewan Construction Association 
has been saying all along that that figure is real. And we’ve 
been trying to establish what the numbers are in terms of what 
the magnitude of this is. 
 
In the Finance minister’s own budget document, she talked 
about $635 million of capital construction in the province. I 
recognize not all of that is under the CCTA (Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement), but a significant amount 
is. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, if you even take $9 million which the . . . or 
$30 million which the Minister of Economic Development 
used, that’s $9 million as an example at the very minimum level 
of how much money could be saved if you got rid of this unfair 
union preference policy. 

Mr. Premier, I recognize today that you said that there may or 
may not be a current interim report that probably substantiates 
these figures and the construction association has tried to 
negotiate and that has failed. Why don’t we scrap this 
document, this agreement that everyone recognizes is flawed 
and faulty, and have that money as a start, because just the $9 
million would save 300 long-term health care beds in this 
province, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, the mathematics of the 
hon. member just simply don’t apply with respect to the CCTA 
and health care. But I want to come back to health care because 
I want it noted for the record that the Liberal Party says to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, wait till 1999 and 
we’ll tell you what you’re going to get by way of health care. 
Elect me, and what a surprise you might get. We won’t tell you 
in advance, but just elect us in 1999 and there may be 
something coming out of our bag of tricks. 
 
I’ll tell you what comes out of the bag of tricks. What will come 
out of the bag of tricks are deterrent fees, and health care 
premiums, and two-tier health care system, and the 
dismantlement of the operation of health care. That’s what you 
say. 
 
Surely to goodness, you’ve got to get up and say that you didn’t 
mean that. Because if you said on the record to the people of 
Saskatchewan, take a chance on us and elect us in 1999, and 
what a surprise you could get in health care . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  They’ll know what we stand for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  They’ll know what you stand for. 
They know what you stand for right now. They know you stand 
for the two-tier system of health care. You and the member 
from Arm River, and you and the Liberal Party, they know what 
you stand for and what you stood for right from 1962. 
 
The hon. member got himself tossed out of this House . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member got up in the 
House and he complained about the fact that the number of 
hospital beds in the Melfort area had been cut from 80 to 40. 
That’s the principle. However, what he didn’t tell, what he 
knew, was that the daily census of hospital bed occupancy was 
only 32 in Melfort  40 and 32  and he got himself tossed 
out, and this is the new Liberal Party, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition. Elect us in ’99, and we’ll surprise you. You 
doggone right, people of Saskatchewan, the Liberal Party will 
surprise you, and I tell you the biggest surprise is going to be 
inflicted on you people as you get defeated in the next 
provincial election, as you should, for your lack of credible 
position in health care and across the piece that you take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Now I want to make a point about 
CCTA. Elect me and take a chance. That’s going to be the 
Liberal slogan. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, CCTA. I don’t know what it is about the 
member from Melfort and the Liberal Party and the  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

Conservative Party, what it is that they hate about unions. What 
is it? 
 
An Hon. Member:  30 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  30 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member:  30 per cent extra from the taxpayers’ 
pockets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  30 per cent extra, the member from 
Melfort says. So maybe they’re getting paid too much, is what 
you’re saying? 
 
Oh, Mr. Chairman, the silence is deafening. Are they getting 
paid too much? Are they getting paid too much? You get up 
and ask me this question and tell them . . . and tell the working 
men and women of Saskatchewan the Liberal Party believes 
that unionized workers in the construction area are getting paid 
too much. 
 
Mr. Chairman, he has now recaptured his principles, and I’m 
not quite sure what they are but they’re certainly loud enough to 
take over the House. 
 
What’s his complaint about the trade union movement? What’s 
his complaint about employers who employ working men and 
women who happen to trade unionists? They want a piece of 
the action too. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Let them bid openly and fairly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Let them bid openly and fairly against 
non-unionized contractors because 30 per cent less, according 
to the member’s own words, just as he said himself. He wants 
to rush to the bottom. He wants as his philosophy to get the 
people who are working every day in their restaurants, in the 
hospitals, in the factories, keep driving them down  keep 
driving them down so that everybody else can make bigger 
profits, and bigger money, and bigger opportunity. And that is, 
like Tommy Douglas used to say, free enterprise, as the 
elephant danced amongst the chickens. You are going to be 
dancing in that context. 
 
Is this the society we’re building in Saskatchewan for the 21st 
century? What do you want to do? Do you want to go back to 
1886? This is 1996, Liberal Party. 
 
And all we’re trying to do is to say if the federal Liberal 
government introduced something like a fair-wage policy back 
in the 1970s, if the United States of America federal 
government introduced it in 1947, the United States of 
America, for goodness sakes, why can’t Saskatchewan try to 
right the wrong that the Conservatives set up? 
 
It’s not easy, but why can’t we try  why can’t we treat our 
working men and women, unionized and non-unionized  
fairly, and give them a fair wage and a fair salary and allow the 
contractors, unionized and non-unionized, to bid fairly? What is 
wrong with that? 
 

Everything is wrong in your books and I tell you if you believe 
that, what you should do is what you’ve been thinking of doing. 
Pick up your chair  don’t walk out of the House  pick up 
your chair and walk over there and join the Conservatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, just a few 
moments ago you alluded to the fact that the Liberal Party 
talked about health care reform and said that yes, we were 
wanting to get rid of bricks and mortar because bricks and 
mortar in fact is not the prime reason for any health care facility 
being put up in this province. 
 
Now the difference in philosophy between the Liberal Party and 
the NDP Party is that the Liberal Party would have done health 
care reform in a much different way. It would have included the 
policy of inclusion and empowering people in decision making, 
in health, in education, and in every other sector. The NDP 
Party in fact has an exclusion policy in their party. They exclude 
so that they can gain power and control over everything, so that 
they make the final decision making, and they exclude and 
extract decision-making powers from everybody in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Premier, in 1991 you campaigned and your party 
campaigned, and one of the big promises that you made was to 
eliminate child poverty in your first term of office. Well we all 
know that this has not happened. In your own discussion paper 
on social assistance reform, it is stated that child poverty has 
increased over the past 15 years. That 15 years, Mr. Premier, 
includes the past five years that your government has been in 
power. And you said that you don’t expect to see any 
improvement of these problems for at least another year. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, there are 18,000 more children on social 
service today than there were in 1991. What are you doing to 
ensure that these kids get off of welfare? Can you guarantee 
that they’re going to be looked after? 
 
In your discussion paper on reforming social services, you talk 
about supplements to income. People have to get jobs in order 
to receive money through Social Services. Where are these jobs 
going to come from, the way you’re going? There are no jobs, 
and you know it. It’s that simple. What is your plan to create 
jobs, Mr. Premier? Not just minimum wage and part-time jobs 
but full-time, meaningful jobs so that these people can work to 
support themselves and get off social assistance. The discussion 
paper quotes jobs that will pay 7 or $8 an hour. Well where are 
these jobs, Mr. Premier, because minimum wage jobs at $5.35 
an hour are not even there for people that would like to get 
them. 
 
Mr. Premier, there were job creation programs in place when 
the NDP Party came to power, and your Minister of Finance 
axed those programs. The Saskatchewan Works program was 
creating 4,000 new jobs a year. What new programs do you 
intend to put in place to create, you know, jobs like the old 
program did? This program only cost $6 million a year and it 
was axed. Are you able to implement an equally effective 
program at an equally low cost? The skills development  



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

program that provided education to single moms was also axed 
when you came to power. How will that program be replaced 
and at what cost? 
 
Mr. Premier, 65 per cent of the children living in poverty in this 
province are children of single parent moms, single moms. I 
would ask you right now how you intend to help those single 
moms get jobs, and if in fact you’re going to use your training 
program in order to get them into an education position where 
they can get a job. How are you going to ensure there are going 
to be jobs for them that are ongoing, meaningful jobs? 
 
And if that is so  if in fact it even happens with the great 
numbers that are out there of single moms  tell me how in 
fact is this going to end up taking care of their children? Who is 
going to take care of those children? Are you going to then 
supplement them with more child care money, or what are you 
going to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
asks me a question. Perhaps I could ask her and the Liberal 
Party yet another question. I think it’s my seventh or eighth on 
policy. Where does the Liberal Party stand on increasing the 
minimum wage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Excuse me  
where does the Liberal Party stand on increasing the minimum 
wage for working moms, working moms who have children on 
the poverty line that you talk about? Are you for an increase in 
the minimum wage and in their fiscal position  yes or no? 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Premier, you have no doubt much more 
experience in politics and in running a province than I have. 
You haven’t even been able to answer the question that I put 
forward to you right here tonight. If you don’t want to answer 
the question, that’s entirely up to you. But the people of the 
province are waiting for an answer. 
 
Because if you’re going to be changing your whole social 
assistance and making reform here happen, you have to tell us 
exactly how that’s going to happen because there are a great 
number of children at risk here  42,000 of the people on 
social assistance are children. 
 
So how in fact are you going to ensure the mothers and the 
people of this province, that those children are not going to go 
any hungrier than they are now? 
 
Mr. Premier, I have some stats before me that actually should 
give you a great reality check here. We have in this province 
since you came in a higher rate of child prostitution. There are 
currently more than a hundred child prostitutes in Saskatoon’s 
inner city, some as young as 9 and 10 years old. There’s a task 
force that has been put in place to deal with this problem, but it 
is making little headway because we don’t have the cooperation 
of the provincial government. 
 
Child prostitution makes up one-quarter of Saskatoon’s sex 
trade. This is 10 per cent higher than in other, similar sized 
cities in western Canada. And on top of it, johns who pick up 
child prostitutes are getting away with that. They’re rarely 
charged. And when they are, they get a slap on the wrist. You 
need to implement policy that is going to be a lot harder on  

johns. And so that kind of thing will certainly help to enhance 
the lives of our young children. 
 
(2145) 
 
We have also in this province, since you came into power, teen 
suicide that is escalating. Twelve thousand teens attempt 
suicide in Saskatchewan every year. Twenty-eight per cent of 
suicide deaths are youth deaths. Over the past three decades, 
suicide rates for teens between 15 and 19 have quadrupled. 
 
Mr. Premier, child hunger and poverty  more than one-fifth 
of Saskatchewan’s children live in poverty. In 1992 and ’93, 
child nutrition and development program provided about 1 
million meals to hungry children in this province. Saskatoon 
child hunger and education program fed 700 Saskatoon 
children, only in Saskatoon, daily, from January 1 to July 31 
’95. And on top if it, Saskatchewan has one of the highest 
instances of substance abuse in the country. 
 
We also have more than 82,000 people on social assistance. 
The number of children on social assistance has increased by 
17,000 in the last three years when your government has been 
in power. We have child abuse in this province, Mr. Premier, 
that has not been dealt with. In Moose Jaw alone, the Moose 
Jaw offices of Saskatchewan Social Services reports at least 
150 cases of ongoing child abuse each year. That’s only in 
Moose Jaw. Looking at child abuse — that encompasses 
physical, sexual, and emotional abuse as well as neglect, and it 
occurs in all walks of life. 
 
Mr. Premier, these statistics are alarming, and I think any other 
province that would have the rates as high as this would 
certainly be looking to doing something about it, Mr. Premier, 
and they would understand that a measure of success of any 
government in any society is how well they take care of their 
children and how well they take care of their women, in fact. 
So, Mr. Premier, I would ask you to comment on those 
statistics, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I want to 
observe that if the hon. members believes what she says about 
child poverty, she will produce of course her correspondence to 
the federal government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, for 
the reduction of $25 million to the province of Saskatchewan 
 I’ll come to our policies in a moment. I’ll come to our 
policies. I listened to you with the greatest respect; I think 
maybe you can listen to me. 
 
Twenty-five million dollars have been reduced by your Liberal 
Party in Ottawa to the poorest of the poor. And I’m assuming 
that rather than grandstanding  that’s just this year  rather 
than grandstanding in this legislature tonight, you will show me 
your letters to Mr. Martin and Mr. Chrétien opposing that. And 
you might tell us whether you’ve written. 
 
Secondly, I’m not going to let you off the hook about the 
minimum wage for working moms. I’m not going to let you off  
the hook on that. You’re going to have to tell us whether you  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

support it or not. It’s not good enough to make the speeches. 
We all know the pain that’s out there. You have to tell us what 
your solutions are going to be. Have you even taken the time to 
write a letter? Have you even taken the time to caucus and 
decide whether or not you support an increase in the minimum 
wage or whether you support your colleague, the would-be 
leader from Melfort, who wants to drive wages down for 
working men and women even further yet? You have to tell us 
that. 
 
Now I’m going to tell you about Saskatchewan. I’m not going 
to tell you about all the details of the program, including the 
comprehensive children’s action plan involving, amongst other 
things, the children’s nutrition program that you referred to. It’s 
our program, for goodness’ sake, that we introduced in the 
circumstances. We know that this is a problem and we’ve been 
arguing about this and the need to do something about it for 
quite some time. There is in fact, in our social design paper, a 
proposal set out. 
 
At the western premiers’ conference, I want to read this part of 
the communiqué for you about the western premiers: 
 

Western premiers agreed that it’s critically important to 
address in the near future practical social policy measures 
that will improve the security and well-being of Canadians. 
Western premiers agreed to seek FMC (first ministers’ 
conference) agreement to consider on a priority basis a 
coordinated national strategy to reduce child poverty. 
 
One option discussed by the premiers that should be raised 
at the first ministers’ meeting, all premiers of the West 
agreed, is the development of a national child benefit 
proposal that would integrate and improve the various 
federal, provincial, and territorial programs supporting low 
income families with children. 
 
Western premiers agreed that a national undertaking to 
address child poverty would be a practical way that first 
ministers can express their concern for children, 
demonstrate that we’re prepared to act together on a 
cooperative basis to address a growing social problem, and 
demonstrate that we believe that Canadians define 
themselves by a common set of values and shared concern 
for one another. 

 
That’s what’s communicated. 
 
Now what did the Prime Minister say today? Here’s what the 
Prime Minister said today in a speech that he delivered in 
Ottawa: 
 

The western premiers at their recent conference 
recommended, and we agree, on a national goal to reduce 
child poverty. (I agree, he said). All first ministers will 
agree. One idea the western premiers are proposing is a 
national child benefit that would integrate all the existing 
federal and provincial programs and support low income 
families. That is worth a serious discussion (the Prime 
Minister said). I hope we can mandate ministers to get to 
work now in finding concrete ways to reduce child poverty  

in Canada. 
 

If I may say so immodestly, that idea of the national child 
benefit comes right from Saskatchewan. And if I may say so, 
with some pride and congratulations, the Prime Minister, he has 
adopted it and it’s on the agenda for this coming Thursday and 
Friday. That’s what we’re doing about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And I might add, contrary to some of 
the local press which is written around this province, when you 
take a look at The Ottawa Citizen of yesterday, Mr. Ken Battle, 
who’s one of the most foremost social writers on social policy 
in Canada, writes under the headline, “National child benefit  
an idea whose time has come” writes: 
 

Saskatchewan Premier Roy Romanow is breathing fresh 
political life into one of the most promising ideas to 
emerge in years  a national child benefit plan. Premier 
Romanow said he intends to push the concept of a national 
child benefit at the first ministers’ conference on the 20th 
and 21st. 
 
One of the long lamented irrationalities of Canada’s social 
security system is the fact that it delivers more child 
benefits to families on welfare than it does the working 
poor, as he defends this concept. As it turns out, the Prime 
Minister today has adopted it. 
 

Now there’s the entire package. 
 
But I want to go on from that point to make one other. This is a 
growing problem because one of the things that is facing this 
country of Canada in the current situation that we face is a crisis 
of inequality. 
 
Lester Thurow says that 1 per cent of the population has 40 per 
cent of the share of the wealth. And that 40 per cent of the share 
of the wealth is double what it was in the 1970s. And it’s 
double what it was prior to progressive taxation in the 1920s. 
He says the inequality gap has got to be narrowed. 
 
How do you narrow the inequality gap? Not by, as the member 
from Melfort would have us do, driving it to the bottom through 
your CCTA attack. How do you narrow the inequality? Not by 
driving the minimum wage further down to the bottom and then 
making speeches in the House while the kids suffer. 
 
What we’ve got to be doing on a national basis is, not because 
this is my idea  it’s not my idea; a number of people’s ideas 
 is working together to elevate up. But do I hear that from 
you folks in this legislature? No, all I hear is attack the working 
people, cut back on the minimum wage, cut back on the labour 
standards — you fought that tooth and nail — cut back on the 
CCTA, and you won’t even tell us where you stand on the 
minimum wage. 
 
I tell you, make the speeches that you want, we’re moving with 
the first ministers, the Prime Minister included. It’s going to be 
a tough one to crack but we’re moving to stop this race to the  



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

bottom. We’re moving to try to give people a standard of living 
which is compassionate and coordinated and caring, for a 
society which is as rich and as great as Canada is. And you 
should be onside with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Premier, the CCTA situation is quite different 
than what you seem to be expounding here. I have had people 
in my constituency that would love to work on any construction 
project. Those people would be thrilled to death to be able to 
work, to have a job. They say to me that they are willing to 
work for less than union wages, but they can no longer get jobs 
because of unions. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Premier, give these people a chance to 
make their own decisions. They are perfectly willing to work 
and to live within their means but they have to be able to get a 
job. When you have union preference, these people don’t have 
an opportunity to get the jobs, and there’s a good number of 
them out there. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, the last thing I’d like to say to you today 
regarding child poverty, and taking care of the children of this 
province in a way that’s meaningful for them in the future, is 
that you have got the power in your hands. You take charge. 
You are in charge. You have a great amount of influence on Mr. 
Chrétien in Ottawa and you know it. If in fact you have that 
kind of influence, I challenge you to go ahead and be the first to 
implement some good changes so that Saskatchewan can see 
the benefits of that before any other province in this country. 
 
So take the leadership that you purport to have and do it here in 
this province soon, and quicker than any other province. And 
then you will have some credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. 
member for those parting words. But I tell you one thing, I will 
never accept the logic that says prosperity through lower wages. 
That’s what you’re saying, prosperity through lower wages. 
 
You know something, you know one of the biggest proponents, 
one of the biggest proponents of a minimum wage, was Henry 
Ford Sr.  Henry Ford Sr. You may or may not know this 
historically. And all his manager said: Mr. Ford, what in the 
world are you doing with a minimum wage? Greatest capitalist 
around in the United States. Ford, what are you doing with a 
minimum wage and so high? You know what his answer was? 
Because I want somebody to be able to be around or to be able 
to afford to buy my cars. 
 
Not you Liberals. You think you can get prosperity through 
lower wages. 
 
I’ll do my bit. I’ve read you what we’re doing and I’ve told you 
where we stand and you haven’t even had the courage  you 
and the Liberal caucus  to tell me where you stand on the 
minimum wage. 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, the first 
thing you need to do is to create some jobs in this province that 
are meaningful, long-term jobs and then we can talk about 
wages. What’s the sense in talking about wages when we don’t 
have the jobs? It’s been evident by the exodus from this 
province that there aren’t jobs here to sustain a family, and so 
those families are moving out. And you know that, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we can go on all 
night on this thing. I’m still waiting to hear where you stand on 
the minimum wage. If you won’t answer me, maybe you’ll 
answer the journalists if they ask you. You don’t have to answer 
me. 
 
Tell us where you stand on health care reform. Tell us how 
you’re going to square the budgets. Tell us all the things that 
I’ve asked you to, that you don’t like about us; tell us so that the 
people can compare what the alternatives are. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Wait till we have an election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Or as my colleague says, maybe the 
answer is elect us in ’99 and it’ll be a big surprise. Well I don’t 
think we need to worry about that because the surprise, as I say, 
will be on you folks, thanks very much to the Liberal caucus. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I’d like to thank you, Mr. Premier. I just wanted to 
thank you for your comments, and I would comment one more 
time that you have three years yet to clean up the mess that you 
have made in this province. So for the next three years you do 
your job, you establish whatever you want, and we will do it in 
1991, although it will be difficult after following in your tracks. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, and your 
staff, welcome. 
 
We haven’t, as I don’t believe yet at this point anyway, we’ve 
received the answers to the global questions from your 
department. If they have, I haven’t been made aware of them 
but I would appreciate them if you have them available. 
 
We can start with just a few to begin with, Mr. Premier. How 
much was spent on ministerial travel for the last fiscal year 
within your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, we will get to you the 
ministerial travel, the total. The travel that we have from my 
department or for myself amounts to, in the last year, a total of 
29,197 and 36 is the figure which I’ve been  which I have 
been reported here on. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I would also like for 
you to detail to us  and you might want to commit to this 
later; it’s not important to have the information here tonight  
but what was the reasons for ministerial travel; where did you 
go; how did you get there; who went along with you on the trip; 
and the purpose of your trips. Also, what value can be attached 
to this expenditure in terms of the expenditure to the taxpayers  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

of Saskatchewan, and how the benefit to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan can be established. 
 
Also, where did your staff travel to? All of the same relevant 
questions to them. How did they get there; what was the 
purpose of the trip; who accompanied them; and what was the 
total expenditure on ministerial assistant travel? 
 
Mr. Premier, does Executive Council have any staffers hired by 
contract? If so, I wonder if you could provide us with the names 
and full details of their contract, including length of contract. 
Also by job description, how the individual qualifies for the 
position; was the position advertised; was a competition held on 
those positions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  If, as the hon. Conservative leader 
said, that they could take these answers later, we’ll get them 
later. I could recite my own travel, where they were and how I 
did it, but it’s an easy form. But you want more than that, you 
want MAs (ministerial assistant). We can get that to you in the 
next couple of days. Well, as long as it completes. 
 
So on the contract stuff we’ll provide all that to you as well. 
When I give you the figure of 29,197, I might just say that  
well again, it takes too much time, but it’s lodging, ground 
transportation, air travel, etc. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. With respect to the 
B-130s, I understand that each department must file a B-130 
form within the Department of Finance prior to budget 
preparations. Perhaps it might be helpful to the Assembly if you 
could  and to the people of this province — if you could 
explain what a B-130 form is, and what its primary use is, to 
begin with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I’m advised that we don’t use B-130s. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Premier, with respect to polling, 
we have noticed that most of the executive summaries and 
general methodology sections of the government-sponsored 
surveys do not state the total number of questions asked. What 
is the reason for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
actual questions asked are appended to those reports. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Pardon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The actual questions that are asked in 
those surveys are appended to those reports. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  We have received reports from people across the 
province, Mr. Premier, who have answered surveys, that 
pollsters commonly ask the respondents how they’re prepared 
to vote, who they think the best leader is, and other clearly 
political questions. Mr. Premier, is it the practice of your 
government to attach partisan political polling to your own 
polling or to the government polling? And if that is the case, do 
you somehow or another split it out so that the party pays for it 
and the taxpayers separately? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  No, we don’t ask those kinds of 
questions. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well, Mr. Premier, I don’t quite understand then, 
because we’ve received reports from a number of people across 
the province who have been polled, assuming that it is 
government polling. I guess we have to make that assumption. 
We aren’t doing any polling, and I don’t know if the Liberals 
are doing any polling about these kinds of things, but I would 
just wonder how we could see that type of situation. Or if you 
would give the commitment, Mr. Premier, that there is no sort 
of partisan political polling attached to any polling that the 
government does. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  We do not, at taxpayer’s expense, Mr. 
Speaker, ask questions of that kind that the Leader of the 
Conservative asks. That’s why I said no. That’s the position that 
we’ve taken. That’s the way the current situation is. 
 
He asks me to speculate as to why these anecdotal evidences 
come back to him. I can’t speculate. A pollster, ours or any 
other pollster, may be asking for his or her own interest those 
kinds of questions. I don’t know that. We do not ask them. We 
do not pay for them, and that’s our policy. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Would then you 
commit for us and for the record that all government-sponsored 
surveys and polls conducted in the past have been published in 
their entirety? And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, just 
that. Are they always published in their entirety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The polls, the results which are 
released with the question surveys attached, are released in their 
entirety in the sense of the questions that we ask the pollster to 
ask. Those numbers are there, as the contract with the pollster 
obligates us to do . . . or he obligates for us to do. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Just to change the 
subject matter here a little bit, with respect to SaskPower and 
SaskPower rate increases, I would wonder what your thoughts 
are with respect to the review process, the 45-day review 
process, that your government committed to. What are your 
thoughts with respect to that process? Has it been successful in 
your view and is it an ongoing thing that will be done for all 
Crowns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  An interesting question and an 
important question. I frankly don’t know what the future of that 
will be. I should say this, we’re committed to the 45-day review 
process for the time being because there’s nothing else in place. 
 
I know that the Conservative caucus advocates a committee of 
the legislature to review the rates and the like. We’ve had our 
debate about that. We can have it here again if we want. I don’t 
rule that out. I don’t like it. I’ll just very briefly say why I don’t 
like it. Because any tribunal, whether it’s a committee of the 
Legislative Assembly or of PURC, Public Utilities Review 
Commission, by rule of law very quickly descends or ascends 
 depending upon your point of view  into a highly 
legalistic, chartered accountants situation. 
 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

As an example, Power comes in and says we need these rate 
increases. A consumers’ association says, prove it to us that you 
need. Another consumers’ association says well, I’m going to 
hire my accountants, my power experts, my lawyers, to 
cross-examine Power and then you get into lengthy 
proceedings, very costly proceedings, and that’s one of the 
reasons why the former administration, the former Devine 
administration, did away with PURC. It just simply is very, very 
costly. 
 
And at the end of the day, by the way, never once overruled any 
of the rate increases requested by any of the Crown 
corporations except one, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). And when PURC overruled SGI  I’m not saying 
this is the reason only why Mr. Devine did away with PURC. 
PURC was done away with, that’s the end of it. So whether it’s 
PURC or a committee of the House, you can’t avoid the 
constitutionalization, the legalization, the bureaucracy attached 
to a fair hearing, otherwise somebody will make an application 
to quash the committee of the House or quash a PURC because 
he or she hasn’t been heard one side of the . . . So we’re trying 
to find a middle ground between cabinet deciding based on the 
recommendation of the board of directors where there is no 
public hearing versus the maximum public hearing, the 45-day. 
 
And there were a whole bunch of hearings and a whole bunch 
of public meetings and it wasn’t perfect. We’re looking at it and 
for the time being we’re sticking with it but we’d like to do 
something more effective and more speedy and more relevant if 
possible. So for the time being we stick with it but not to the 
point where I can tell this House that that is it for ever. We’ll be 
examining what else we can do in order to have greater 
transparency and greater confidence in the minds of the public 
that these rates are fair and justified. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. With respect to the 
SaskPower’s reconstruction charges, has there been a separate 
account basically set up within SaskPower to establish what 
those reconstruction charges are going to be used for in the 
future? Or how does that work exactly? I’m sure the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan would be very interested in knowing what 
those reconstruction charges have amounted to as well as if they 
are indeed being used for reconstruction of the infrastructure 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I will undertake, to the Leader of the 
Conservative Party, if he’ll accept that, my undertaking that in 
writing within the next few days there shall be a written 
response by the minister in charge of the Power Corporation to 
answer your questions specifically and directly. And if you’re 
not satisfied in the sense of it being a straight-up answer, 
leaving alone for the moment the substance of the answer, then 
I undertake to further get the answer. 
 
I just don’t know how they bookkeep on that and how they 
account, but that can be easily obtained, and we’ll provide it. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Premier, earlier this spring we witnessed a 
fairly lengthy strike within SaskTel. At the end of the day the 
government settled with the SaskTel employees. SaskTel settled 
with the SaskTel employees. It amounted to . . . and their  

figures vary. I mean I know you’re not going to accept the 7 per 
cent figure that we believe is what the SaskTel settlement 
amounted to. 
 
However I think when you look at what the negotiators on the 
union side were saying, they basically confirmed that it was 7 
per cent or very close to the 7 per cent figure. And I’m 
wondering how you can square that with your commitment of 
your government not to come anywhere evenly remotely close 
to a 7 per cent settlement. When you take everything all into 
account  and that’s what the union negotiators were doing 
there  they said it, I believe, came to 6.8 per cent, something 
in that neighbourhood. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Premier, given your commitment to, I 
believe it was three and a half per cent caps on public sector 
wage increases, how you can justify that level of a settlement to 
the SaskTel workers when you gave the commitment you 
wouldn’t do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, the member asks an 
important question, but I have to say, as he intimated in the 
question, that I cannot accept the statements that he attributes to 
the union leaders  I’ve done this before in question period  
or his interpretation. And I would summons in aid of my 
argument that the analysis is not correct, the fact that 
subsequent to the SaskTel negotiated agreement, there have 
been a number of settlements with a variety of public sector 
employees  teachers, subsequent; SAHO, mind you, it’s still 
tentative  all within mandate. And I can tell you that in the 
world of industrial relations, if the interpretation as applied by 
the Leader of the Conservative Party was correct, subsequent 
unions would say look, we’re not settling for something less. 
 
They understood and understand that what happened here was 
basically a pension surplus which had to be dealt with either 
now or within three years. And over the three years, the surplus 
was handled in the way that it was to bring about the settlement. 
It was within mandate. No other surplus of that magnitude 
existed in other public sector operations. And in the 
consequence therefore, they could not in other sectors have 
those kinds of settlements. 
 
So we’ve had within-mandate settlements, and that is consistent 
with my view and my interpretation that this was within 
mandate across the piece. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, well 
why then would the union negotiators say that the settlement 
amounted to something in the magnitude of 6.8 per cent, which 
was widely reported by the media at the conclusion of that 
strike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well of course I cannot answer for the 
union negotiator. All I can answer for is our side, if I can put it 
that way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member:  What did it amount to, then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I’m sorry? 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

An Hon. Member:  What did it amount to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well it amounted to the guidelines of 
zero, one, one, and one in the figures. 
 
Let me say again, to be very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. 
To be absolutely forthcoming in this, within the guidelines there 
are always, in every . . . I shouldn’t say every, but almost every 
sector-by-sector settlement, there will be little variations, okay? 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but this is not in that 
category of 100 per cent. The variation aspect was the fact of 
the pension money. It has nothing to do with the salary increase. 
Their base increase remains zero, one, one, and one. That’s 
what the settlement was. It’s mandate. 
 
You’ve got the pool of money. If we had not done it this year, 
we would have done it next year or the year after that because 
by law, federal law, we had to do it by year 3. So it was agreed 
by the union people and by the management people at SaskTel 
that this is the way you could handle the settlement. But it’s 
within mandate. It doesn’t add anything to the base salary wage 
rate, other than within mandate. 
 
Now if we had that kind of a surplus, say, for others and if it 
was an acceptable way in which to handle it and by law we had 
to do it, we’d do it. But it didn’t apply in the case of SaskTel 
because . . . sorry . . . applied in the case of SaskTel because of 
the size of their surplus in the pension plan. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Boyd:  But all parts of the contract count, Mr. Premier. 
All parts of the settlement count in terms of the overall 
percentage increase. I think that’s the concern that we have, and 
I’m sure the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have, that when you 
take into account all parts of the settlement agreement, it 
amounts to something close to 6.8 per cent which was 
confirmed by the union negotiators who were negotiating with 
you, the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the concern that we have, that at some point in further 
negotiations with everyone, and there will be further 
negotiations coming up with public sector, unionized 
employees, that they will be looking for exactly the same. 
 
And I think you’ve set, and I think your government has set, 
Mr. Premier, a rather dangerous precedent with respect to that 
level of settlement at the same time that you profess only to be 
prepared to go to a three and a half per cent increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  No. What the hon. member is not 
taking into account is that by virtue of this particular pension 
settlement, SaskTel no longer has to make contributions to the 
pension plans, which is in effect a saving for SaskTel. And 
that’s the other side of it and it balances itself off. 
 
But I repeat again my central point with respect to wages, the 
settlement, that there have been a spate of settlements since 
SaskTel, within mandate. And believe me, if the interpretation 
was as the member says, the Leader of the Conservative Party 
says, the way of industrial relations, somebody would have  

said, we’re not settling for anything less. 
 
So your worry about the precedent is our worry about the 
precedent too. But the worry has not come to reality. Why? 
Because there have been settlements. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. With respect to a whole 
other area of native taxation, I’ve spoke with the Minister of 
Finance in estimates about it at some length; there are 
negotiations ongoing as I understand it. As I also understand it, 
there are out-of-province court cases taking place in, I think it’s 
New Brunswick, with respect to the whole issue of native 
taxation. 
 
What is the government’s position in terms of native taxation? 
Is it your view that if you look at native taxation off reserve that 
you are very likely to lose the potential . . . or I mean the 
ongoing taxation on reserve. Is that the government’s position 
 it’s one or the other, but it’s not both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a difficult 
question to answer precisely for the preface of the question, 
which is that we are in negotiations with the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Perhaps I should withdraw the 
word when I say, in negotiations. There have not been recent 
negotiations. We’ve heard Chief Favel speak on this and his 
concern about the direction taken by the government, and the 
Minister of Finance has articulated the government position. 
But when I say in negotiations, I mean the willingness, the 
readiness, for us to meet and to talk. 
 
And the Minister of Finance has set out our general proposition. 
And I shouldn’t be saying this, because if you stand ready to 
listen to offers and the like in the context of give and take for 
negotiations, I don’t want any doors closed. But the Minister of 
Finance has roughly stated the position to the House and to the 
public that the government has adopted. 
 
It so happens I happen to have watched that night of the debate 
featuring you and the Minister of Finance on this issue. That’s a 
government policy. But it’s also government policy that we 
don’t want to go to court. If we go, we’ll have to defend. We’d 
like to have a settlement. And we want to have, at least in the 
spirit of compromise and settlement, some options for some 
flexibility here. But the Minister of Finance has stated our 
position. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Is your government 
committed then to court action, if necessary, to back up your 
taxation policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well we do not make that 
commitment. We have not made that commitment at this stage 
in the game, because our preferred route in this area, as it is in 
almost every area, including the CCTA debate that we had a 
few moments ago, we believe that compromise, settlement, 
agreement, is the preferred way to go. 
 
I do not believe lawsuits settle anything. I can speak from my 
own legal experience in this regard. We had a saying in law that 
a bad settlement was better than one good lawsuit. And that’s  



2818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

the reality of the case. You get into a lawsuit, you get into two, 
three years of negotiation, huge expenses, and at the end of the 
day, nobody wins. 
 
So the answer is, are we committed? We have not made that 
decision. What we’re committed to is to try and work out an 
amicable solution involving the first nations people. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Our position on native 
taxation, as you know, is clear. We made it very clear during the 
election campaign, and we’ve reiterated by bringing in 
legislation with respect  private members’ legislation — with 
respect to it. To date we don’t know what the Liberals’ position 
is. I wonder if you could clarify for us, Mr. Premier, what your 
clear position is with respect to native taxation off reserve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, again I repeat that I 
cannot have it both ways. I cannot say to the House what I have 
said and what the Minister of Finance has said to the House — 
we want a negotiated settlement roughly along the lines that you 
describe in one of your earlier, immediate one or two questions, 
the parameters of the trade-off . . . 
 
Some call it the flip-flopping. But we want a negotiated 
settlement. That is our view. And in the context, I can’t have it 
both ways. I can’t say we’re going to sit down and negotiate in 
good faith; oh, but we’re not going to sit down and negotiate in 
good faith because here is our position cast in stone. 
 
I’ve given you the direction. We want to sit down and talk and 
see what our options are. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Premier, can you tell us then at what stage 
those negotiations are? Are we at a point where we can expect 
some sort of conclusion to the negotiations in the next relatively 
short period of time, or is this just going to be an ongoing thing 
that is negotiated out basically for a long period of time and is 
something that you are not committed to concluding? Or is it 
something that you are prepared to work at, and can we get 
some sort of idea of time frame of when those discussions and 
negotiations are likely to be completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  These are very important questions by 
the Leader of the Conservative Party, and they’re not easy for 
me to answer, not because of the fact that  I don’t want you 
to misinterpret — that we don’t have our perimeters, roughly 
speaking, with of how we might settle this, but in the public 
forum, I repeat again, we want to negotiate. And I want to make 
one point here, that I cannot give you a timetable because — I 
don’t blame Chief Favel or the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) on this at all. I think there’s 
enough blame to go around for everybody — for the moment 
there is simply no discussion that’s going on in any meaningful 
way. 
 
I think the last salvo in this was fired by the FSIN in the 
contemplation of a major lawsuit in pursuit of what they think 
is their treaty and constitutional rights. That hasn’t happened 
yet and there hasn’t been discussions. 
 
What is my strategy? Let’s get around the table and try to talk it  

out in the context of what I just told you a few moments ago. 
 
So I cannot give you a timetable, and so long as no agreement is 
arrived at and/or no court order arrived at, it’s business as usual. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  So just to confirm for us then, Mr. Premier, there 
are no discussions ongoing at this point and none scheduled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  In the sense of formally scheduled 
meetings where you have proponents and the arguments and the 
advances and proposals being submitted, I believe  I want to 
stress the word  I believe I’m correct that there are none 
ongoing or scheduled. 
 
I must say I’ve not been briefed by the Finance department 
officials lately, but I think that’s the case. But my deputy says 
he does believe there will be soon and I know that the Leader of 
the Third Party will ask, what does soon mean. Can you give 
me a bit of a hint on that or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
in the next weeks? In the next few weeks  we hope  but I 
can’t give you a time. It is uncertain, I have to admit that. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Premier, to 
turn our attention now to the future of the Crown corporations 
here in Saskatchewan. As we see the process, the public process 
of consultation, going on around the province right now taking 
place in Saskatchewan . . . of which we support incidentally, 
and I think you’re aware of that. We support the public process 
of getting input from people all across Saskatchewan. I’m 
wondering how much weight your government is attaching to 
these hearings in terms of what the overall approach will be to 
the future of the Crown corporations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The answer is we’re attaching, Mr. 
Member, Mr. Leader of the Conservative Party, we’re attaching 
a considerable amount of importance to the public input. But 
there are three parts to this process. One is the initial public 
input which we are now receiving. Then there is the review of 
what I call the experts  it’s a heck of a word to use  but the 
analysts and the consultants. And then it is contemplated, if all 
goes well, by fall that there will be yet another public 
consultation process, this time focusing on the 
recommendations, if I can put it that way, of what this 
summer-long, spring-long exercise has meant. 
 
At which point then it’ll go to cabinet, through CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), and a decision will 
be made or an announcement will be made, probably late fall, 
early winter of 1997. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There may have been a crossing of 
signals. I had understood the third party were not interested in 
stopping the clock. I now realize that we may have 
misunderstood each other. If they are interested in stopping the  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2819 

clock and if the official opposition is interested in stopping the 
clock, we’re prepared to do so. I think, Mr. Chairperson, I 
would invite you to ignore the clock until such time as someone 
draws it to your attention. 
 
The Chair:  Is the Government House Leader’s request clear 
to members? What I’m going to do is ask for leave to revert 
back to just prior to your motion to rise and report. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. We 
apologize for any confusion that there may have been. I was 
operating under the assumption that the Premier would be 
available again at some point. If that’s not the case, we certainly 
are prepared to go along with the questions further. 
 
Mr. Premier, we were talking about the future of the Crown 
corporations here in Saskatchewan, and the public process 
that’s ongoing at this point. Now do you think . . . I’m sure your 
officials in your department are looking at the meetings that 
have been scheduled to this point, and there’s been media 
reports that there’s been relatively well attended, that there’s 
been views on both sides in terms of the future of the Crown 
corporations, from privatization right through to maintaining 
them the way they are. 
 
There also is reports that the various organizations, from the 
CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) to the 
labour movement, have been making statements at these 
meetings across the province. 
 
Do you think . . . Mr. Premier, does your government have a 
concern about the meetings that have been held to this point 
and whether they fairly reflect what public attitudes are on this? 
Or are we just looking at the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour) on one hand saying, no, no, no. And other people on 
the other hand saying, privatize, privatize, privatize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  It’s difficult to tell, but from I can 
read or what I’m told by people who read newspapers and 
watch television and radio, that there are people who come in 
with vested  not vested, I don’t mean that  but with 
particular points of view. But that there’s also a fairly wide 
cross-section of ordinary people. 
 
I think it’s still a more preferable way to get consultation than 
take a public opinion poll. A public opinion poll may 
scientifically be more accurate in terms of the larger proportion 
of people, but I don’t think governments, generally on big 
issues like this, should go to that technique. I think we need to 
hear people’s views. 
 
(2230) 
 
So I don’t think it’s being dominated by extremes, one way or 
the other. I think that there is open debate and it shows by the 
way that people care very strongly about their Crown 
corporations, whatever position they take. And that, I think, is a 
very positive sign. 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier. I 
haven’t had the opportunity to attend one of the meetings to this 
point. I’m sure you’re aware of what our policy is with regard 
to the Crown corporations. We believe that privatization should 
be an option and should be discussed at these meetings. 
 
What is the structure of the meetings to this point? I understand 
they break up into small groups and they just sort of lay out the 
various options. Is that how it’s done, and then the people sort 
of make their opinions known at that point? 
 
Or is there some sort of a process where there is some direction, 
overall direction that the people are . . . attending the meetings 
are given in terms of the various options that should be looked 
at for the Crown corporations as well as what their financial, 
relative financial health, is for the Crown corporations? Exactly 
how is this process . . . or have you people put together the 
process and how is it working to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  We actually haven’t put the process 
together. The process is put together by a committee of PACE, 
which is the Provincial Action Committee on the Economy. It’s 
a subcommittee of the Provincial Action Committee on the 
Economy that is conducting the hearings. In fact I believe . . . 
well the Chair . . . a number of people like the Chair of 
Wascana Energy, Mr. Frank Proto, is on the board. I forget the 
composition, but they decide the format. 
 
As I am advised  I could be wrong on this  what happens is 
that there is an overview about the Crowns. A lot of people just 
have got to know what the assets are, what the Crowns do, what 
the statutory base for them is, what the regulatory base is for 
them, and set out the factual basis of the Crown, try to identify 
some of the problems in operating in the 21st century for the 
Crowns in a global economy, technologically oriented 
economy, and so forth. 
 
Then they break up into these segments, these little buzz 
groups, as you describe. A variety of impressions are taken. 
People report out, and the Chair of the subcommittee or the 
people attending summarize the conclusions of that evening’s 
hearings. 
 
Now this is a good preliminary way to consult because it gives 
an informational, factual basis to the public, which is important. 
It gets feedback from the public as to what they think about the 
Crowns. 
 
But what I said earlier, I repeat again. What is intended to be 
done thereafter, sometime in the fall, is I think they’re thinking 
about a conference where the studies having been done, the 
actual numbers and the pros and cons on the economics will be 
advanced to the public for more detailed, specific debate. 
 
That’s the second stage or the third stage which will take place 
in the fall time. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Premier, don’t you think that it might have 
been helpful to have that type of information available to the 
people prior to the meetings rather than after the meetings? It 
seems to me that if people are going to come to the meetings  



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

and make any kind of rational decision about what they think 
the Crown corporations should be doing in the future, that that 
information would be useful in their decision-making process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well what we’re doing here is . . . I 
think both is the best way to go. 
 
First of all, we’re giving, as the minister in charge of CIC tells 
me . . . and he’s more familiar about the actual detail. This is 
generic, as he describes the word, uses the word, generic 
information which is right, fundamental, and important, about 
the way the Crowns are set up. A lot of people don’t know. I 
mean . . . and I don’t say it critically. It’s a complex business. I 
think that’s important. 
 
Later on there will be a specific report with detailed 
recommendations which may be very complex and technical 
and accountant-based. But at least when the public shows up, 
they will have gone through this first hearing of getting the first 
understanding and approach, and they’ll be in a much better 
position to make their views known as to the final suggested 
approach that we should take. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  So is it then simply just an exercise in numbers 
then, Mr. Premier? If the majority of people attending these 
meetings suggests that the Crown corporations should stay as 
such, that will be the case. And if they say no, we think that 
another option should be looked at, a share offering or a sell-off 
or anything of that nature, that’s what’s going to happen? 
 
Like how does a person sort of determine what the overall 
direction is going to be for the Crown corporations based on 
these meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  It is not a numbers game. It is not a 
situation of saying more people vote for retaining the Crowns as 
they are, or do something else with the Crowns. At this stage in 
the game, that is not the situation at all. 
 
What this is, is as the minister says, basic information, reaction, 
people’s feelings toward Crowns, their ideas about what the 
Crowns mean to them in their ordinary lives, in a rural setting, 
in an urban setting. And hereafter and concurrently started will 
be the detailed analysis of the Crowns. It’s a $3 million 
exercise, as you know, involving people who are more expert in 
the actual financing and the future developments of the Crowns. 
That’s starting sometime now over the summer months. It’ll be 
brought together in a comprehensive report, which report will 
be made public. 
 
Thereafter there’ll be another chance for the public, political 
parties and others, to make their submissions and their views 
known. Then a recommendation to cabinet. And we’ll be 
making a decision based on the factual basis, the economic 
basis, the evidence which is before us, making our decisions 
public. And then you people in the public can decide whether 
we did the right thing or the wrong thing. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  One of views that came out of one of the 
meetings, I understand, was reported by the media, I think it 
was out of Moose Jaw meeting, I believe. That the view was  

put forward that a referendum should be held, a province-wide 
referendum should be held, prior to any privatization 
opportunities within the Crown corporation sector. Is that a 
view that your government would subscribe to or hold as 
something that you would want to look at as an option? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  No, I’m not keen on what I call 
plebiscitarian democracy. I think that in our parliamentary 
system of government we are mandated for the term of our 
mandate to make decisions with as much consultation and input 
from the public as we can. And that at election time, the public 
either accepts or rejects what we’ve done or not done. I think 
plebiscitarian democracy is a weakening of the parliamentary 
system and is not a desirable way in which to make the 
necessary, difficult trade-off decisions and choices which often 
have to be made with very complex public policy issues, such 
as this particular issue with respect to Crown corporations and 
their future. 
 
I don’t rule out plebiscites in every case. There may be 
something or some circumstance in which this needs to be 
done, but in this particular instance, given what I know myself 
about Crowns, their financing, their intricate, difficult corporate 
structure, their challenges in the 21st century, I think that does 
not lend itself to an easy yes or no on a ballot with respect to 
this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Under what 
circumstances then would your government look at and 
consider privatization as an option? Is it an act of consideration 
that you will be looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  We’ll want to obviously . . . I want to 
obviously await the results of the reports and the documents 
which are before us and I don’t want to pre-judge those, 
because all that it amounts to is in effect an expression of 
opinion as opposed to a decision or an informed opinion based 
on fact. 
 
I have taken the view that our Crown corporations  having 
said what I’ve said  have served the people of Saskatchewan 
very well. I’ve taken the view that our economy in 
Saskatchewan  you and I may disagree on this  has grown 
because it has been what I call, a mixed economy. There are 
three sectors to that economy working together. Three cylinders 
 the private sector, the cooperative sector, and the public 
Crown sector. They’re not in competition. They work together 
in tandem. If they’re tuned, if they’ve got goals, they’re 
structured to a certain point of view, it’s the best way for this 
province to overcome some of the barriers that we have for 
economic development  long-distance, tough to get our 
products out to market, tough to get our supplies here into 
market, lack of political clout, climate conditions  those 
circumstances. That’s how we’ve overcome those obstacles in 
the middle of a prairie, North American plain. 
 
Now having said that, since I say we are preparing 
Saskatchewan for the 21st century, Crown corporations have 
also got to prepare for the 21st century. And we know that the 
explosion in the information society, through 
telecommunications, necessitates SaskTel and others to take a  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

hard look at what its future is going to be four years from now 
or five years from now. It’s not only SaskTel; it’s Power and 
the like. And that’s what we’re doing. We’re asking them to go 
through a check-up, a fiscal check-up, an economic check-up, a 
futures check-up. 
 
A lot of them have done this themselves every year, as a matter 
of ordinary planning. They did this during your administration 
just in the course of ordinary planning. And those are good 
enough studies. But what I’d like to do is to make sure that they 
are as objective and independent and external as possible, so 
that whatever we decide as Saskatchewan people, in the 
combination of the factual basis and in the combination of the 
public opinion, is something which will provide for 
Saskatchewan an ongoing, healthy asset. 
 
That means being pragmatic, it means being open-minded, it 
means making the right and sensible decision for the 21st 
century. That decision will be made after the reports are in. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  So then we and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
can be confident that any changes in the structure of the Crown 
corporations will be based completely on the hard facts and the 
views of the people of Saskatchewan, and not on any kind of 
political philosophy, whether it’s based in terms of privatization 
right across the board or in public sector Crowns across the 
board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer to 
the question is that in . . . the answer is generally  I have to 
say the word generally and I’ll qualify that in a moment, 
because I don’t want you to get agitated about this. If you do, 
it’s of course your right to do it — generally, the answer is we’d 
like to make decisions based on facts . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No. We like to make decisions on facts. It’s not 
too late; we can continue. We generally like to make decisions 
on facts. 
 
But in a political  and I use the word political in the best 
sense of the word  policy, all kinds of factors enter into the 
decision making. I have explained to you quite candidly that I 
have an affinity for Crown corporations because I think they’ve 
served us well in a mixed economy  much better, three 
functioning cylinders, than one or two. 
 
But I’m not so ideologically blinded to that view to have 
prevented the review from being started in the first place. It was 
our government which in fact launched the review, which 
indicates that we have the desire to do what is the proper 
economic, social, economic, small “p” political decision, 
cultural decision in the interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan based on the reports that are going to be 
forthcoming. 
 
And that’s the way all decisions of government are basically 
made. After all, we’re not a business; we are a government. We 
involve public policy. We involve societal interests, community 
interests. A variety of interests are taken into account. 
 
I mean not to be provocative, but you and the Liberals were 
after me all evening about the impact in rural Saskatchewan of  

job loss and the like. If we applied a straight economic 
yardstick to rural Saskatchewan as a business, I could say to 
you, hey, don’t bring in politics in this thing and how rural 
Saskatchewan might feel or how urban Saskatchewan feels. 
And since you do, we too do as government. 
 
So it isn’t as simple as that, but I can assure the member this is 
a legitimate, honest check-up for the public about the state of 
the Crowns and their future, as part of their economic health in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Well that gives, oh 
some small measure of comfort I guess to myself that it will be 
looked at as an option. 
 
The question of course, as you have said, is the future of the 
Crown corporations  not the past  the future of the Crown 
corporations. And I can’t help but think back to a dinner that I 
attended here in Regina not too long ago. And I think the 
Government House Leader was in attendance at that dinner as 
well. And as the after-dinner speaker was the . . . I think he was 
the CEO (chief executive officer) of Hewlett-Packard of 
Canada. He made some rather convincing arguments  and I 
think probably the House Leader could bring them to your 
attention  about the public sector Crown corporations in 
terms of things like telecommunications and the development of 
technology that’s going to make it extremely difficult under the 
deregulated economy that we are faced with for Crown 
corporations as to what would be of value today to the public of 
Saskatchewan in Crown corporations, like SaskTel, and what 
the value will be tomorrow. 
 
(2245) 
 
And he made the rather convincing argument, Mr. Premier, that 
given the circumstances and the technological change that we 
are experiencing in the deregulated economy that we are seeing 
and the total atmosphere that Crown corporations must occupy 
these days, particularly high tech Crowns like SaskTel, he made 
the argument, and I think rather convincingly, to the audience 
there today, which was mostly chamber of commerce types, that 
the Crown corporation, SaskTel, is going to come under 
tremendous pressure from outside interests in terms of 
competition  tremendous pressure. 
 
I think he made the case that his company alone, Mr. Premier, 
just to sort of speak about that for a moment, his company alone 
when it comes to putting out products here in Canada, and 
across the world for that matter, had something like $35 billion 
worth of sales annually. And a full 70 per cent of those sales 
were in products that had only been developed 18 months ago. 
 
And I think what he was saying is, is that the technology change 
is moving so fast, so rapid all across the industrialized world, 
the industrialized nations of this world, that we could see 
conceivably technological change come to the 
telecommunications part of the economy so rapidly that we 
could envision having essentially satellite telephone technology, 
which is available today as you know, but brought in at such an 
extremely modest price compared to the  



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

technology that is there today, that may render  and that’s my 
fear and I think probably the fear of the government as well  
that may render SaskTel virtually worthless in almost no time at 
all. 
 
And I think that that’s the concern that we have to have primary 
in our view here, is that it’s not simply what politics has to say 
about the evolution of the Crown corporations of the past, but 
what it means in the future, Mr. Premier. And that’s the concern 
that I have, that we may have a Crown corporation that  I 
have no idea what SaskTel is currently worth  but we may 
have a Crown corporation that’s worth hundreds of millions of 
dollars perhaps today that may be virtually worthless in a 
couple of years time based on the technological change that 
they are going to be seeing. 
 
And I think that that comes from a fairly . . . that view comes 
from a fairly reputable type of person with respect to 
technological change, because he’s running a company here in 
Canada that deals with technological change on a daily basis 
and the view that change has to be met constantly. 
 
And so I’m just wondering, Mr. Premier, if that is going to be 
part of the overall context of how these Crown corporations are 
looked at, not the past, because that’s, as you say, it’s worked 
pretty well, frankly. But I think it has to be looked at in that 
context, in terms of technological change. 
 
And the member from Rosetown-Elrose, we talked about some 
of those kinds of things in our discussions earlier, and I think he 
recognized that this may not be a time for partisan politics but 
this may be a time that we’re going to have to look and put 
those Crown corporations under the most extreme microscope 
we can in terms of what their value is today, and what it’s apt to 
be in a few years from today, because I would hate to have to 
stand in this legislature a few years from now and say I told you 
so, that SaskTel for example, is not worth a dime today, and it 
had the value of several hundred million in 1996. 
 
So I just hope that that is part of the ongoing process here and 
part of the review, that we’re not going to limit it in terms of the 
debate or limit it in terms of the scope of investigation here to 
whether or not you feel it is appropriate timing to look at 
privatization from a political standpoint or whether it is 
appropriate in timing in terms of what is best for those Crown 
corporations and the taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well I think, Mr. Chairman, that the 
hon. member puts forward a very thoughtful and important 
argument on this debate. And there’s no doubt about it, that no 
one can dismiss the arguments which he advances. And believe 
me, as much as he hates having to get up to say in the 
legislature that I told you so, you should have done something; 
you can quite imagine how I feel if, in fact, he did get up in the 
legislature and with legitimacy and validity said that to me. I 
think I’d feel worse, which is why the reason for the study. 
 
Having said that however, the other side of the coin is we must 
not assume that SaskTel isn’t a globally competitive company 
now in a technologically explosive world. It has, as you know, 
done all the communications work in the Chunnel. It’s in a  

number of international companies: LCL (Leicester 
Communications Limited) and the cable involvement that they 
had over in England. In fact it’s involved in the United States 
with respect to cabling up portions of the United States between 
Detroit and Chicago on a multimillion-dollar contract. This is a 
very, very technologically mobile, superior corporation. I take 
quite frankly, it’s the issue of, in my judgement, the best 
telephone company in Canada. 
 
Ownership, of necessity, may be neutral in this sense — 
publicly owned telephone corporation which has got the best of 
researchers and scientists and engineers and can move to pick 
up the slack in the international world can do it, should be able 
to do it, just as well as a private sector company. Now again we 
may have a debate on this philosophy and ideology. Ownership 
can be neutral. I don’t think there’s anything inherent about 
public ownership which would prevent SaskTel from 
continuing being what it is  which is one of the world 
leading, world leading telephone companies. 
 
Having said that, the concern that you raise is one of the 
reasons why, quite obviously, this check-up is taking place. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. To move to another 
issue, with respect to The Labour Standards Act, labour 
standards legislation that we have here in Saskatchewan. As 
you are aware, your government’s changes to The Labour 
Standards Act passed a couple of years ago under a fair storm 
of controversy. It seemed at the time that there was a lot of 
opposition to it. Business didn’t like it. And in some cases 
labour didn’t like the legislation either. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you feel it was an appropriate way to introduce 
legislation, given that the issues were not pressing emergencies 
 we don’t believe  to the province as a whole; was it worth 
the political strife to alienate the business community with this 
type of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well the answer is, the process was 
very consistent with my philosophy  cooperation. I want to 
try in . . . and coming back to the CCTA. The minister of . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Labour Standards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I know, but coming back to the CCTA 
to make my point vis-à-vis labour standards, you asked about 
the process. On CCTA, that’s a tough circle to square. I 
understand that. Labour standards was a very tough circle to 
square. But you alienate the business community. You alienate 
the working men and women and the part-time workers. You 
alienate somebody. 
 
I don’t want to alienate anybody. Not because I want to be 
loved. I know in this game you can’t be. But because I think it’s 
the only way you can advance good social policy and good 
policy for the government and for the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So was the process a good one? I think it was a 
good one. Did it work? It didn’t work. Would I try it again? 
Yes, I’d try it again. I’d take the chance all over again. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

And I just think that eventually business people, and working 
men and women in this province of Saskatchewan, will realize 
that when they disagree, somebody else in some other part of 
the world or Canada benefits. And cooperation is the ticket in 
the modern day, competitive world and we would follow that 
approach in general terms again. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. You and your ministers 
have often talked about the opposition parties sowing division 
in the province, but don’t you think that that is exactly what 
happened with respect to the labour legislation here in 
Saskatchewan? You bulldozed ahead with your own agenda 
without any attempt to deal with the concerns of the people 
affected. And I think that that’s the concern that certainly the 
business community has. 
 
They don’t feel that they were adequately consulted with 
respect to the labour legislation or the CCTA, for that matter, or 
anything else. They think that, relatively speaking, that your 
government has not been listening to their concerns with 
respect to labour legislation. They are more of the view, frankly, 
that your government, as the years go by, move towards sort of 
gaining some sort of peace with labour unions here in this 
province just prior to elections, and then you move to some sort 
of other agenda as the election passes by. And you’ve been 
successful, relatively successful, in doing that, I think, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
At the time the legislation was passed, you’ll remember your 
minister said he was listening to all sides in the debate. Again 
though, I think the business community felt that they were not 
being listened to and they were being ignored. And even, Mr. 
Premier, I think they felt that they were belittled. 
 
And we talked to a number of business people, business 
leaders, across the province of Saskatchewan about your 
government’s agenda with respect to labour legislation or with 
respect to Crown tendering and that sort of thing. And you 
recall your Labour minister at the time talking about ruthless, 
greedy businessmen. And I’m hoping that that was a rather 
unfortunate statement that he made at the time that I hope you 
will correct here this evening, because I think it is the type of 
statement that drives a huge wedge between labour relations of 
a government and the business community. 
 
Because I don’t think business people in this province are 
ruthless, greedy business people. I think what they are are 
people who are hard working, people who try to make a living 
in a province and try to employ people in this province, and 
they do it in the best spirit of business. 
 
But when you have a minister coming out and saying those 
kinds of things, how can anyone conclude except to make the 
conclusion that somehow or another this government isn’t all 
that interested in the concerns of the business community. And 
as I say, Mr. Premier, I’m hoping that you would be prepared to 
sort of correct what I hope was a misstatement of that minister 
at the time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I make two points in 
response. First of all, I obviously agree with the Leader of the  

Conservative Party that the business community in 
Saskatchewan is a very important part of our community for all 
the reasons, and more, that he’s articulated. That only makes 
common sense, and we want to work with them and we’ve met 
with them. All of us have at every point that we can. And I must 
say that notwithstanding some ill feelings which arise from time 
to time around contentious issues, I believe the relationship 
with the business community, as I believe it is with the trade 
union community, is not too bad with respect to this 
government. 
 
As for the second point, namely the specific comments made by 
the minister of Labour, as he then was at the time, I think he 
made an explanation to the House, certainly did to me, which I 
accepted then and I accept now. And I think there was a 
misunderstanding in the report, the way the report was tabled. 
He did not intend to convey, nor did he convey the way that The 
Financial Post article represented his comments. You can 
accept that or reject that. I’ve known the member for quite some 
time. I accepted his words because I believed it to be an honest 
representation of the circumstances. 
 
But the point needs to be made again that what we can do is 
learn from this experience. None of us can gain in my 
judgement . . . I don’t think you people can gain either . . . the 
lateness of the hour to be too provocative, but you can’t win 
either in this business by beating up on the working men and 
women any more than any political party could try to win on 
beating up on the business people. The province is too small. 
We’re all in this boat together, and we’ve got to try to work 
together. There will be differences and at time to time 
governments will have to make decisions which one side or the 
other side won’t like. 
 
And you know, if I may say so, I have to smile a little bit about 
this because, believe me, if you think it’s been all beer and 
skittles for me on the trade union side . . . skittles . . . do you 
know what skittles are? You know something, I don’t either, 
but it sounded like a good phrase for me. Not all beer and 
pretzels, let’s put it that way. Not all beer and pretzels for me 
too, so all I can say is, it’s the way we should still continue to 
try to pursue efforts. 
 
(2300) 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Well we have in the 
Conservative Party never attempted to beat up on anyone with 
respect to labour legislation. First of all, I’m too small, and 
second, I’m getting too old to attempt any of that sort of thing 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s a good question for 
yourself, actually. 
 
But, nevertheless, Mr. Premier, there’s been a lot of talk in the 
press these days about the political parties are sort of growing 
sort of maybe a little bit closer in terms of what has to be done 
to govern a province these days. And it must seem a little bit 
annoying for a committed social democrat like yourself to have 
to admit that they’ve had to move in a rather pragmatic fashion 
towards the centre or even conservative-type policies, in terms 
of running the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

I’m pleased to hear, I’m pleased to hear, Mr. Premier, that you 
don’t subscribe to the view that was advanced at that time about 
the business community, because I thought it was very 
provocative about . . . in terms of trying to raise the ire of the 
business community in opposition to things like The Labour 
Standards Act, The Trade Union Act, or as we’ll touch on now, 
the Crown tendering policy here in this province. 
 
Given your comments about the role that the business 
community has to play in the economy, can you explain why 
your government felt compelled to bring in the Crown tendering 
policy in the first place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I think this is an important question. 
I’ll be very pleased to explain it. 
 
I believe that the period between 1982 and 1991 saw, again not 
to be provocative but I believe this to be the case, an ideological 
predisposition to providing Crown tendering work to essentially 
non-unionized contractors. Very strong bias that way. I would 
argue that the trade union legislation was amended the same 
way. And I would also argue that there were other 
non-amendments, occupational health and safety and the like, 
which fell into this area. 
 
And in the end result, what happened was when you people got 
hit with a bit of an economical recession at the time and 
construction fell off, whatever work was obtainable was 
obtained, by and large, by non-unionized  I don’t mean by 
and large  by large volume, by non-unionized contractors. 
 
In the result, unionized contractors had to pack up. Unionized 
workers, skilled trades people with their journeyman certificates 
and the like, had to leave the province. Now we’re back up into 
a bit of an economic uptake and the economy is increasing, and 
there is shortage, and there is now a demand that the pie be 
shared a little more equitably. 
 
And the idea behind this is to try to remedy what we felt was 
the difficulty created by that particular period of time. That’s 
exactly what the trade unions feel. And not only the trade 
unions feel, private enterprise construction companies who are 
unionized felt the same way. 
 
Now if you’re into the line, as the member from Melfort is, 30 
per cent, drive them down  and I guess you are  then you 
don’t want any CCTA. But as I repeat again, I think I’m correct 
in this, the United States of America federal government passed 
a similar provision back in 1947, for goodness sakes. 
 
In the federal government in 1971 or ’72, it’s been policy to try 
to figure out a fair wage, fair chance at the business, without 
getting into this race to the bottom. 
 
You know, if I may just elaborate for a moment, I know we’re 
in a competitive world, but the argument that keeps on cropping 
up, well in Mexico they pay their workers $4 a day. So what 
does that mean? Well it means our workers have got to take less 
and less, and you shouldn’t introduce the labour standards 
because, you know, it’s making the climate uncompetitive. 
 

Well where does it stop? Where does it stop when the hungry 
child and the mother and the family has to worry about . . . I 
mean that’s the point that I’m getting at. And so what we’re 
trying to do is to find a reasonable solution where both 
unionized and non-unionized contractors can get a fair slice of 
the action, fairly. 
 
And I might add . . . I don’t have the exact numbers here, but I 
think I can say this without contradiction. If I do, forgive me 
because I don’t have the numbers here. But I think since CCTA, 
even with CCTA, the majority of the Crown work that’s been 
tendered out has been tendered to non-unionized contractors, by 
some substantial amount. That’s the policy behind this move, 
and we wanted it reviewed over the year. 
 
There is no report. There will be a report if the negotiations fail 
in the next three or four days or they don’t take place. 
Somebody will write up a report for us as to what we do, and 
we’ll have to make a decision. We’re hoping, just like I said 
about labour standards, that men and women of goodwill in 
Saskatchewan can find a way to put a balance on this, as we 
have in other jurisdictions in other parts of the world. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. If that is . . . if we are to 
accept your argument that this is simply a way of correcting the 
past and that the people of Saskatchewan were somehow done 
wrong by having the policies different than this, isn’t it exactly 
the same thing though, Mr. Premier? You have a policy today 
that is exactly the same as the policy of the old except the 
reverse  exactly what it is. 
 
We have 80 per cent of the contractors in this province that are 
non-unionized. About 20 per cent of the people working in 
companies are unionized contractors in this province. And so 
you’re saying to the people of Saskatchewan that somehow or 
another you have to correct this imbalance because 80 per cent 
of the people were working on jobs here in this province, and 
they were non-unionized . . . And somehow or another we have 
to provide an opportunity for those other 20 per cent, so we 
bring in a piece of legislation that compels the Government of 
Saskatchewan to have unionized contractors get the job. 
 
But to further your argument, you say, but no, that isn’t the case 
because the people of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan haven’t been asked to cough up any more 
because they have been . . . you believe, and you don’t support 
it with any information. We’d ask you to support it with some 
information to prove your contention that non-union contractors 
have been provided with that amount, extra amount. Because 
I’m not sure that is the case, Mr. Premier. But if it is the case, 
and even if it is the case, is it still not so that you have done 
exactly the same thing that may have happened in the ‘80s but 
the exact reverse? 
 
You have provided an opportunity for unionized contractors a 
discriminatory policy that only allows for, if you choose, 
unionized contractors to get Crown tendering projects. That’s 
the concern that I think is here. It is not only the concern that 
there is a higher cost to it; we’re not only concerned about the 
higher cost to the taxpayers. And you can stand and you can say 
things like, are we only saying that you should drive the costs  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

of these projects down? 
 
No, we have never said that, Mr. Premier. What we have said to 
you is, is that there should be a fair tendering policy. That the 
tenders let in this province should go to the people who are 
qualified, yes, but also to the people who are prepared to do it at 
a cost that this province can afford. 
 
And if you are saying that the province of Saskatchewan can 
afford an extra cost to these projects, I’d like you to stand and 
say that. Because I think the taxpayers of this province and the 
business community in this province would like to hear you say, 
and justify the extra costs, just based on what you view as some 
social responsibility to the unionized contractors and unionized 
workers here in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well we’ll undertake to provide in 
writing for you, for your analysis and examination, what the 
break-out is of the work since CCTA came into place, allocated 
to unionized and non-unionized workers. I’m sorry I don’t have 
that with me here at the present time, and I’m asking the 
minister of CIC to give me the details but he does not have his 
officials here either. But we’ll have that for you in the next 
several days. 
 
But you misread the policy, if I may say so with the greatest 
respect. Because this is a policy which I say does not fall onto 
Saskatchewan from Mars. This policy or variations of it were 
around in Saskatchewan in the 1970s  1970s. No, it’s the 
same thing. There’s an exemption of 150,000 or less. It’s wide 
open to anybody. Over 150,000, all other things being equal  
note the word, union preference  what the Tories and the 
Liberals have done is either wilfully or negligibly 
misinterpreted the word preference to mean union only. 
Preference does not mean only. They’re two different words 
and two different concepts. And in fact under some 
circumstances, under your administration by the way, under 
your administration  under your administration when you 
constructed in concert with . . . or got involved in the 
partnership with the co-op movement on NewGrade, that was 
straight union contract. 
 
When you got involved in Shand in the Power Corporation, that 
was straight union contract by diktat of your cabinet  by 
diktat. No non-union contractors . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
no, but . . . So? The point is exactly this  that it is a 
circumstance which acknowledges the fact that in the case of 
the Power Corporation, in the case of some major projects, all 
governments have adopted union only. We don’t say union 
only, we say union preference. And all that this policy does, is 
saying over 150,000, that’s the bid that takes place. 
 
But look, stripping it, all of it, the reality is again, what you 
want to do  I mean I argue what you want to do is, you want 
to say, take away the union preference, go back to ’82 to ’91, 
catch-as-catch-can; and as you describe it, describing me, 
according to your vision of social policy. Well maybe it is. I just 
don’t want to have a race to the bottom. I don’t want to have a 
race to the bottom. We’re racing fast enough to the bottom as it 
is without parties like the Liberals and the Tories getting up in 
Saskatchewan saying, let’s even race there more  

so that the construction company people can have an exclusive 
tie in this whole operation. 
 
That we can improve the CCTA  that’s exactly what we 
should be looking at. That we should be negotiating it and 
making it more compromisable and more understandable and 
acceptable  that’s exactly what we want to do. That’s why the 
negotiations are taking place, I hope will be taking place, over 
the next few days. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Well, Mr. Premier, I don’t think that that’s the 
case. And I don’t think that the people of Saskatchewan believe 
that that is the case. We’re not advocating any race to the 
bottom. But what we are saying is, is that the race to the bottom 
right now is being shouldered by one group. And that is the 
non-unionized contractors in this province because they have a 
policy . . . they are faced with a policy that says they are not 
going to get jobs in this province. That’s the type of policy that 
they are faced with and they are shouldering the race to the 
bottom by themselves. And they are saying to you, Mr. Premier, 
that they think that this policy is not fair, that it discriminates 
against the non-unionized worker in this province who wants to 
have a job. 
 
And so you are saying to that non-unionized worker that we are 
prepared to make you expendable in order to guarantee work for 
unionized contractors even if it costs more or even if it is 
discriminatory. 
 
If you were to base your policy, that type of policy, on sex or 
religion or creed or anything else  sexual orientation  it 
wouldn’t fly. But because it is union-only tendering policy, and 
that is not something that is made up within the purview of 
anybody to look at, it somehow is okay. It’s somehow okay if 
you discriminate on the basis of a union card or a non-union 
card, but it is not on any other basis. 
 
And that’s what people are taking about in this province today, 
Mr. Premier, because they don’t believe that this policy is fair. 
They do not believe that a government should set out 
parameters of which some people cannot work within. Some 
people simply choose  choose, Mr. Premier, not to belong to 
a union. That is their choice. 
 
But they also are faced with a government that comes in with a 
policy that says you either are going to be unionized or you’re 
not going to get a job from us. And I don’t think that that is the 
type of message that you should be sending from your 
government, that you are prepared to discriminate in some areas 
and guard  religiously guard — discrimination, as you 
should, in other areas. 
 
That is the fundamental argument here, Mr. Premier. Not only 
is it cost, but it is a discrimination against workers who make 
the conscience decision not to become unionized or a contractor 
who isn’t unionized. That’s the fundamental premiss of the 
argument. 
 
And for you to say, Mr. Premier, that there isn’t a report, that 
there’s not any kind of a report, I don’t think . . . I think it flies 
in the face of everything you and your ministers on the front  



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

bench have been saying over the last number of months. 
Because you’ve been saying, hold on, there will be a review, 
we’re conducting it right now, the report will be out relatively 
soon. Hold tight, you’ll be happy with it. Everyone will be 
happy in this province. 
 
(2315) 
 
And then now what has happened. I’ll tell you what I think has 
happened here, Mr. Premier, you got yourself in a box. You got 
yourself essentially two choices. On one hand your choice was, 
invite the Saskatchewan Construction Association in, sit down 
with them, with the unionized contractors and the unionized 
bargaining team that is in place, and try and hammer something 
out here and hope that the unionized contractors will give up 
something in this. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Premier, they already got their 
contract. They’re going to hold you to it because it’s five years 
of nothing but gravy for them, and they realize that. It’s a 
five-year term that you’ve committed to. I think we’re about 
one year into it now, but it’s a five-year term. It’s something 
that you had to give up to them just prior to the election, not 
only to get their support but to get their vote, Mr. Premier. 
That’s what you were prepared to give up in the ’95 election to 
get their support, that five-year agreement of no change in this 
policy. 
 
And now I suspect what happens is . . . and I understand what 
happened at those meetings because we have talked to people 
from the construction association that attended those meetings. 
The unionized people got up, and they lectured them. They said 
to them, we got an agreement, and there isn’t anything that’s 
going to change this because we’ve got these people right 
where we want them in the government. We’ve got them boxed 
into a corner here where they can’t get out unless they’re 
prepared to go back into the legislature and legislate a change in 
it just like you did to the farmers of this province. But I don’t 
think you’re prepared to do that, Mr. Premier, because it would 
result in the loss of that union support that is so critical to your 
electoral future here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So what did you do? You chose the opposite route. You chose 
the easy way, Mr. Premier. You said, I think we can get by the 
negative publicity that’s going to result from us standing up and 
saying there never was a report. I think you chose what you 
thought would be the lesser of the two evils. I think you thought 
to yourself, we’ll take a little heat for a couple of days, but all in 
all this thing’s a pretty complicated issue. And before very long, 
the public of Saskatchewan will forget about it. And before 
very long the legislature will conclude, and then it’ll be all a 
done deal. The issue will go away. 
 
And it’ll be another tendering year has gone by because we 
pretty well let, I suspect, most of the tenders under this policy 
for this summer, which is when most of the Crown tendering 
projects are done. And then you move back into the process 
next year. Same old thing, invite the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association in, say to them, well we’ll talk again. 
We got a process here. Let’s work our way through this. Let’s 
grind her on through. 

But the reality is, Mr. Premier, I think people saw through it. I 
think people in this province realize that that is exactly your 
agenda here. You were prepared in ’95 to give up the store on 
this one because your election chances, you thought, would be 
significantly diminished if you didn’t given them what they 
wanted. And I think, Mr. Premier, that that is not a good, 
public-policy type-of-way of doing things. 
 
And you can be critical of anything you want in the past. I don’t 
care about that. It doesn’t really bother me a whole lot that you 
want to be critical about the past. But what I think is more 
important here, Mr. Premier, is what the people of 
Saskatchewan expect from you and your government in the 
future. I know you like to reiterate the past every time you stand 
up in this legislature. 
 
It’s either somebody else is doing it to you in Ottawa, or the 
past is doing it to you. But the more important issue here, Mr. 
Premier, is, is what are you prepared to do to fix this thing? 
What are you prepared to do that will make this right, that will 
end the discriminatory practice that is before the people of this 
province? 
 
The unionized contractors cut a deal with you; we understand 
that. We are prepared, Mr. Premier, to stay here and debate this 
for a period of time. We think that you need to take some action 
on this. We think that you need to deal with this issue. We think 
you should be bringing in legislation, if necessary, to break this 
agreement and go back to square one and invite in all of the 
parties, and that includes non-unionized employers, into the 
discussions because it isn’t good enough, I don’t think, Mr. 
Premier, to get into these types of negotiations and have a cosy 
little arrangement with only some of the players being there  
80 per cent, fully 80 per cent of the non-unionized people of 
this province not represented when you cut a deal with those 
people. And I don’t think that that is right. I think the tendering 
policy of this government should be, as we have said, the 
lowest qualified bidder. 
 
And if that means, Mr. Premier, that some people in this 
province cannot live with that type of agreement, then so be it. 
Because I think the taxpayers of this province want fair and 
equitable treatment, and I think the contractors want fair and 
equitable treatment. And I don’t think they’re getting it with 
this type of policy, Mr. Premier, because it is not right. You 
know it’s not right. We think you’re looking for a way out of 
this, and we’re prepared to cooperate to give you that way out 
by giving you the opportunity to bring in legislation, if 
necessary, to deal with this agreement. We’d be prepared to sit 
here and debate that and help you through that policy and help 
you through that legislative change. 
 
But I don’t know, Mr. Premier. It looks to me like you have dug 
in on this. It looks to me like you have decided that you are 
prepared to accept whatever negative publicity there is 
surrounding your admission of today  just today  that there 
is no report, because we think there was a report, and I suspect 
before very long we may see a brown envelope turn up on our 
desks, as we have seen in other cases, Mr. Premier, or under the 
door. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

And we’re hopeful that that will happen because I suspect there 
was a report. I suspect there was a report. I suspect the report 
said this policy is discriminatory; this policy breaks all of the 
human rights type legislation when it comes to discriminating 
against people except if they have a union card. And I think, 
Mr. Premier, that you should take some leadership on this issue 
and deal with it, because it is no longer acceptable to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the calm 
demeanour of the Leader of the Conservative Party heretofore is 
betrayed by the venom that he displays toward the working men 
and women of Saskatchewan in his last outburst. Yes, venom, 
venomous, a venomous attack in the face of the facts. That is 
the worst part of this. In the face of the facts. 
 
Here is question no. 45 on the twenty-third legislature, first 
session, asked by the member from Maple Creek — that a 
return no. 47 do issue on the CCTA. Here are the facts. Your 
question and the answer tabled. What were the number of 
government-funded tenders that were awarded to union-only 
firms in 1995 and the total dollar value of these tenders? You 
asked that question. You know what the answer was? 
SaskPower, 19 projects, cost 6.183 million; SaskTel, 8 projects, 
cost 1.27 million; Sask Water, 7 projects, cost 15.2 million; 
STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company), 1 project, cost 
113,401; SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), zero 
project, zero cost; SaskEnergy, 21 projects, cost 7.33; total of 
56 projects CCTA, at a cost of 30.127 million. 
 
Next question. What was the number of government-funded 
tenders that were awarded to non-union, non-union firms in 
1995 and the total dollar figure of these tenders. SaskPower, 
145 projects, cost 41.4 million; SaskTel, 183 projects, cost, 3.6 
million; Sask Water, 14 projects at a cost, 703, 000; STC, one 
project, 14,733; SGI, one project, cost, 55,900; SaskEnergy, 39 
projects at a cost of 43.4 million. Rounding it out, total of 383 
projects awarded to non-union firms in 1995 at a cost of 89.3 
million or $90 million. Three times. Three times. On your 
figures the union contractors get 25.2 per cent of the work and 
the non-union contractors get 75 per cent of the work. 
 
And that was a question that you tabled. That was an answer 
which we tabled, and you had, and you get up and you say, 
union only. 
 
How dare you misrepresent the facts? How dare you attack the 
working men and women of the province of Saskatchewan? 
How dare you misrepresent the policy and the way that you 
represent it? How dare you continue your Alabama North 
approach, your approach of being able to determine to destroy 
the working men and women of the province of Saskatchewan 
and misrepresent the facts? You and the Liberals driving the 
people down right to the bottom. 
 
There you are, you won’t even allow me to give the speech, you 
and your cacophony down at the back yelling against the facts. 
You know those are the case. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, what these people do. They 
misrepresent. These people, they twist and they turn. These  

people want to govern again in 1999 like they governed in 
1982. These people shout down others when they tell the truth, 
like the member for Maple Creek and the member from 
Rosthern. Why don’t you listen? Why don’t you accept the facts 
which are tabled? 
 
I tell you, you five are a sorry lot, a sorry lot of misrepresenters 
and mean-spirited people who will never, ever be elected again 
to the government of the province of Saskatchewan because you 
do not tell the truth outside of this Chamber. You misrepresent 
the facts. You attack ordinary people. You do not seek 
compromise. And you have the answer tabled here. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Chairman, as far as I’m concerned, you can 
sit in this legislature for ever. We’re not going to succumb to 
that kind of an argument, by that kind of a discredited party, on 
this kind of an important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, you can 
advance that kind of argument all you want, but I think what it 
represents is a wilful and negligent attempt to try and convince 
the people of this province that this policy does not favour 
unionized contractors in this province when I think it flies in the 
face of everything that the people of this province believe in 
terms of fair policy. And you know that is the case, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
And I think it appears more than ever that you’re prepared to 
tough her out on this one. But I think, Mr. Premier, that you 
will find that the people of this province will not support that 
type of discriminatory policy. I don’t think, Mr. Premier, that 
they will believe you, that this does not represent unfair 
treatment to some people. And you can rant and rave all you 
want about unfair policy or what we are talking about. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re wrong. You are wrong in terms of what 
you’re saying about this project, or these types of policy. It is 
not fair; it is discriminatory; and I think everyone understands 
that. And at some point in the future, I think, Mr. Premier, that 
your government will be judged by it. Your government will be 
judged by those types of policies that advance the argument that 
only you know better about who should get jobs and who 
shouldn’t get jobs in this province, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’re going to continue to advance the argument 
that this policy is wrong. We’ve been talking about it a fair bit 
in the last little while and we’re going to continue to talk about 
it. 
 
The Liberals have talked about the CCTA policy and how they 
are opposed to it as well, and yet it seemed incredible today, 
and I’m sure it must have been incredible to you as well, to see 
them voting time after time after time with you all day long, in 
compliance with just trying to wind down the session. That’s 
what that attempt was. 
 
But we don’t believe, Mr. Premier, that we’re prepared to let 
you off the hook just yet because we don’t believe that this 
policy is right. You’ve committed to reporting to the people of  



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Saskatchewan on this policy. You’ve committed to reporting. 
You’ve committed to reporting to the people of this province on 
the policy, and yet now when it comes down to the crunch time 
. . . the legislature took a few weeks longer than you 
anticipated, I expect; but nevertheless, Mr. Premier, I don’t 
think it’s right; the people of Saskatchewan don’t think it’s 
right; the contractors of this province don’t think it right. 
 
And you can . . . Mr. Premier, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will at some point say to you, no. You can’t have 
those kinds of policies, you can’t do these kinds of things 
because it is not fair. And, Mr. Premier, I think that that will be 
the conclusion of this in the end. 
 
(2330) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I would just simply say, Mr. 
Chairman, whatever the members do is up to them. By the way, 
skittles is a game of ninepins in which a ball is thrown to knock 
them down. Beer and skittles is a carefree existence of drink 
and play. That’s what my research staff says, so beer and 
skittles it is for everybody here today. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, there’s a number of issues that are certainly 
important to raise, but there’s one thing I’d just like to bring to 
the attention of the Assembly and that is the fact that as we are 
winding down this session, and we’ve asked and we’ve talked 
to the Government House Leader, the fact that the Premier’s got 
a responsibility to the people of this province and what we’ve 
ended up with is that in the dying days of this session, basically 
one evening that we’re told okay, the Premier’s available. 
 
I noticed last week the Premier was here on three or four 
different occasions basically all day. We could have had 
Executive Council up. Unfortunately the government wouldn’t 
bring it forward. And I’m not sure where the Premier was 
hiding; I’m not sure why he was hiding. It just seemed . . . just a 
few minutes ago that all of a sudden he’s ready to debate us and 
take us on. 
 
I would think, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if it’s important, if the 
Premier feels he’s so important, he’s got a responsibility in this 
Assembly that we should have more than just two or three 
hours. 
 
And I’m not prepared just to stand here and just vote off 
something in a matter of two hours. Nor is it fair, I think, to ask 
the officials to stay here just for another . . . till the wee hours 
of the morning to address some of the concerns, some of the 
questions. 
 
So I’m going to suggest that we call the clock at this time and 
we bring Executive Council back to address the issues like the 
no-fault insurance program that is discriminating against people 
who are under $50,000 in wages. Unfortunately SGI doesn’t 
come directly to the Assembly, so we have to deal with it 
through the Crowns, but there are questions that need to be 
raised on that issue. 
 
And there are certainly other issues that need to be raised and  

brought to the forefront of this session, so therefore I would 
suggest we call the clock at this time, and bring Executive 
Council in at another occasion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman. Fair enough in calling 
the clock. It would be very nice if the Tories showed up in the 
legislature once. 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Members, will members come to 
order. Order. The Chairman neither asked for advice on how to 
advise, but I do advise the Premier that your last remarks were 
not in order. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:35 p.m. 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Executive Council  Vote 10  

Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................2787 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2787 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2808 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2811 
Boyd .................................................................................................................................................................................2814, 2818 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2818 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2828 
 


