


















































April 10, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 783 
 April 10, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 
of our good citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayers reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the names of people from Leross, Punnichy, Lestock, 
Kelliher, and a number of other small communities throughout 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
numerous communities in rural Saskatchewan, and Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Hon. the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in the legislature 
assembled, the petition of the undersigned of the people of 
Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Plains Health Centre 
should remain open: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petitioners are from Regina, Lestock, Raymore, La Loche, 
and throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina, but also include Neudorf, Leross, 
Regina Beach, and Strasbourg. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of the Plains 
Health Centre. The petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people on this petition are primarily from Regina but also 
from communities in the southern part of the province. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I too rise today regarding the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer that I have reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina. 
They’re from Hodgeville. They’re from North Portal, from 
Weyburn, Kipling, all over southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too to present 
a petition regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre, and 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents  a lengthy 
list  from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they are 
from Regina here. They’re from White City. They’re from Pilot 
Butte. They’re from Balgonie. They’re from Oxbow and Glen 
Ewen, Saskatchewan. They’re all from throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues today to also present petitions on behalf of the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
mainly from the community of Lestock, Grand Coulee, several 
from Regina, and of course Regina Albert South constituency. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions  
  



784  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

have been received, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to take action to allow an increase in the 
security deposits on rental properties. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 28 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture regarding the minister’s 
participation in the Team Canada agri-food mission to 
several countries along the Pacific Rim, scheduled from 
April 6 to April 23 of this year: (1) what other 
Saskatchewan government officials will be accompanying 
the minister on the said trade mission; (2) what department 
is paying for the government’s cost of the trade mission; 
(3) what is the projected cost of the Saskatchewan 
government officials’ participation in the said trade 
mission; (4) what private companies from Saskatchewan 
are accompanying the minister on the trade mission; (5) 
what department is paying for the cost of the Saskatchewan 
private companies’ participation in the said trade mission; 
and lastly, (6) what are the projected costs to be incurred 
by the private Saskatchewan companies participating in the 
trade mission? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I notice in the west gallery a young constituent of 
mine by the name of Matthew Jacoby who has travelled down 
from Saskatoon to join his mother who works with the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation for his spring break. 
 
Matthew is a grade 4 student at Brunskill School in Saskatoon. 
He is joined by his father, Paul Jacoby, who is an English 
teacher at Aden Bowman Collegiate in the city of Saskatoon. 
And I would ask Matthew and his father, Paul, to rise so that all 
of our colleagues in the legislature can welcome them to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and all members of the Assembly a constituent of mine, Mrs. 
Carol Sego. Her husband is here  please rise, Carol  her 
husband is here attending the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) annual meeting, and so Carol is joining us during 
question and answer period. Please help me make her welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the  

House to join me in welcoming two special guests sitting in 
your gallery. We have Eddie and Laurent Roy of Edmonton, 
Alberta, and hopefully they’ll become a couple of constituents 
of mine in the next few months. 
 
I’d like to ask the Assembly to please welcome these people 
into the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Delegates Welcomed 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to welcome all the delegates attending the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation conference being held in 
Regina this week. 
 
I had the pleasure of attending a portion of the conference last 
night. As a former teacher, I know what a tough job educating 
can be. They spend countless hours trying to equip our children 
for the future. 
 
These days Saskatchewan teachers face even more challenges 
because of fiscal restraints, but they still aim at providing 
Saskatchewan students with the best education possible. STF 
president, Dwain Drew, summed it up when he said, and I 
quote: 
 

In a time when public education is widely misunderstood 
and criticized, the importance of a strong, supportive voice 
from teachers cannot be over-emphasized. 

 
I would like to welcome STF delegates to Regina and I look 
forward to hearing more of their concerns and I also hope that 
the government members are listening to their concerns as well. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Manitou Health Centre in Neilburg 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The focus of my 
statement today concerns wellness and health care. Residents of 
the Twin Rivers Health District will soon have access to a new 
medical facility in Neilburg. It’s called the Manitou Health 
Centre and it is in my former constituency of Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. It’s progressing well and they will start 
accepting patients in the near future. 
 
This facility is being made possible through a 
Canada-Saskatchewan grant structure. Thirty-five per cent of 
the 800,000 of the project will come from local funds and the 
federal and provincial governments will provide the rest. 
 
The Manitou Health Centre will replace the former hospital 
building in Neilburg which was 45 years old. The new facility 
will include a doctor’s office, emergency and diagnostic 
facilities, observation beds, and rooms for therapy and 
community service programs. This building will become a  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

focus of medical care in the community and also demonstrates 
the district’s ongoing shift away from institutional care into 
community programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the near future the health district may also 
consider development of seniors’ housing attached to the health 
centre, along with family services and services for children. 
 
I would like to extend my best wishes to the Twin Rivers 
Health District and to the people of Neilburg and congratulate 
them on this facility. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Raymond Daigneault Bonspiel 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My home town of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse is made up of many generous, strong, and active 
people. They are the heartbeat of the community. One such 
person was a good friend of mine, Raymond Daigneault. 
Raymond passed away last November, and his loss was not 
only felt by his family but also by the many lives he had 
touched throughout Ile-a-la-Crosse and area. 
 
He was a hard-working miner for 18 years, but he still made 
sure he had time to enjoy his family and his community. He was 
a father of four of his own children and helped raise 10 foster 
children during his short lifetime. 
 
Raymond loves sports like hockey, softball, and curling. While 
he had many friends, special friends like Pat Ratt, Leo 
Belanger, Jake Alcrow, Bully Kyplain, Ron Morin, Glen 
Boucher, Magic Case, others were for ever and specially 
touched by this great man. He was always welcomed with 
respect and admiration in every home. He was easily recognized 
by his great strength and his dedication to his job and family, 
but more so for his respect for all people  rich and poor, 
strong and weak. 
 
I am so pleased to hear Raymond’s memory will live on 
through the Raymond Daigneault Memorial Bonspiel held next 
weekend. I am sure that Raymond would also be pleased that 
such a fun, social curling event and cabaret is being held in his 
name. I commend the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse for such a 
kind gesture, and I would ask the Assembly to join me in 
recognizing the accomplishments of Raymond Daigneault of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

One Hundred Years of Service 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to congratulate Edward Service Ltd. in Broadview, 
Saskatchewan, for 100 years of continued family service in the 
Massey Harris-Massey Ferguson dealership. 
 
Today Denny Edwards and his brother Allie run the business 
which was started by their grandfather, Albert W. Edwards. The 
senior Mr. Edwards signed his first Massey Harris implement 
contract in 1896; 1909 was one of his best years, when Mr.  

Edwards sold 40 seeders and 40 binders. 
 
The Edwards family survived two world wars, the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, and the many ups and downs in the 
volatile agriculture economy so dependent on weather and 
world markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of this Assembly join in 
congratulating the Edwards family at Broadview for 
maintaining a Massey dealership for 100 years. Edwards 
Service Limited is without a doubt the oldest Massey dealer in 
the world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Peewee Broncos Win Hockey Championship 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to congratulate the Humboldt Peewee Broncos hockey team 
on winning the provincial championship in the peewee A 
division. The Broncos defeated the Spiritwood Imperials 17 to 
12, two-game total goals, to claim the title. They are presently 
on their way to winning the league championship. 
 
Congratulations to the coaches, Len Hergott, Alvin Olynick and 
Jack Lees, and congratulations Humboldt Peewee Broncos. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Premier’s New York Trip 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to congratulate our Premier on the remarkable restraint that he’s 
showing on his current trip to New York. Rather than staying at 
a $500-a-night suite at the Drake Hotel, as he did last year, he’s 
slumming it at a 400-American buck-a-night suite at some dive 
called the Plaza Hotel. I really hope he packed his own soap and 
towels for that economy version. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the Premier is leading by example. He may 
be closing some hospitals and forcing some elderly people to 
cut back on oxygen, but he’s doing his own part  like living 
like a monk at the Plaza Hotel, just $400 a night, Mr. Speaker, 
American. I do hope they have running water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the truth is our penthouse Premier could find 
decent accommodations for about half that if he really wanted 
to, and that’s exactly what he would do if he were truly serious 
about setting an example and showing restraint at the top. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for our penthouse Premier to come down 
from the Park Avenue penthouse and start living a little more 
like the average Saskatchewan taxpayer who is paying the bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fourth Annual Save Our Environment Guide 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The great folks at Z99 
and CJME are rocking and rolling again  hot music, solid 
programing and community involvement aren’t just bywords,  
  



786  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

it’s the way the Z and CJME operate daily. 
 
The fourth annual Save Our Environment guide is not only 
more useful than ever and full of useful tips, additional help and 
so on. The Save Our Environment guide is printed and available 
at major sponsors: Sherwood Credit Union, Cornwall Centre, 
Unique Garden Centres, and the Southland Mall. Making it 
possible, 35 Regina businesses are actively participating this 
year. Thank you to those environmentally concerned Regina 
businesses. 
 
The fourth annual Save Our Environment guide has useful tips 
on consumer power, Dutch elm disease, environmentally 
friendly yards, water conservation  it has a great kids guide 
 greening the workplace, conserving energy in the house. It 
even has an article on our new Saskatchewan scrap tire 
corporation set up to reuse and recycle Saskatchewan’s output 
of 1 million scrap tires annually. 
 
Environmentalism is not a fad. It is a commitment to our 
collective future. Congratulations, Z99, for environmental 
activism that demonstrates again the commitment to our 
community and our future. The environment wins; let’s rock. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Entrepreneurs 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the Carlton 
Trail Regional College and Human Resources Development 
Canada held a six-week entrepreneurship program at Davidson 
for individuals interested in putting themselves to work through 
self-employment. I’m most pleased to report that this program 
is now completed, and 15 new businesses will shortly be 
opening  14 of them in the constituency of Arm River. 
 
Darryl Mathers of Bladworth is recording a CD (compact disc) 
and will supply taped music at social functions. Shirley Moser 
of Davidson will be making clothing for the handicapped. 
Donna Olson is opening a convenience store at Hanley. Brenda 
Katryinuik will be making leisure wear at Kenaston. Arnold 
Bueckert is opening a shoe and leather repair shop at Davidson. 
Karen Gjerde will be operating a cleaning service using 
environmentally safe products at Saskatoon and Davidson. 
 
Doug Hignett will specialize in raising Belgian Blue cattle at 
Imperial. Janice Johnson of Davidson will be doing research 
and conducting surveys. Jonathon Severight, an artist from 
Regina Beach, will market his works. Clifford Stevens will 
distribute organic products at Davidson. Janet Stevens will do 
sewing and alterations at Davidson. Marilyn White will be 
opening a fitness centre at Davidson. Arlean Topping will 
develop and present workshops including desktop publishing, 
and Heather Lowdermilk will be opening a crafts and 
woodworking and a Snapper dealership at Davidson. And 
lastly, James Hunter will be opening a computer learning centre 
specializing in children’s programs in Saskatoon. 
 
Congratulations to the new entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Library Branch of the Year 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is hardly an 
exaggeration to say that in the development of Saskatchewan, 
closely following the explorers, the Mounties, and the pioneers, 
came the librarian. Books and our communities’ determination 
to circulate them have been a vital part of our history from the 
beginning. And I am proud to say the dissemination of 
knowledge is still a fundamental practice of our society. 
 
As proof of this assertion, I offer the Weyburn Public Library. 
Recently at the annual meeting of the Southeast Regional 
Library, the Weyburn library was named branch of the year. 
The award came in recognition of Weyburn library’s service to 
town and surrounding area  service that included the 
circulation of nearly 151,000 items in 1995. That number alone 
tells us that one, people are reading, and two, their reading 
needs are being met. 
 
As well Weyburn, like all our libraries, provides special 
services such as pre-school story time program, summer reading 
program, author readings and workshops, and an active 
outreach program for seniors’ facilities and homes. 
 
This is the 30th anniversary for the Southeast Regional Library 
 30 years of communities in the area banding together to pool 
their resources, and I was glad to see at the annual meeting 
discussions to better continue this cooperation. 
 
Finally, this year is the last for head Weyburn librarian, 
Marlene Yurkowski, who is retiring. Winning the award is a 
good way to step aside, and I congratulate her and all her staff 
for their years of service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Employees’ Strike 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
this House is well aware, SaskTel employees went on strike at 
midnight last night, sparking a great deal of concern from the 
people of rural Saskatchewan. The only access to health care for 
many rural families is the telephone. Whether one calls it a 
dial-a-doctor system or two-bit health care, this is the fact. 
 
What assurance will the minister in charge of SaskTel give this 
House today that appropriate phone service will be maintained 
to ensure access to emergency services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, 
I would say that management personnel have been redeployed 
throughout the province to maintain service at the highest 
possible level, and we have plans to maintain the service. 
 
At this time of year, Mr. Speaker, when frost is going out of the 
ground and there are flooding problems, it’s not unusual to have 
some interruptions in service. And we are prepared for  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

those eventualities, to give the highest level of service possible 
throughout the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I agree with the 
minister that spring is possibly the worst time of year for rural 
Saskatchewan, and this is where a good part of our concern 
comes from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is anyone’s guess as to how long this labour 
dispute may carry on. And in spite of what the minister may 
say, there are serious questions about whether appropriate 
telephone access to emergency service can be maintained over 
the duration of a lengthy strike. 
 
Will the minister explain how 650 managers can adequately 
take the place of 3,600 employees and properly maintain these 
and other services over the long haul? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I should mention that in 
the event of emergencies, including health emergencies, the 
union has agreed to be available to respond for that type of 
service if necessary, and we certainly commend them for that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the anticipated length, we believe, Mr. Speaker, 
unlike the members opposite, in the collective bargaining 
process. We respect that process. Unfortunately, a tentative 
agreement that was reached in February, after many long 
months of negotiation, when taken to a vote, was rejected. We 
are prepared, as speaking on behalf of SaskTel management, to 
go back to the bargaining table at any time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s very unfortunate. We know that the livelihoods and the 
good and welfare of a lot of Saskatchewan people, good, 
hard-working, productive employees of SaskTel, are at stake. 
We take this very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and we are prepared 
to go back to the collective bargaining process at any time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teachers’ Salary Costs 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I had no idea that Robin Hood 
is alive and well and living in the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
cabinet. In fact I may have never known if I wasn’t at the STF 
convention last night. 
 
Listening to the Education minister praising the unselfish 
actions of her government, she promised teachers that her 
government will pick up $8 million in salary increases for 1997. 
And teachers do deserve this raise. But what the Education 
minister didn’t make clear was that they are stealing from the 
poor. They are actually taking the money from school boards 
who are facing cuts from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe I was distracted by her shining halo, but 
even after last night’s meeting I still don’t understand why her  

math seems inconsistent. If the minister is telling teachers the 
NDP government will channel $8 million more into education, 
will she explain why she’s been telling the public the increase is 
only $900,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to 
represent the New Democratic Party last night at a political 
forum put on by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. I 
noticed that the Education critic for the Liberal Party was not on 
the platform. So I can see where his nose might be a bit out of 
joint this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member cares to look at the budget book, 
which I’ve suggested he do so in the last week or so, he will 
note that in the fiscal year 1996-97, this government, this NDP 
government, increased K to 12 spending by $2 million. In 
1997-98, there is a further $900,000. We have made it very 
clear to the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, Mr. 
Speaker, that we can’t back-fill all of the federal Liberal 
funding cuts, and we’ve made sure that we cover teacher salary 
incremental increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I thank the minister for her comments. I 
understand that the invitation was to the leaders of the political 
parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) newsletter dated March 31, an article on the front 
page states: 
 

After shouldering funding reductions of 8 percent over the 
past several years, school divisions will see their operating 
grants held at current levels for 1996, and then decreased 
by two percent in 1997 and a further two percent in 1998. 
 

I’d like to send a copy to the minister, please. 
 
Will the minister admit that she is not giving any new money to 
education and that school boards will face $7.1 million in cuts 
which, when combined with $8 million more in salaries, 
produces the figure of $900,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think any time 
you have $2 million in increased funding for K to 12, that is 
money for education. When you look at the budget for the 
Department of Education, every single dime goes into ensuring 
that our young people have access to a quality education that is 
recognized as excellent in this country. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I simply have to disagree, with all due respect, 
with the member opposite. Every dime is going into supporting 
our educators and our young people in the classroom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



788  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, of 
course we know that the educational development fund has 
vanished. And that is also $2 million; check your numbers. 
 
The minister continues to dish out money-filled promises. She 
says there will be money for rural technology, more money for 
special education, more money for distance education, and that 
in fact the per student allotment is also going up. According to 
her, Saskatchewan’s education system is reaping the profits of 
her government’s good will. But if there is no additional 
money, except for the $2 million which goes directly to 
teachers’ salaries, who is paying for all these wonderful 
promises of improved services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite pleased 
that our government has been able to put an additional $2.35 
million in to more community schools and more programs for 
Indian and Metis people. I’m pleased about that. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased that we’ve provided an additional $1 million for 
students that have serious behavioural problems. I’m pleased 
that we’ve had an extra $1 million to help school boards pay for 
high-cost disabled students. That is money that this government 
has made available to ensure that our school boards can provide 
the kinds of services necessary for our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true, we’ve got a $3 million technology fund 
for school divisions in rural Saskatchewan. We think it 
important, Mr. Speaker, that young people of this province, 
regardless of where they live, have access to the same 
educational system, the same quality of education, as their 
urban counterparts. I’m sorry the member opposite is not 
interested in ensuring kids in rural Saskatchewan have access to 
a good quality education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Flood Conditions 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Municipal Government. Madam Minister, the 
people of Eastend in my constituency are facing a crisis 
situation. The Frenchman River has overflowed its banks and is 
threatening to flood the entire town. The people of the 
community are pulling together and so far have been able to 
prevent a complete disaster. 
 
However a state of emergency has been issued by the mayor — 
that’s Mayor Terry Haggart — and a water-use warning has 
been issued by environmental officials. They also had a lot of 
trouble finding enough sandbags yesterday and were fortunate 
to be able to get some from Moose Jaw and some from a local 
seed grower. 
 
Madam Minister, although the crisis appears to be passing 
Eastend communities, the communities of Wascana-Souris and 
Moose Mountain rivers are bracing for even worse flooding 
next week. I have some photos that will better bring you up to 
date and I’ll send them over so that you can understand the 
problem. 

My direct question to you, Madam Minister, is this: what steps 
are you taking to help communities to be better prepared for 
flooding so that they won’t have to be searching around for 
sandbags and have the same kind of a crisis that Eastend faced 
yesterday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
answer, on behalf of the government, the question put by the 
member from Cypress. He obviously is aware that Her Worship 
Mayor Haggart has been very much involved in doing planning 
for the potential of a flood. And I think at this point, in fact in 
talking to her office within the last hour, they indicated that 
things were in control and that hopefully the town would in fact 
be protected. 
 
You’ll also be aware that Sask Water has been involved in the 
last year in rebuilding the dam at Eastend. Taxpayers in general, 
basically putting money into an excellent project in Eastend that 
will go a long way to alleviating a problem that has been 
historic; that is, not having enough good quality water for the 
Eastend community, and once every 50 years having this kind 
of a problem. 
 
So I think it’s in hand. I accept from the member any 
suggestions that he has for improving the situation. 
 

Health Districts Funding 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, last Thursday we saw your latest attack on health 
care in Saskatchewan’s smaller communities. Nineteen of 
Saskatchewan’s 30 health districts are going to see their funding 
cut by as much as 3.3 per cent this year. These are primarily the 
rural health districts which have already seen hospitals close 
and services cut dramatically. Now they’re gong to be faced 
with even further service cuts or even further hospital closures. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us what impact there will be on those 
19 districts that are losing that funding? What services will be 
cut; how many more beds will be closed; how many more 
hospitals will be closed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Third Party for the question. And I want to say to the Leader of 
the Third Party that what the funding system recognizes, is that 
regardless of where you live in this province, whether a small 
community or a large urban community, you should have the 
right to get the medical services that you need. 
 
And that means that if you go from a small town in the 
member’s constituency to Saskatoon or to some other centre, 
the money should follow you to pay for that service, because 
everybody should have access to the medical services they 
need, Mr. Speaker. That’s what needs-based funding is all 
about. 
 
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

And if the member believes that the people in his community 
should not have the right to seek health care wherever they like 
in this province, the member should so indicate, but that is not 
the position of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that’s 
exactly the problem. They want health care services but they 
want health care services in their area, in their local 
communities. The people in these smaller communities in rural 
areas understand what your wellness program means. It means 
get well, stay well, or farewell. 
 
You say that you’re taking money away from rural health 
districts because there are fewer patients. That’s the vicious 
cycle that you started, Mr. Minister. You closed down rural 
hospitals so people have to go to larger centres; and then you 
use an excuse to even transfer further funding cuts to the rural 
districts, which means even more service cuts and more hospital 
closures. Mr. Minister, where’s this all going to end? How 
many more hospitals have to close before your plan to destroy 
rural health care is completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to tell the member, who apparently 
doesn’t know this, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan probably 
has as many hospitals per capita as any province in the country, 
and I think more, and the same is true of acute care beds. 
 
But I say to the member, and the member knows full well, that 
if a person who lives in a small town in his constituency needs 
to have laparoscopic surgery to get their gall bladder removed, 
they have never had the ability to get that kind of surgery in the 
Kindersley riding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I say to that member that the person who lives in his 
constituency is entitled to have their gall bladder out by 
laparoscopic surgery, they’re entitled to get an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging), and they’re entitled to other specialty 
services. And when they get those services in another centre, 
the province of Saskatchewan is going to pay for those services 
because everybody, regardless of where they live, is entitled to 
decent medical care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if that member believes that this government should not be 
providing funding for the people of his community to go where 
they need to go to get medical services on a specialized basis, 
let that member say so. But he won’t say so, Mr. Speaker, 
because he knows that the system cannot operate that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Family Services Funding 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are to the minister responsible for Social Services  I 
trust has a better answer than the one just given to my 
colleague. 
 
Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Speaker, your government’s budget has 
promised cuts from the top down, but so far the only cuts are to  

Saskatchewan families. Mr. Minister, the family support 
services branch of Social Services in Saskatoon has had its 
budget slashed by almost one-half, or $100,000. This means 
that there are three staff, two of them counsellors for battered 
women, have been let go at a time when waiting-lists for these 
services are growing longer. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own pre-budget consultations show that 
Saskatchewan people’s third highest priority is the protection of 
children, after only health and education. As well you have 
stated that dealing with poverty and helping victims of abuse is 
a priority of your government. 
 
Given what you have promised, Mr. Minister, how can you 
possibly justify cutting these essential services to battered 
women and children who have nowhere else to turn? How does 
this fit into your plan to protect children and families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
raising the question and raising this important issue in the 
House. He is dead on when he says that that is a number one 
concern of our government and remains so, and is reflected, if I 
may say, Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget. 
 
In regard to the changes in Saskatoon, the member should be 
aware that some of those services will now be delivered by the 
Saskatoon Tribal Council, more appropriately, we believe, to 
meet the needs of their people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, another question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, people from Interval House and other transition 
houses are upset about this move because abused families have 
few options. They need the help provided by family support 
services. 
 
Mr. Minister, it all comes down to priorities. If you and your 
NDP colleagues would give back your $4,000 bonus this year, 
the money saved could fund the family support service centre 
for two years. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you and the other government MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) believe you should be taking 
home an additional $4,000 when you’re at the same time cutting 
essential services to battered women and children? Do you 
believe this is fair and right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, from that member and 
from that party, this is an interesting observation. That 
particular party, in government in other provinces around this 
country  take Ontario, for instance  have just cut the 
benefits to the poorest of the poor in Ontario by 20 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the way Conservatives do business. 
 
When they were in government in this province, they 
bankrupted . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the Leader of 
the Third Party from his chair says, what did they do here? Mr. 
Speaker, they bankrupted the province, that’s what they did  
  



790  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

here. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re living with the consequence of 
that kind of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want again to say to the member, and to all 
members, that the protection of children, the strengthening of 
families, remains and is the number one priority of this 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget you will note that 
the funding to the Department of Social Services has been held 
as it was a year ago. 
 

Domestic Violence 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week a 
tragedy occurred in Vernon, B.C. (British Columbia) when an 
armed man gunned down his estranged wife and eight others. 
The one and only positive aspect of such an awful situation is 
that it draws attention to the fact that many women, and 
particularly women in Saskatchewan, face physical abuse on a 
daily basis and more must be done to address the serious 
problem. Will the Minister of Social Services explain how his 
government is working to address the issue of spousal and child 
abuse in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, again I thank the member 
for that important question. We’re all aware of the tragedy in 
British Columbia and we’re aware, I think, of tragedies that 
occur in homes across our province almost on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken some real leadership in 
this regard. The member, while not a member of the House at 
that time, will know that we have passed The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act, an important piece of legislation, to 
add further protections for any who may be abused in our 
community or society. We have continued to work with the 
transition houses and with non-profit groups across our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so much more we can be doing. And I 
would appreciate any positive suggestions that the member may 
have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the fact that 
this issue remains a very difficult one for this government to 
deal with. However there are measures a responsible 
government should take, and can take, to ensure that women 
and children who face abuse have safe havens they can turn to, 
not just in urban centres, Mr. Speaker, but in rural communities 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was recently brought to my attention that a 
woman who lives on a farm in my constituency had been badly 
beaten by her husband. There was nowhere for her to turn and 
nowhere for her to go, and in desperation she had to phone a 
tow truck operator to take her and her children away from a 
dangerous situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this serves as only one example of the lack of  

adequate services in our rural communities. Will the minister 
agree that the current level of services and number of facilities 
providing safe haven for those who have been abused is totally 
inadequate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I would commit to that 
member, and to all members and throughout our province, that 
this government will continue, as we have in the past, to work, 
as we are able, to provide protection for women, for men, for 
children, for seniors who face abuse, Mr. Speaker. And our job, 
of course, would be made somewhat easier if we had more 
support from that particular caucus and their federal 
counterparts in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Association of Transition Houses has determined 
that about 4,000 Saskatchewan women and children were 
provided shelter and direct service last year, and more than 
12,000 enquiries were made. However I must highlight the fact 
that almost 2,000 women and children were turned away last 
year because shelters were full and unable to accommodate 
them. 
 
We need a firm commitment by this government that there 
should be safe houses, and more of them. Will the minister 
commit to more safe houses today in this Assembly? This is a 
deplorable situation and we want to make sure that women do 
not have to hire tow trucks to free them from dangerous 
situations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as we’ve been through the 
course of this session, it’s become very difficult to understand 
what the position of the Liberal Party is. Before the election, 
they were telling us to hire Texas auditors to cut down the size 
of all government and get rid of government services. We have 
one member of the Liberal caucus telling us on a daily basis we 
should be spending less, less, less, and less. The member from 
Humboldt now today says we should be spending more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re trying to do is strike that balance, to 
strike the balance of appropriate services that we can reasonably 
perform and provide to the Saskatchewan public while 
maintaining balanced budgets and sound fiscal practice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Poverty 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, a report from the National 
Council on Welfare indicates that Saskatchewan has the second 
worst rate of child poverty in this country. The report states that 
59,000 children in Saskatchewan, 22.4 per cent of them, are 
living in poverty, and this does not include the children who 
live on Indian reservations. 
 
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

Will the Minister of Social Services explain these numbers, 
given the fact that this government pledged to eliminate child 
poverty by the end of their first term in office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank the 
member for her question, and I know it’s sincere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that we should have in this province the second 
highest rate of child poverty in Canada is not a happy situation, 
and I’m sure all members would agree with that. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if there’s one thing that motivates this minister and if 
there is one thing that motivates this government towards the 
redesign of social assistance in this province, it is that fact. We 
must do better for the sake of the children of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the minister and the government 
over there often blame others on things that they say are beyond 
their control, but I submit, and so does the rest of our caucus, 
that if there were more meaningful job opportunities in this 
province, there would be fewer people on welfare, and as a 
result, fewer people and children living in poverty. The figures 
clearly show that the government’s job creation record is 
dismal. 
 
While the Premier shuttles around the globe and stays in deluxe 
hotel accommodations, children are going hungry in this 
province. Will the minister explain what concrete measures he 
and his government are going to do to tackle this very serious 
problem of child poverty in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I accept the member’s 
wisdom, that poverty is not a single-issue cause and therefore 
not a single-issue solution. And employment is important. 
That’s why the member will be interested to know that 
employment among women in our province increased 4,000 
since March 1995 to March 1996. Employment in the 25-plus 
age group increased 1,000. Now that’s 5,000 more people 
working, and indeed I share the view of the member that this is 
important in dealing with poverty. 
 
But equally important are the kind of social programs that we 
can engineer to provide for the needs of the children and 
families of Saskatchewan. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, when 
those members get up, as Liberals in this House, when the 
federal Liberal government of which they are a part have cut 
social programing in the most recent budget by 73 per cent, I 
wonder where they’re coming from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. It’s with great  

pleasure that I table the response to question no. 66. 
 
The Speaker:  Question 66 is answered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased today to outline to all members the key provisions 
of the amendments to The Education Act. The major 
amendments can be defined under four headings: contracts of 
employment for teachers, financial transactions by boards of 
education, confidentiality and disclosure of people records, and 
the change in name of the Saskatchewan Book Bureau. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when teachers are employed by boards of 
education, they’re hired under one of two types of contract a 
temporary contract which is intended for short-term vacancies, 
or an indefinite contract which continues on from one year to 
the next unless the teacher or the board choose to terminate. 
 
Over the past several years, issues arose around the way in 
which temporary contracts were being used. Concerns 
expressed by teachers to the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation culminated in a court case in 1994. The rulings in 
that case confirm that certain existing practices are contrary to 
the letter, spirit, or intent of the existing legislation. 
 
As a result of the court ruling, the groups affected  notably 
teachers, trustees, educational administrators, and school 
business officials  all acknowledged that changes were 
necessary to create clear and workable rules that would ensure 
consistent, acceptable hiring practices across the province. 
 
The representative organizations consulted among themselves 
to develop such rules. They also urged the Department of 
Education to take legislative action in order to eliminate the 
existing uncertainties and inconsistencies. The amendments in 
this Bill address this objective in a number of ways. 
 
First, they create a new category of teacher employment called 
a replacement teacher. When an existing teacher takes a leave 
of absence for a full year, the board of education will now be 
able to hire a replacement teacher on a contract which will 
cover that full year but which will automatically expire at the 
end of the year. 
 
Provisions are also included to deal with the status of 
replacement teachers in various circumstances in which they 
might be employed by a board for a second year, or rehired in a 
subsequent year. 
 
Second, the existing definition of a temporary teacher is revised 
to clarify that temporary contracts are to be used only for 
periods of time of less than a full academic year. And third, to 
clarify the purpose of replacement in temporary contracts, a 
new term called the academic year is introduced. This refers to 
the period from the start of school in the fall until the end of  
  



792  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

school in June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, related amendments will make it clear that the 
provisions for termination of a teacher’s contract by mutual 
agreement between the teacher and the board apply only after 
the contract has actually been created. And these amendments 
follow from one element of the court ruling which indicated 
that the use of post-dated letters of resignation as a condition of 
hiring were contrary to the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments dealing with contracts of 
employment for teachers reflect some compromises. 
 
The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, for its part, would 
have ideally preferred provisions which gave stronger 
employment rights for teachers. And the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association on the other hand would have preferred 
provisions which gave greater flexibility to boards and allowed 
temporary contracts to be used for longer periods of time. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that these new 
provisions will deal effectively with the majority of situations in 
which boards of education wish to retain a teacher on some 
basis other than an indefinite contract. And to the extent that 
compromises have been necessary, these will affect only a 
small minority of situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the second major subject 
contained in the Bill. As members know, the role and the world 
of financial transactions has been revolutionized by technology. 
Most employees now receive their pay by means of direct 
deposit rather than a cheque. We can pay bills by pre-authorized 
withdrawals from our bank accounts or even pay them over the 
phone. 
 
Boards of education are increasingly interested in taking 
advantage of new technologies for a variety of administrative 
reasons. However the existing provisions of The Education Act 
are still based on the traditional idea of payments being made 
by cheques with original signatures or by payroll systems with 
preprinted cheques. 
 
To enable boards to function more effectively, we are removing 
these specific requirements and creating the flexibility for each 
board to determine who they wish to handle these types of 
financial transactions. We’ve avoided referring to specific 
technologies available today in order that further amendments 
will not be needed as technologies become obsolete. 
 
The third main topic dealt with in this Bill is pupil records. The 
existing provisions set out very specific and limited 
circumstances under which pupil records can be disclosed. 
Confidentiality of all personal records, including those of 
students, is obviously something we need to be concerned about 
from two perspectives. 
 
On the one hand, confidentiality requirements must be 
sufficiently stringent as to protect the privacy of students’ 
personal information. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the 
ability to disclose information must be sufficiently broad to 
enable the interests of individual students to be respected. 

Mr. Speaker, various government departments involved in 
integrated services initiatives, including the departments of 
Justice and Education, have examined relevant provincial 
statutes to assess changes required to allow for a more 
integrated service approach. 
 
And while we want to protect the privacy of personal 
information, it’s important that service providers be able to 
share information of mutual concern. The existing provisions of 
The Education Act have been determined to be a barrier in this 
regard in that they do not permit appropriate  and I stress 
appropriate  sharing of information. And with these 
legislative barriers removed, our government can work toward 
more efficient and integrated services. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the existing provisions are inconsistent 
with the principles and concepts incorporated in our own 
provincial freedom of information and protection of privacy 
legislation. For example, they did not give a student the right to 
consent to the disclosure of his or her own records, nor do they 
give a student in most cases any right to see their records except 
in the presence of a student’s parent. 
 
The approach being taken is to repeal the existing provisions 
entirely. And since boards of education are local authorities 
within the meaning of The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act, the provisions of 
that Act will now apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our department will work with the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association and school divisions before the 
amendment is proclaimed, in order to ensure a smooth 
transition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth and final element in this Bill deals with 
the Saskatchewan Book Bureau. The bureau is part of the 
Department of Education and is responsible for making 
textbooks, curriculum documents, and a variety of other 
educational materials, available to school divisions, educators, 
and the public. And over the years, Mr. Speaker, the materials 
handled by the bureau have grown in volume and have become 
much more diverse. It seems appropriate that the name of the 
bureau be changed to more accurately reflect its function, and 
for this reason the bureau will be known from now on as the 
Saskatchewan Learning Resources Distribution Centre. This 
new name is consistent with the names of similar agencies in 
other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Education Act is one of the longer and more 
complex of our provincial statutes. It deals with all aspects of 
our K to 12 education system in our province. The Act needs 
amending on a regular basis to reflect developments in our 
education system and to address issues as they arise. The 
amendments included in this Bill are designed to deal with a 
variety of important matters which require attention at this time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 5, 
An Act to amend The Education Act, be now read a second 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Education 
Amendment Act put forward by the government attempts to 
clarify and correct some of the current problems in our 
education system. Unfortunately the government’s proposed 
changes are not adequate, at least not as they are presented in 
this Bill. I would like to briefly outline some of our concerns 
about this Bill today, although we believe it warrants a far more 
thorough examination before the members opposite push it 
through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any time we talk about education, we’re talking 
about the future of our province. Any decisions we make could 
now seriously influence our children and the opportunities they 
have become productive . . . in the hopes that they become 
productive adults. 
 
Already this government has started to chip away at our 
education base, Mr. Speaker. For the past five years, operating 
grants to school boards have dropped significantly. From 
1990-91 fiscal year to the 1995-96 school year, grants have 
plummeted by over $20 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s not the worst news. According to the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, only Prince Edward Island spends less 
money per pupil than the Saskatchewan government. This is a 
disturbing fact, Mr. Speaker. However, this government seems 
oblivious to the comparison. 
 
I want to know, is the government trying to tell the people of 
this province that their children’s education is so unimportant 
that it’s okay to have one of the worst records in the country? 
And Saskatchewan’s record isn’t any better when it comes to 
student-teacher ratios. In fact it’s worse. Our classrooms have 
the highest number of students per teacher in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government should be ashamed that its 
commitments to education rank so low, especially when 
compared to other provinces. Do the members opposite believe 
that the public supports their actions when they turn their back 
on our children to save money? If they do, they are dead wrong. 
 
In a 1995 survey commissioned by the SSTA, people of this 
province identified lack of funding as the biggest problem 
schools face. So the public is noticing, Mr. Speaker, and we 
intend to make sure that their concerns and their protests are 
heard loud and clear by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to some extent the changes proposed in this Bill 
will make at least some teachers happy. For one, the 
amendment to the Act addresses the issue of replacement 
teachers. In my understanding, if on or before May 31, a 
teacher’s leave of absence is reviewed for another academic 
year, the replacement teacher: (a) has the right to refuse to 
replace that absent teacher for that academic year; (b) is deemed 
to have an indefinite contract from the day the teacher was 
retained for the first academic year by the board or the conseil 
scolaire. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked with people who are familiar with  

The Education Act and they have some concerns about this 
amendment. For example, the government has proposed 
changes to sections 9, 10, and 11. The significance of these 
sections is that at the end of two or more years, a teacher on 
leave of absence may return and that board would have to 
invoke either the redundancy or misconduct sections to get rid 
of one or the other. To avoid this, boards may refuse leaves or 
look for reasons to dismiss replacement teachers in May. 
Neither of these options is desirable. In the committee as a 
whole, we will propose our own amendment to try to alleviate 
this potential problem. 
 
Another less contentious proposal in this Bill is the changing of 
the name from the Saskatchewan Book Bureau to the 
Saskatchewan Learning Resources Distribution Centre. While 
we have no problem with the name change, only if it does not 
end up costing the taxpayers money. We have far more 
important things to spend our money on than changing 
letterheads and business cards. We have to channel it to the 
quality of education, as an example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also do not object to the change in financial 
enumerations by boards or conseils. The proposed amendment 
would presumably keep pace with technological advances, and 
this is a positive thing. This government is so far behind the rest 
of the country in their commitment to education, we should 
applaud even these minimal steps and attempts to catch up. 
 
The final amendment to this Act which I make . . . I’d like to 
touch on briefly today, concerns the repeal of the confidentiality 
of student records section of this Act. Previously records were 
not released to anyone except parents, guardians, pupils over 16 
living independently, youth workers, school officials, and 
authorized officers of the department. However, the local 
authority and freedom of information Act is now in place and 
appears to be in conflict with this section. If this is indeed the 
case, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be calling for an immediate repeal of 
the 146 without delay for proclamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of points in this Act which still need 
to be discussed, but I don’t have enough of the legal 
background to make these points here today. I strongly believe 
though they do need to be addressed because, as I already 
emphasized, changes made to legislation now could have a 
significant impact on our classrooms in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, leading up to this legislative session, we have 
heard a lot of making choices from the government. Well now 
it’s time for those choices to be made. And when choices are 
made in our education systems, Mr. Speaker, they must be in 
the best interest of our children. We want and need a strong, 
effective school system in this province. 
 
My hat goes off to the leaders of our school system who have 
managed to survive; to survive despite the pressures of barbaric 
cut-backs by the members opposite. These school boards, 
teachers and staff, have done an admirable job, but at some 
point the financial pressure on them must be released. We need 
to start giving something back to our schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is so important, and I know the  
  



794  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

members opposite agree with me. Once again I’ll bring up the 
Premier’s comments from 1990. He said, and I quote: 
“Increased education is a priority. All I can say is, we simply 
have to find more money”. Well I can simply say: yes, we do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean to stray from the issue of this Bill, 
but we are talking about amending an Act that deals with our 
very important education system and I think it warrants some 
meaningful discussion. In my comments, I have made it clear 
that the government’s proposed amendments to The Education 
Act are not in the best interests of all people involved. 
 
Although we have little problems with some of the changes, we 
have very deep concerns about others. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
we would like to ask that this House adjourn debate on this 
issue so that we can collect a wider variety of opinions and can 
ensure that the best interests of everyone are represented in any 
changes in this Act. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 36  An Act 
to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning 
Municipal Government be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
caucus spoke at some length on this Bill when it was introduced 
in second reading. At that time, we asked the Assembly to 
adjourn debate and we wanted to look at the Bill more closely. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have had time to look through the Bill 
and, although we would like to pass it on to Committee of the 
Whole, some of the concerns we raised in second reading still 
stand. 
 
For example, we still find the decision to exempt SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) from printing 
its new assessment manual in the Saskatchewan Gazette 
disheartening. This is typically how people learn about the new 
regulations. 
 
The members opposite seem to be using this Bill as a shield. 
They are worried the public will be flinging abuse at them and 
they are using this new rule to limit access to the new 
assessment manual. This is both unfair and undemocratic. 
 
But the members opposite must remember that they were 
elected by the people of this province. They should be 
accountable to those same people. And that means opening up 
documents to the public eye, even if those documents are 
controversial  or I should say, especially if those documents 
are controversial. It is pathetic to think that the members 
opposite would rather hide behind a piece of legislation than  

welcome open public input. We sincerely hope that they will 
reconsider this decision. And if not, we’ll find a way to open up 
access to the public. 
 
In the Committee of the Whole, we will be asking for an 
amendment to help ensure this manual is easily accessible to the 
public. We will also be asking for further clarification on the 
time frame for filing petitions for or against local 
improvements. 
 
The final concern I would like to touch on today deals with the 
appeals to the assessment appeal committee of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. This board proposes to 
lengthen the appeal period from 15 to 21 days and to centralize 
hearings. The members opposite believe this centralization will 
save money. Before we support this amendment, we will be 
asking for more details on how this will affect the people of this 
province, particularly in rural areas. 
 
In our earlier discussions about this Bill, we raised some 
questions. And we would like to see these ambiguous 
statements addressed in the legislation itself. When do the 
petitions have to be submitted? And when do they have to be 
certified by the assessor? Perhaps an amendment to the wording 
would suffice, but there’s no sense creating new legislation that 
is unclear or confusing. 
 
Besides these issues I have brought forward today, Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill does appear to have some validity. For example, it is 
ludicrous that Wanuskewin Park employees have been 
contributing to the provincial government’s employees’ 
superannuation plan but are not entitled to the benefits. This is 
one of the changes we strongly support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not raised any new or startling concerns 
today, but the concerns we have raised must be addressed 
before we vote on this Bill. The most effective way to raise our 
concerns, we’ll go through the Bill section by section. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we ask that Bill No. 36 be discussed in 
the Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 24  An Act 
respecting the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents and 
Contact Lenses be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 
indicated when we moved for adjournment on second reading, 
we are largely in favour of the intent and the direction of this 
Bill. 
 
In our discussions with the optometry association and 
optometrists around the province, they have also indicated that 
the government has consulted fairly widely in this regard. And  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

while a person may be tempted to make the obvious comments 
about how this Bill will provide much clearer vision in terms of 
how optometry and the optometric society will work in this 
province, I will forgo that. 
 
We also have indicated that there is one area of concern that has 
been raised in our discussion with the association across the 
province, and that has to do with the whole area of who is 
responsible if services are not provided in such an effect that it 
could create problems. And while we think that that is an 
inadequacy of this Bill as stated, we’re also very hopeful that 
the government will entertain in Committee of the Whole that a 
positive, friendly amendment could be considered so that this 
small deficiency could be clarified. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to see that the 
government has consulted with the industry in this regard. It’s 
going to update the providing of particularly contact lenses 
across the province. It’s a good deal in terms of the consumers 
of the province are going to find the cost of this service 
decreased because it clarifies the dispensing of certain drugs 
and pharmaceuticals. It’s also going to make it much more cost 
effective for the whole health care system and therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest we move this Bill to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 40  An Act 
respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to address the issue of the pending debate on The 
Pharmacy Act, 1996. New legislation in this area has long been 
overdue, as it has been 18 years since the last Act with regard to 
pharmacies and the regulations thereof was introduced and 
consequently enacted in this House. 
 
Pharmacists play an extremely important role in our society and 
the legislation that governs them and their profession needs to 
be modernized. The Bill before us today will, if passed, replace 
the outdated pharmacy Act of 1978. This Act no longer 
addresses nor meets the needs of pharmacists and their 
businesses in Saskatchewan. The new professional legislation 
that has been passed in our province affects all pharmacists and 
pharmacies, and this Bill is needed to deal with and implement 
these changes. 
 
The Act before us today does address many of the shortcomings 
of the current legislation, but it also leaves a series of questions 
and concerns that beg answers. I feel that these questions should 
be dealt with in more detail when we proceed to Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
The Pharmacy Act, 1996 will require the Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association to file an annual report to the  

Minister of Health, and we as a caucus see this as a positive 
step in the right direction because it highlights accountability. 
A large part of this Act deals with professional and criminal 
misconduct and the consequent charges and penalties that may 
be imposed. The penalties for professional misconduct range 
from suspension of a pharmaceutical licence to criminal 
charges. Penalties for some re-offences will increase 
dramatically in this new legislation. This, in my mind, is a step 
towards more responsible administration of drugs and 
pharmaceutical products. 
 
When dealing with the dispensing of drugs to the public, 
penalties for betraying the trust and endangering the health of 
the general public cannot go unnoticed and without sufficient 
punishment. The safety of the public must always come first. 
 
This Bill brings the pharmacy profession into the 1990s in 
many ways, but there are still some concerns on the part of our 
caucus and on the part of pharmacists who will be affected by 
this new legislation. 
 
There are areas that we as a caucus feel need more clarification. 
These areas are with regard to the possibility of pharmacy 
ownership by government or district health boards. It is not fair 
that yet another area of our economy should face the fear that 
they may have to compete with government for profits. 
 
(1445) 
 
Section 19 deals with the issue of a permit to run a proprietary 
pharmacy to anyone who meets the predisposed conditions. 
There is concern on the part of pharmacists that the door may 
be open for district health boards to own and run pharmacies in 
an attempt to make money or to meet their bottom line. Many 
small or local pharmacies and pharmacists see this as a threat to 
their economic well-being. Competition is welcome, but 
competition with government is often difficult to win. 
 
Although we still have some concerns of the possible impacts 
of many of the proposed amendments to this Bill, I feel that 
these questions will be better dealt with in the Committee of the 
Whole. For this reason I see no reason to hold up debate on this 
Bill any longer, and I recommend that this Bill be passed on to 
the Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 8  An Act 
to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to 
take a closer look at the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. 
 
As stated during the first go-around on this amendment, the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation is a new Crown  
  



796  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

corporation. At least that is what the Minister of Economic 
Development would like everyone to believe. He believes that 
changing the name and rewording the mandate of a very similar 
Crown corporation we all knew as SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation) makes this corporation 
infinitely valuable to the province. 
 
If this corporation put the decision-making power into the hands 
of the business people, then perhaps it may be beneficial. Mr. 
Speaker, right now the minister has the power to decide which 
business will be successful and which will not. He does this 
simply by approving or, more often than not, rejecting 
applicants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been repeatedly told by the Minister of 
Economic Development that the business people of 
Saskatchewan are very intelligent, innovative, and capable. 
They can do so much for themselves if the minister would 
simply move back and allow them to do it, yet he refuses. He 
wants to maintain strict control over the business community so 
as to allow him to take credit for any positive happenings. Mr. 
Speaker, this is not acceptable. 
 
The minister now wants SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation) to have access to an additional $100 million. This 
is the same minister and government who have repeatedly 
claimed that a reduction of $100 million in federal transfers will 
cause the sky to fall on Saskatchewan. One hundred million 
dollars is a lot of money to hand over to a corporation that has 
yet to differentiate itself from a horror story named SEDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan need things like 
health care, quality education, accessible social programs, and 
safe highways to mention a few; $100 million could go a long 
way in the hands of the educators and the care-givers of this 
province. 
 
This NDP government accused the federal government of 
threatening our essential programs and services through the 
alleged reduction of $100 million. Mr. Speaker, now all of a 
sudden we have $100 million for the Minister of Economic 
Development to allocate as he wishes. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Economic Development is grasping at straws 
trying to figure out how to handle his accounting glitch after 
purchasing Innovation Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to discuss the issue of job creation. 
This government has, over and over again, patted themselves on 
the back for creating jobs. The fact of the matter is that 
everyone on this side of the House, and the million people in 
this province, know full well and have experienced firsthand the 
effects of NDP job cremation. 
 
The stats don’t lie. These are the stats put out by one of the 
government’s very own agencies. These are the stats that clearly 
show Saskatchewan is rapidly losing jobs. The minister knows 
it, but he would rather hide behind his glossy documents instead 
of taking on the huge task of undoing what they so carelessly 
did. Mr. Speaker, this is shameful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the short time that we have been official  

opposition, the business people of this province have time and 
time again told us they want less government involvement. I am 
quite certain that the Minister of Economic Development has 
heard the same pleas, but this would mean that the minister 
couldn’t act as the omnipotent being he has led himself to 
believe he is. This amendment is just another example of how 
the minister and his government want absolute control over 
economic development in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, we are dealing with $100 million. 
This is at the same time the minister has not answered the pleas 
of the business people to reduce taxes, reduce restrictive labour 
legislation, and reduce regulations. 
 
I don’t know what it will take, but giving the minister access to 
$100 million for research and development parks is not the 
solution. Mr. Speaker, we do need research and development in 
the province, but not under the strict control of government. We 
have said before and we’ll say again, it’s not the job of 
government to decide who may have business, where the 
business should be, how the business should operate, and if the 
business will be successful. 
 
The approach of this NDP government is to give the answer to 
these questions. Mr. Speaker, it is not their job. No chance. The 
business people will answer these questions, and I can assure 
you they have the correct answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to the $100 million. Coupled with the 
existing $100 million, we are talking about an enormous 
amount of money  $200 million. What is truly sad is that the 
Minister of Economic Development will sit back and take credit 
for every single job that may be created as a result. 
 
I say to the minister that businesses will come to Saskatchewan, 
and they will invest in Saskatchewan. They don’t need the 
minister setting up roadblocks. By reducing roadblocks, the 
Saskatchewan economy would thrive and prosper into the next 
century. We would finally experience substantial job creation 
and economic growth, but the Minister of Economic 
Development has yet to realize this. 
 
He seems to be stuck in the 1980s, when the Tory government 
would just give huge hand-outs to business as their means to 
economic development. Mr. Speaker, economic development is 
the job of business. Government must provide a framework for 
economic activity, but they cannot continue to make the 
mistake of tying the hands of business, which is ultimately 
stifling growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that as we go into committee and discuss 
this in detail that we can make some significant input that will 
improve this Act. Therefore we will not be limiting its process 
right now. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 3:20 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

Yeas  22 
 
Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Shillington 
Anguish Atkinson Johnson 
Whitmore Crofford Renaud 
Koenker Trew Bradley 
Lorje Scott Stanger 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Ward Flavel 
Thomson   
 

Nays  7 
 
Osika Draude Belanger 
Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce 
to the Assembly and the committee my staff person, Denise 
Gustavson, who heads up the community bond program for the 
Department of Economic Development. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, 
Denise, to the Assembly. We’re glad you could be here today. 
 
I have a number of questions for you or the minister on this 
Bill. And I guess maybe I can start by asking you what you feel 
this review process . . . what type of changes there have been 
made that you feel are going to be beneficial to the Act right 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, I want to just say that there are 
three main changes to the legislation that will be achieved by 
the amendments. And I want to say first of all, it will eliminate 
all references to the environmental bonds as a separate class of 
bonds and add environmental projects as eligible investments 
for community bonds. So that’s one aspect that changes. 
 
Secondly, and I think probably for many members of the 
community, the biggest change will be to eliminate the 
guarantee fee the investors were required to pay under the Act, 
currently equal to $3.75 per hundred investment on a five-year 
term. And this was causing, I think, an extra burden for the 
bond co’s; especially some of the smaller ones seem to have the 
biggest problem. But it was a problem for all of them. And I 
think that is probably the most substantive change and will be 
seen as a very popular move by bond co’s across the province. 
 
And the third main point is to authorize repayment of all  

guarantees collected to date to ensure equitable treatment under 
the program. 
 
So those are the three changes that we are making. And the 
community bond program, in relative terms being relatively a 
new program, I think you can expect to see minor changes like 
this on a regular basis in order to keep the program current and, 
I think, working in the best interests of communities across the 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Okay. And it’s also going to allow different 
classes of bonds and different terms and conditions for each 
classes. Why is this necessary? Has there been requests for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  It doesn’t allow for different terms 
in different classes. In fact it makes common, across the board, 
coverage. So it tries to eliminate different categories in different 
groups. 
 
Ms. Draude:  And the age restriction was changed. Was 
there a special reason for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well there’s two reasons of course, 
as you know. And I have noticed from the second reading 
speech and also the comments that I have made, that raising the 
limit from 16 to 18, it was very difficult to get people between 
16 and 17 to sit on these boards because obviously they would 
be at school and not feeling comfortable. So the age was 
increased from 16 to 18. That’s at the one end of the spectrum. 
 
And at the other end, we increased the limit from 25 to 30 for 
the youth member to do the same thing. In many communities, 
it was difficult for the bond co’s to get people between that age. 
This actually expands the number of years that they can draw 
from. And also by moving it up that five years, it gives them I 
think more impetus and more opportunity to attract those in that 
younger age group. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, thank 
you for your answer there. As I read subsection 3 on the bottom 
of page 1, I see that you must have one person who is between 
the age of 18 and 30. You’ve just elaborated that you’ve 
actually increased the age from 16 to 18 and from 25 to 30. 
There’s only one person to be selected between the ages of 18 
and 30. Or at least one, at least one. I’m sorry. Yes, okay, 
you’re right. 
 
Now does that mean though that the old Act said that you also 
have the provisions of one person, minimum, between age 16 
and 25? What greater flexibility is provided now for the bond 
creation . . . or the bond company to have 18 to 30? Sixteen to 
25 are like . . . If we now have a person who is selected who is 
age 28, are we eliminating someone who represents the youth 
which is like usually age 24? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The problem was — is — that we 
were getting virtually none between the age of 16 and 18 
because it just wasn’t . . . most bond co’s didn’t think that that 
was an appropriate age to have a board member. So you 
basically were eliminating those people between 16 and 18, 
because the bond co’s were either believing that was too young  
  



798  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

or just not able to attract people. And by adding the five years 
on the top, between 25 and 30, you were actually opening up a 
bigger segment in the youth category. 
 
And dealing with the different bond organizations around the 
province, this was a request that a good number of them were 
asking for, and this legislation responds to those requests. 
 
I just might add if I could, Mr. Chairman, before I take my 
place, that the member is right in assuming this does not restrict 
that you can only have one person in this age group. In fact this 
is a minimum clause. So in fact if they wanted to have their 
whole bond board in the group of 18 to 30, there would be 
nothing restricting them from having as many as they would 
like. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me why there should be at least 
one? Is there a certain reason why you’re asking for one 
member to be between the ages of 18 and 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I think it’s an attempt to 
include entrepreneurial skills and entrepreneurial appreciation at 
a much younger age. And if you look at our Partnership for 
Growth document, to take it one step further, we’re also trying 
to make sure that entrepreneurial skills are taught even earlier 
than this — within the school system. 
 
And this has been one of the parts of Partnership for Growth 
that has got a lot of attention. And I’ve received a number of 
letters of congratulation to the business community and the 
government for establishing the need for . . . within our school 
system and in terms of training young people at a very early 
age; that looking at the private sector of being a small-business 
person or a business person is something that traditionally 
within our school system  and this is true I think in many 
jurisdictions in North America  that we just haven’t 
emphasized enough with our young people that they should not 
only look at where they might get a good job working for 
someone else, but every one of them should include in their 
litany of opportunities the possibility of them themselves going 
out and starting a business and actually employing other people. 
 
So this is an attempt to include young people in the bond 
corporations. But it’s part of our more general thrust of trying to 
get entrepreneurial skills included in families and in the school 
system at a much earlier age. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Chairman, Minister, I’ve had  and I 
say it very sincerely  the pleasure of being involved with 
Melfort and district community bonds association, and so I 
bring a little bit of firsthand experience about the whole process 
of community bonds. One of the things that was frustrating for 
some of the people that were coming to us is a number of issues 
and I want to ask you if you’re addressing this in any way in 
this amendment. 
 
The first one was the whole process of review that has to be 
done on any projects. And I am very much supportive of the  

concept of due diligence and making sure that the interests of 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers are protected and all those things, 
but the comment that seemed to come quite generally was the 
whole question of timeliness and how much time it would take 
between the time that these projects were submitted for review 
and the time that the review process would be completed. 
 
I wondered if you may speak briefly about your thoughts on 
this, because I don’t know if it’s just something specific to our 
projects or if it is something more generally a problem and I 
wondered if you’re considering addressing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The problem that the member 
identifies is, I guess, is not unusual when you’re going to a bank 
or a credit union, or in this case, asking other taxpayers to 
guarantee the bonds, because as the member has indicated — 
and just to elaborate on it for a moment — when these bonds 
are received and people put money into the local projects, other 
taxpayers across the province guarantee 100 per cent repayment 
of that bond if the local project fails. And this is something 
we’ve debated in the House, as to whether or not there wouldn’t 
be an opportunity for the federal government to pick up some of 
the guarantee, or even the local municipal government at the 
local level, because that’s the community that, broadly defined, 
benefits most initially from the investment. 
 
Therefore some would argue why wouldn’t the local 
government guarantee 25 per cent; that puts a check and 
balance on it, and if it’s good for their community . . . if it does 
fail some of it would come directly back the responsibility to 
the local community. 
 
We haven’t gone that route but what we have done is insist on, 
as you call it, proper due diligence to make sure that the 
taxpayers who are footing the bill are well protected. 
 
Now what we would like to do, and have been able to do, is 
streamline the process, because I don’t think due diligence and 
long process are necessarily synonymous. And we’ve tried to 
compress the time line in which the due diligence has to take 
place, and in the last set of changes in the legislation that 
process has been improved. And I think what it is, is striking a 
balance between meeting the needs of the community to get on 
with the development and job creation, and meeting the needs 
of the investors or the protector of the investors, that being 
other taxpayers, who are putting their money on the line by 
guaranteeing the bonds. 
 
And I think it’s improved and probably can be improved 
further. But I just say that, whether you’re a manager of these 
bond corporations in protecting the taxpayers’ money or 
whether you’re a credit union manager or whether you’re the 
Royal Bank, taking time to make sure the project has legs, so to 
speak, will continue to be an important part of setting up a bond 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister, and I appreciate the 
difficulty and the balance. One of the other things that struck 
me in my experience with the bond corporation is that it has to 
do with the projects that will come forward to bond 
corporations. And of course, depending on the success that the  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

bond corporation has had in raising funds, that will attract 
different kinds of projects. 
 
And I’m very concerned about the fact that, for example, the 
Saskatoon bond experience was not all that happy. A fair bit of 
money was raised, but after the two-year time limit on finding 
suitable projects, there really were no suitable projects to any 
extent that came through the process, and so the money got 
returned. And that’s all well and good. 
 
And I wondered if the minister, through this process, is 
contemplating some type of assistance in terms of attracting 
projects that would, you know, have a high likelihood of 
meeting the due diligence process and would actually then be 
good projects that the investors that have put up all this money 
. . . because that is always a very difficult thing to do especially 
if it isn’t a project specific bond or it’s just a general bond 
where you’re just raising money then to have considered for 
investment. Saskatoon project, P.A. (Prince Albert) project, and 
even initially the Melfort project was not project specific. 
 
And so it seemed as if there was a great deal of frustration and 
drag between the time that the money was raised and really 
good projects were coming forward. And I wondered if in this 
process that there is some contemplation of a searching for 
projects. I mean there always seem to be people saying they 
need money and yet then when you raised the money there 
didn’t seem to be any projects that easily met the qualifications. 
And that was very frustrating to see that that money would go 
back, because a lot of time and energy was put into the raising 
of it and it’s sort of unfortunate that this potential investment 
pool went back. Is that being considered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well within the Department of 
Economic Development we do have officials and department 
strength in the area of project management, not only within our 
department, but also in Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation, as well as in Crown Investments Corporation or 
CIC as we commonly call it. 
 
Now when we are working on projects with individuals or 
companies or relocating companies to the province, community 
bonds is one of the tools in the toolbox that we tell companies 
about that they would be able to use. At the present time, as you 
know, there are a number of communities that use the 
community bonds and a number of them that don’t. The one 
where I would have expected community bonds might have 
been used and they chose not to go that route, is the very 
successful project in Moose Jaw where the spa raised a lot of 
capital at the local level through local investment and chose not 
to use the community bond program. 
 
So we shouldn’t assume the community bonds are in some way 
the only set of tools that communities have for doing economic 
development. There are many, many of them. And having said 
that, the community bond program seems to be working very 
well for some areas. 
 
I want to say as well though, that this is a community-driven 
program and we are really intent on making sure that the ideas 
and concepts, as they come forward, are not being driven by  

Regina or by the bureaucracy in Regina but are being driven by 
the local folks. 
 
So while we can go out and assist once projects are thought of 
and intentions are made known, I think part of the problem of 
the previous administration was trying to force-feed economic 
development literally with hundred of millions of dollars, 
saying, look if you just get out there and spend a bunch of 
money somehow you’re going to have economic success. 
 
I challenge anyone to look at the job creation record during the 
1980s when we were spending hundreds of millions of dollars, 
and I’ll provide for you . . . but the outflow and the 
out-migration during the 1980s as compared to today, even 
though we’re spending very, very many fewer tax dollars to 
drive these initiatives, the out-migration has gone down very, 
very considerably.  
 
Also the population of the province has now grown 
continuously for almost three years, whereas in the 1980s, at 
least in the last half of the 1980s, the population was going 
down. And you know full well that at the time the previous 
administration was putting hundreds of millions of dollars into 
upgraders, and GigaText and the Supercarts, and trying to 
force-feed an economy from the top down. 
 
And so here again, while I accept that we do have a role to 
search out and try to put some ideas in front of people, I much 
prefer those ideas that come from the local community. And 
whether that’s processing of food products or hog production, I 
tell them, when I go out there, bring the projects forward. 
There’s lots of them available, but know that they have to be 
your vision and your dream of what your community wants to 
be. 
 
If you’re assuming that I, as Minister of Economic 
Development for example, have a long-term economic vision 
for the community of Humboldt and somehow I’m going to 
bring it out there and give it to you and that you just have to 
implement it, that’s the reverse of what I see economic 
development being. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. Looking at the 
projects again that come forward, it struck me that, for a lot of 
these potential projects, community bonds may be a funding 
mechanism of last resort. And I recognize that that creates a 
unique set of problems and why due diligence is so important. 
But . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t know of any of those 
on community bonds. 
 
The question is that quite often, because of the nature of these 
projects as well, is that there seems to be an overemphasis on 
sort of a nice packaged report or a nice packaged presentation 
by a bunch of outside consulters that cost a fair bit of money to 
the individual that’s proposing the project. 
 
And quite often it seems to be an attempt to sort of make a silk 
purse out of a sow’s ear because the project, when you really 
stripped away the 50 pages of paper, really did not have a lot of 
validity to it. And yet they come with this great package with a 
wonderful looking presentation, with layers and layers and  
  



800  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

layers of baffle-gab. 
 
And it made it very difficult, I know, for the local bond 
organization to actually sort through this stuff. And there 
seemed to be a predisposition to have this very professional, 
high pressured sales thing. 
 
And I wonder if that sort of process has been encouraged by 
this due diligence process or where that initiative has come 
from, because I think it’s quite disruptive and difficult for local 
bond corporations to sort through that quite often. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I’m not going to say very 
much about that, but I’ll just accept that the member has 
experience with a bond co and I’ll just take that under 
advisement. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I’m wondering, the community 
bonds, when I talk about companies like Shuttle Craft in Prince 
Albert, and they had the opportunity to use . . . or there was 
money through the community bonds in Prince Albert, and they 
chose to go to SOCO and move to Saskatoon. In your opinion, 
do you feel that there was restrictions through the community 
bonds that made it easier for them to use SOCO, or was there 
too many regulations or red tape within community bonds that 
didn’t provide the right atmosphere for them to remain in Prince 
Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just want to be clear that the 
Shuttle Craft didn’t use a community bond program and chose 
to borrow the money from Sask Opportunities Corporation or, I 
suppose, could have went to the Royal Bank or the credit union. 
 
But SOCO’s role is really a very unique one and fundamentally 
different than what was there on the previous lending 
administration known as SEDCO, where SEDCO really did 
loans for many, many purposes on Main Street, Saskatchewan. 
They could have set up a motel or a laundromat or a Kentucky 
fried chicken outlet by borrowing money through SEDCO. 
 
Sask Opportunities Corporation does not see in its mandate any 
of those kind of retail ventures as being in their responsibility. 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, in addition to 
managing and operating Innovation Place in Saskatoon and 
other research parks’ potential in the future, also lends money 
or takes equity position in non-traditional kind of investments in 
the province. 
 
Shuttle Craft is one of those ventures because there’s no 
competitor in the province for Shuttle Craft. The competitors 
are all outside of the borders of the province. No one else builds 
a craft like this in the province. So the criteria of meeting the 
. . . or meeting the needs of the criteria of SOCO were there 
when it came to Shuttle Craft. And of course they would have 
had just as much chance of getting a SOCO loan if they had 
stayed in Prince Albert or Saskatoon or if they had chosen to go 
anywhere else in the province of Saskatchewan because size of 
community or location of community is not one of the criteria 
that Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation would take into 
consideration. 
 

(1545) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Why do you think the community bonds, in 
places like Prince Albert and Saskatoon then, aren’t utilized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  As I said, every community seems 
to take their own approach. I sometimes wonder why 
communities choose to use one set of tools to do the economic 
development as opposed to another. But here again, I think it 
has to be very much a local decision. Some areas of the 
province choose not to use very much government program at 
all. They don’t choose Sask Opportunities Corporation. They 
don’t use CIC, and they don’t use community bonds. They just 
deal with the regular lending institutions. 
 
And that actually, I think, pleases me very much because of 
course then the other taxpayers in the province aren’t on the 
hook, Moose Jaw being one of the examples where they raise 
their money selling shares but didn’t use the community bond 
program. 
 
And so every community chooses to do their economic 
development in their own way. And community bonds work for 
some community, and for others they don’t, but I think these are 
local decisions. And I think each community might have a set 
of reasons. But to say one reason or another, it just wouldn’t be 
appropriate here. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I guess I believed that there is sort of a . . . a 
lot of our entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan have actually left this 
province, and I believe that some of the high taxation and the 
labour legislation that are around actually create an 
unfavourable environment. 
 
And I also think that the repayment window on community 
bonds is a problem. Have you been asked by community bond 
people to extend or to lengthen that repayment window for the 
bonds? The repayment window usually . . . to repay the loans 
usually . . . or within, like December 31, ’97. Like there’s a time 
frame that they have to repay the bond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The length of the bond . . . Here 
again, it’s trying to find a balance to which you as an individual 
. . . if you’re putting your money into a bond in your home 
community, if you had it for longer than five years, it would 
actually be an impediment for people putting their money in 
because most people simply don’t like tying their money up for 
longer than five-year blocks; in fact, even five years for most 
people is a considerable length of time. 
 
If your argument is why don’t you make it a longer period that 
people have to leave their money in, I think very quickly you’d 
see a diminishing amount of money coming into the program 
just because people like, I think, to have flexibility over their 
investment as to when the money comes and goes. So after a lot 
of discussion and debate, doing it in five-year blocks seemed to 
be about as long a period as you could ask people to leave their 
money in the bond without starting to lose some serious 
investors on the other end. 
 
So here again, I suppose in a perfect world we’d like to be able  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

to say to the public, we’re taking the community bond in for 10 
or even 15 or 20 years. But of course being a voluntary 
program, the number of people who would invest in a 
community bond for 15 or 20 years, I think, you would find to 
be very, very few. 
 
Ms. Draude:  There’s actually two committees that review a 
bond or an application for funding through the bond, and I’ve 
found from one of the clients, one of the people that have 
bought a community bond, that they’ve found that this process 
is very time-consuming and that . . . And I’m not sure. You can 
probably enlighten me if the review committee  once it’s 
been approved by the bond committee  has a regular meeting 
time, or if there’s some kind of schedule where they meet on a 
basis that can hurry the procedure along. Most business people 
know that there is a time frame that has to be met in order for 
business to be carried out in an efficient way. So I’m wondering 
if this review board does meet at a regular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  As you mentioned, there’s two 
review processes: our own and then a private-sector review that 
takes place as well. And both meet on a monthly basis. So if the 
timing is right, it could happen very quickly. 
 
But on the other hand, I think a month wait is not an extremely 
long time either. So we try to coordinate in the event of . . . for 
example, if it went through our board and then there wasn’t 
another meeting for a month for the private sector board, we 
would arrange our meeting on more than a monthly basis in 
order to try to accommodate the bond co. 
 
So I really think that process has been streamlined a great deal, 
and I really, quite honestly, don’t get very many complaints on 
that part of it. We think the program at this time is working 
quite effectively, has created a number of hundreds of jobs 
across the province. And quite honestly, we encourage 
communities to look at the community bond program as a tool 
that is quite meaningful. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce the staff I have with me today. Seated right beside me 
is Bob Perrin who is the assistant deputy minister responsible 
for regional economic development, the services division. And 
seated behind me and slightly to my right is Janis Rathwell who 
is assistant deputy minister responsible for programs and 
corporate service division. And Tom Douglas who is seated to 
my left, executive director, diversification division; and David 
McQuinn, senior policy coordinator, policy and coordination 
division. And we look forward to attempting to answer the 
questions from the members of the official opposition. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome to the officials with the minister. We welcome you 
into the legislature today. And this is the first time as official 
opposition we have the opportunity to discuss the budget with 
the ministers, and we look forward to discussing the direction 
this government is taking as we head into the next millennium. 
 
I think it’s very fitting that the first department we get to 
discuss is Economic Development because, as we all know, 
without the economy’s drive and thrust forward, there won’t be 
the money we need for highways and education and health and 
everything the rest of the province is looking to see some 
growth in in the next four years. 
 
I’m going to ask if the minister will actually summarize or tell 
us about the last year in his Department of Economic 
Development and the activities within the department, just to 
give us an overview. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 
clearly the opportunity for us to be the first department to come 
before the review of this committee is indeed an honour today. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate, too, to pick up on the comments 
made by the hon. member who spoke before me, that this is the 
first opportunity for the official opposition . . . I think all of 
them who are with us today in committee are new members and 
I want to say to them that this is an important part of the process 
in the legislature and in a democracy, and that is for members of 
the opposition to ask questions of government ministers. 
 
And I think it’s clear, too, that it’s not only an opportunity to 
ask questions, but also to lay out positive alternatives of where 
we may be able to pick up and seek advice from you as well. 
Because I always found that in the nine years I spent in 
opposition it was an opportune time for us to make positive 
suggestions of where we might want the government of that 
day, the Devine administration, to go. 
 
I think having the wealth of experience that the member 
opposite has as a small-business person, I think this is an  
  



802  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

advantage that you have. So I look forward to comments that 
you might have about ways and means, particularly in some of 
the smaller communities, where you may have ideas or 
concepts that you see where we may not be quite hitting the 
mark. And I accept that a department that is close-minded to 
suggestions or ideas is one that is not doing its job. So I look 
forward to those comments. 
 
But as you know, in the last year we have had a very, very busy 
year in the department. For the first four years of our 
administration, particularly between the period from 1992 to 
1995, we started out by developing an economic development 
plan known as Partnership for Renewal. And you go back to 
those days, and I’m not sure if the member was aware, but it 
started out with a process in Saskatoon where 30 or 40 members 
of the public, a blue ribbon committee, got together with myself 
and the Premier and other members of our cabinet for two or 
three days and did a blue sky session on where we thought the 
economy could go by the year 2000. 
 
And I think what happened at that time was, after 10 years of 
exaggeration of what the province might be or could be . . . and 
you remember all the slogans that there were in the 1980s about 
“there’s so much more we could be” and the premier of the day 
going to New York and saying there’s so much money in 
Saskatchewan that you can afford to mismanage the economy 
and still be profitable and the great exaggeration there was 
about what the economy of Saskatchewan was really about. 
 
In fact some people argue that this is really the first period 
where there has been a realistic view of the potential of 
Saskatchewan. At that time, all of the reports that we got said 
that if everyone worked as hard as they could, Saskatchewan’s 
population would grow in coming years to somewhere around 
1.1 million. 
 
If things didn’t go well, the population of the province could 
actually decrease to 900,000. And these analyses that were done 
then became a bit of a parameter of what was within the realm 
of possibility. And if people came to you and said, well if you 
just elect me we’ll grow the population to 2 million, everybody 
in the province now knows that these are pipe dreams and that 
there is no strategy around, and can be no strategy, for those 
kind of exaggerated political statements to be made. 
 
So the basis of the document Partnership for Renewal was a 
very realistic one. It was based on commitments by the private 
sector that if we did a set of things in this province  the most 
important being trying to create a climate that was positive and 
conducive in terms of atmosphere for economic development 
. . . that is, everyone being positive about their community in 
the province. That was number one. 
 
Secondly, they said, the key was to balance the books of the 
province  that you couldn’t sustain the very large annual 
deficits that were being incurred during the 1980s. And the third 
main point, they told us  the business people and working 
people  is that strategic tax changes were necessary, but only 
as you could afford them. That they didn’t want tax cuts that 
would lead to higher debt or that would result in the  

government coming back in a few years and saying we couldn’t 
sustain those kind of tax cuts. 
 
So those three primary elements were the advice that we got in 
a consensus fashion from working people and from business 
people, and then out of that flowed Partnership for Renewal 
and the 31 initiatives that you are aware of and became the basis 
for our first term in office of economic development. 
 
The other thing they said is, that if we strived hard between the 
period of 1992 and the end of the year 2000, the economy of 
Saskatchewan  not the government or government agencies, 
but the economy of the province  could create a net 30,000 
new jobs. And some will argue, as the member . . . the Leader 
of the Conservative Party, that Alberta’s created 100,000 jobs 
and therefore our economy should create 100,000 jobs. 
 
This is nonsense. There isn’t any economist around, who is 
believable, who would believe that our economy the way it 
exists today would be able to achieve that  30,000 is a 
realistic, best-efforts number that we believe the economy of 
Saskatchewan can create between 1992 and the year 2000. 
 
You ask where are we at today? So far in the first three years of 
the plan, 10,000 new jobs have been created. Between 1992 and 
1995 there are 10,000 more people working in the province than 
there was back in 1992  so 1993, 3,500 new jobs; 1994, 3,500 
new jobs; and 1995, 3,500 new jobs. 
 
In our new plan, Partnership for Growth, which we worked on 
and consulted extensively with, the plan remains. We still 
believe that that 30,000 job target  and I say we; I include 
business in that  is still attainable. So the first 10,000 are 
created by 1995, that leaves ’95. That leaves ’96, ’97, ’98, ’99, 
and the year 2000 to create another 20,000 jobs; five years for 
another 20,000 jobs or 4,000 jobs a year. 
 
This is the goal and objective that we, in conjunction with 
labour and business, have set; in the co-op movement. We think 
it’s attainable. And with the proper set of tools and, I might 
argue. with the proper, responsible opposition response in a 
positive way to the economy of the province, 4,000 jobs per 
annum is attainable and is a believable number. 
 
So this is what we’ve been doing in the lead-up to today. The 
economy of Saskatchewan is very strong right now and I think 
you would have to look far and wide to find an economist or 
banker who would disagree that the economy, if not hitting on 
every cylinder, is very close to it. You need only look at the 
Chicago market for grain prices to realize that now, for the first 
time I have ever seen it, that for far as you can look down the 
road in buying wheat futures, the price is over $5 a bushel right 
into 1997 and even into early 1998. This is really phenomenal 
because much of our budget structure is not based on wheat that 
is that high. 
 
If you look at the price of oil today, around 22, $23 a barrel. If 
you look in our budget document we’re predicting 18, 18.10, 
18.50 a barrel. So our numbers are coming in higher, on many 
of our resources, than we had dreamed of. 
 
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

And so I think setting goal targets of 4,000 per year for the next 
five years is probably within a pretty good realm of possibility. 
 
I say as well that I really think it’s necessary, and I don’t want 
to overstate this, but I think it’s important that each and every 
person in this province begin to have a positive view of what 
the economy of Saskatchewan should be and will be by the year 
2000. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much. First of all I’d also like 
to thank you for your willingness to listen to the alternatives 
that we will put forward, and we’ll be willing to do that. 
 
But I guess I have some questions on your Partnership for 
Growth document. The minister has spent some time telling us 
about the job creation that has occurred and the opportunity that 
is available. I do agree with him. The economy in this province 
has great potential and that’s because of the people out here. 
 
I do have great problems coming up with the numbers or 
believing the numbers of 10,000 jobs that have been created at 
this time. We have spoken on previous occasions about the 
numbers, and I guess to start with I’d like to ask you how the 
number of 10,000 is actually come by at this time. And I realize 
that we were talking about another 20,000. But I’m going to ask 
you to explain to me about the 10,000 jobs that are created since 
1992. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member will know that the 
document Partnership for Renewal was released in November 
of 1992. And the goal, as the press and everyone has accepted, 
started with the release of Partnership for Renewal. 
 
If you look at the numbers in 1993, for the full year of 1993, 
from January 1 to the end of December 1993 — these are not 
my numbers but StatsCanada — you will find that for the year 
1993 there were 3,500 more jobs than there were in 1992. 
 
If you go to 1994, the full year, the full calendar year, you will 
find approximately 3,500. And so what I’m doing is taking, 
year over year, since 1992 when the document was released 
projecting 30,000 new jobs between the release of the document 
and in the end of the year 2000, approximately 3,500 jobs a 
year . . . These are not department numbers or Government of 
Saskatchewan numbers; these come from the federal agency 
known as StatsCanada, and each year there has been 
approximately 3,500 new jobs. 
 
The reason that the analysts and the people believe that we can 
pick that up by about 500 jobs per year is because the books of 
the province are balanced. And we don’t have to continually 
crunch as hard as we did in the first term, government agencies 
and government programs, which will mean that even within 
our own house of government we won’t have to make the 
severe cuts that we were, and all agreed to during to the first 
term, which will mean that there will be a few extra jobs; 
therefore moving our goal and objective from 3,500 a year to 
4,000 a year. And if we create 4,000 jobs a year in ’96, ’97, ’98, 
’99 and the year 2000, that’s where you get the next 20,000 jobs 
from. 
 

Now there’s a lot of confusion around, and I hear the Leader of 
the Third Party  and I’m sure with great intent  saying that 
we have now downscaled our goals, and we were saying 
30,000, and we’re now saying 20,000. All this is being done in 
an attempt to confuse the public about what our goals, as stated, 
have always been. 
 
(1615) 
 
Since 1992, we said in a very realistic way — and I say again, 
we as a group, business people, bankers, unions, co-ops  have 
said that the economy of Saskatchewan can probably create 
between 3,500 and 4,000 jobs a year net, knowing full well that 
in agriculture we’re probably going to see a decreasing number 
of people working, which means the economy actually has to 
increase way more jobs then the 3,500 net in other areas in 
order to make up for what government is downsizing and 
agriculture is downsizing because of new equipment which 
requires fewer employees at the farm gate. 
 
And the economy is doing it. And I would be very, very 
surprised if that goal couldn’t be met by the year 2000. But 
these numbers that we’re using come directly from the federal 
agency, StatsCanada. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I just want to assure the minister that I’m not 
confused about the numbers. And I think it’s only fair, when we 
compare numbers, to compare the month of February of ’92 to 
February of ’96. That’s the only way you can do a fair 
comparison. Because to take an overall total over the year is 
going to take in the months of July, August . . . or June, July, 
and August, when there is summer students working, and 
they’re not full-time, sustainable jobs. 
 
When I look at the same numbers that you’re looking at, I can 
see that in the month of January and February there was 
actually at least 4,000 people less working in ’96 than there was 
in ’92. I believe I’m a fairly optimistic person and I believe that 
30,000 jobs could be created, but I don’t think we can be 
starting saying that we only have 20 to go right now; I believe 
we still have 30 to go. 
 
And I think that in order to start on the same basis, we’re going 
to have to see . . . If you’re going to start from November of 
1992, then I think we should have a wage . . . a job scale of 
some sort where we can actually analyse the figures each 
month, and then at the end of . . . and each month when Sask 
Trends come out on the 8th of the month we can look at it and 
see: where are we sitting each month? 
 
I know, since the time I’ve sat . . . been in the House, elected in 
June of last year, there hasn’t been more jobs each month than 
there was since ’92. 
 
I’m going to ask the minister if we can actually come up with a 
. . . the same way of describing job creation, or at least the same 
basis of getting our numbers. Because I don’t want to spend the 
next four years arguing, first of all, where we’re starting from 
and where we’re going to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I think this is a good idea. What I  
  



804  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

did when I was first a minister was . . . or first a member, was 
doing what you’re doing, comparing month over month. But of 
course some months you’re going to be way up; some months 
you’re going to be way down. And so what I have done with the 
StatsCanada number is taken the yearly average number as the 
basis for . . . and this is accepted throughout the industry. 
 
If you went to the provincial chamber of commerce or the co-op 
movement or the labour movement, they have now accepted 
that the average number of people working in the province, 
which really takes all the months of the year, puts them 
together, and then does an average of how many people were 
working in the province during the year . . .  
 
In 1992 there were 450,000 people, on average, for all of the 
months of 1992. In 1993 that number went to 455,000; in 1994 
that went to 457,000; and in 1995 that number went to 460,000. 
And so we use, as the basis for our number, averaging all the 
months, and we call it the annual average of people working, 
each month, add them up. So for example, in 1995, you will 
find in January ’95 versus January of ’94, year over year, it 
went from 438,000 to 450,000 or an increase of 12,000 for the 
month of January last year, month over month. 
 
But that trend didn’t continue throughout the year and so I can’t 
stand up and say, well we created 12,000 jobs, because later on 
in the year, not only did we not get 12,000, some months there 
were fewer jobs. And so those would be the days when you 
would stand up and say the government’s losing jobs  neither 
of which is accurate. 
 
The only accurate thing is at the end of the year take all of the 
numbers, average them out, and this is now accepted within 
business, within chambers of commerce, as being the number 
that is relevant and takes away from the idea of the minister 
standing up in those months where there’s good job creation, 
saying, well, hurrah, we’ve created 12,000  because that isn’t 
accurate. I mean I can do that, but it’s not playing fair ball. 
 
Or the months where there’s job losses, of you standing up and 
saying, well the government has lost a bunch of jobs. The only 
thing in my mind that matters is at the end of the day, is year 
over year, whether there have been more people working or not. 
 
And so that’s where we get our numbers from, and if we could 
agree with that basis. Otherwise we just go back and forth  
one month jobs are way up, one month they’re way down. And 
they will vary a lot during the year. 
 
For example in 1995, just to give you an example of how these 
numbers vary month over month, and I’ll just take a minute of 
the committee to run through them because they’re quite 
fascinating; and you’re absolutely right, in the wintertime there 
are fewer people working, in the summer there are more. And 
this is the same every year. 
 
But in January of 1995, there was 450,000 people working; in 
February, 450; in March it went down by a thousand to 449; 
April down to 448; and then the big jump when agriculture 
kicks in  up to 468,000; up further in June to 473; down a 
little bit in July to 472; holding at 472 in August; then down, as  

the farms start to slow down, to 467 in September; 464 in 
October; 454 in November; and 453 in December; which gave 
an average of 460 last year. 
 
Now one could get very excited in January about huge job 
losses over August, but every year this cycle continues. The 
only thing we know, that in the three years since we introduced 
Partnerships for Renewal, it’s gone up a little bit  the average 
each year  to the point where on average, year over year, we 
have 10,000 more people working on a yearly average than we 
had when we started. And if this trend continues  as we 
believe it will given the projections on oil and gas, wheat 
economy, potash, uranium  that we will continue to grow by 
4,000 per year. 
 
And here I want to make it absolutely clear, that’s not 
government creating it; that’s the economies that exist out there. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I guess I still . . . I don’t agree that by 
averaging the whole year and we come up with 10,000 more, 
that actually means there’s 10,000 more sustainable jobs. It 
doesn’t mean that those people are still working in January. I 
employ people from June till they go back to university in 
September and that doesn’t give me a full-time job and keeping 
food on the table for more people. 
 
And I guess I also don’t have the numbers that I wish I had 
available to me, so instead of continuing on with our job 
creation debate here for a few minutes, maybe the next time we 
come into the House to discuss Economic Development I can 
bring the numbers that I would like to talk to you about. 
 
We could maybe move to the next topic that I have a question 
on in your Partnership for Growth, when we talk about less 
regulation. As a business person I would like to tell you that I 
did a survey. Out of businesses in the province there is 250 
businesses that I talked to, and one of the . . . the second most 
important item that they told me was the regulations that they 
found were very overbearing and they were, especially for small 
businesses, causing a big concern and costing us a lot of money. 
Small business people cannot afford to hire somebody just to 
fill out forms all day long because they are not productive 
people. 
 
I am very disappointed in the Partnership for Growth document 
that is going to take 10 years to cut back 25 per cent, when I 
believe the last four years has cost us more than . . . caused 
more than 25 per cent regulation increase. 
 
I would like for you to talk to us or to explain to us about the 
regulations and what you feel are going to be some of the first 
steps you’re going to take with cut-backs and regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the reduction in regulatory 
administrative burden on business is the no. 2 objective of the 
Partnership for Growth which includes, I think, 21 initiatives. 
 
But just so we know what a priority we’ve put on this area, not 
only starting today but going back to 1991, if you were to go to 
Calgary and talk to the oil industry about whether there was  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

ease to deal with the Alberta government or the Saskatchewan 
government as it came to regulation, it would almost be 
universal that Saskatchewan is an easier place to invest, based 
on regulations, because our department and regulatory structure 
for oil and gas is much easier and more streamlined than in 
Alberta. 
 
And this is common knowledge within the industry. And they 
will readily tell you that we have streamlined the regulatory 
process as it would apply to oil and gas in such a way as to 
make investment in Saskatchewan relatively easy. 
 
The other area of course where we have made significant 
change is standardizing and working with the federal 
government on the regulatory side as it would apply to uranium 
mining, because oftentimes streamlining regulations does not 
mean that you have fewer regulations or weaker environmental 
laws. In fact it can mean quite the opposite, as we talked about 
earlier with community bonds. Due diligence and good due 
diligence is not necessarily synonymous with the length of time 
it takes to do the process. 
 
So in dealing with business, we find that on the oil and gas side 
and uranium side that these industries would tell you that when 
it comes to regulation, it is much easier here than in many other 
places in the world. And even at that, we’ve maintained some of 
the best environmental laws of anywhere in the world. 
 
So I think streamlining and getting the regulatory processes in 
place that work efficiently for business, and at the same time, 
achieve the goals that the regulations were set out to, is what is 
important. 
 
But I would like to then quickly add that there are many other 
regulatory changes that we can . . . believe we can make in the 
relatively near future. Ten years is set out as a guideline because 
this is what we believe the full 25 per cent cut would take. But 
you can believe me that the changes to the regulatory structures 
started the day we announced and we will be making much of 
those changes at the front end of the 10 years as opposed to in 
the later years. 
 
So when it comes to regulation, I think you’ll find that 
Saskatchewan is very competitive with other provinces and will 
get much better as we implement the section no. 2 within 
Partnership for Growth. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I guess I’d really feel a lot more comfortable if 
you’ll assure me that in the next four years you’re not going to 
add some more regulations so that by the time the next four 
years is up I won’t have to . . . there won’t be an added number 
to add onto your 25 per cent. 
 
Also we were talking about Alberta; we shouldn’t . . . if we’re 
going to compare to Alberta, then we better compare about job 
growth there compared to Saskatchewan as well. 
 
I’m also interested in what you’re saying in your Partnership 
for Growth regarding tax relief for businesses. What do you 
have in mind for that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well when we talk about tax relief 
for business, I think it’s important to see where we have made 
changes and I think it then leads to some other conclusions that 
we will look at. 
 
First of all, one of the first changes we made even while we 
were balancing the books back in the period between 1991 and 
1995 was the elimination of the E&H (education and health) tax 
on 1-800 numbers for businesses in general. And we did that 
initially to attract the Sears call centre to Saskatchewan when 
we were competing against other jurisdictions across Canada. 
 
One of the things that was a hindrance to getting call centres in 
Saskatchewan was the fact that we charged E&H tax on 1-800 
numbers. So in the deal that we made with Sears and the 500 
jobs or 600 jobs that they now have in Saskatchewan, was the 
elimination of the E&H tax on 1-800 numbers. In the following 
budget, then we applied that to all businesses in the province. 
 
The other area where we were able to make tax changes was the 
reduction in the small-business tax  a reduction of 20 per cent 
small-business tax, from 10 per cent flat tax for small business 
to 8 per cent. And this went a long way to . . . And you’ll see 
the job numbers in the service industry, for example, they have 
gone up considerably, in part because reducing taxes meant that 
more money can be spent on employees or hiring people. 
 
One of the other areas of course is on the E&H tax remission 
that now applies to process and manufacturing equipment in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And this was done in large part to 
help with the expanding of our machinery manufacturing and 
processing. The crushing plant for canola, the expansion of the 
Flexi-coil plant in Saskatoon, and the expansion of Bourgault in 
Saskatchewan. And a number of other manufacturing. 
 
So we were able to reduce the E&H tax through a remission 
plan for companies in terms of processing and manufacturing. 
One then can see down the road . . . Or the aviation fuel, for 
example, to make sure that more flights were landing in 
Saskatchewan to refuel. That has meant some more jobs. 
 
(1630) 
 
So these are the kind of selective tax cuts that I think one can 
look at in the future. And the list would include such things as 
potential of E&H tax remission on expanded agricultural 
production such as hog barns. This is one where we have, I 
think, significant discussion going on with the pork industry, 
where they are telling us that this is needed in order to move our 
hog production from where it is at today, of about 1.1 million 
hogs, to 2 million, which is part of our goal in Ag 2000. They 
say applying the same remission standards that we do to 
processing and manufacturing to large hog barns would mean 
that you would get a reciprocal increase in construction. 
 
So I think these are the kinds of areas that you will see our 
government continuing  those areas where we see some 
immediate job creation and expenditures resulting from the tax 
changes. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I guess I’m happy but at the same time  
  



806  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

disappointed to hear you say that you realize it’s taking tax 
reductions in order to encourage business in this province, and 
yet you’re still being selective about which taxes — the tax on 
the 800 numbers, the tax on certain manufacturing and 
processing equipment. 
 
If you would expand that thought, I think that you will hear 
what the opposition is saying  that reducing the taxes is what 
it’s going to take to actually get this economy moving and 
getting job creation going. I think that the taxation system we 
have right now is the biggest deterrent to business that there is. 
 
And I assure you that the hog industry, the many producers that 
I have been speaking to, are waiting to hear you make this 
announcement  it’s one of the questions that I have been 
wanting to ask  but I feel it’s something that, if it’s under 
advisement right now, I think it’s probably one of the biggest 
helps that you’ll see to the hog industry, which is one of the 
biggest potentials we have in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And if anything in this province needs help right now, it’s rural 
Saskatchewan. I’m going to ask you, you also speak about less 
government involvement in business. Can you give me some 
specifics about what you’re saying about less involvement in 
my business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I think the whole area that I talked 
about earlier, about the role of SEDCO for example, of lending 
money in a competitive way where you would see a 
government agency lending out taxpayers’ money for a new 
business on Main Street to compete with businesses that were 
already there and established, we have very much moved away 
from that because our analysis of that kind of lending didn’t 
mean any net new jobs, it just meant that one person had an 
advantage over the person down the street. And oftentimes 
legitimate businesses that had gone to the credit union or to the 
bank to borrow money to set up their business, was driven out 
of business by taxpayer-funded loans from government. And so 
we have removed government from that kind of competitive 
lending. 
 
I think you will also see much more emphasis on 
community-driven economic development as opposed to 
Regina- or Ottawa-driven economic development. Well what do 
I mean by that? 
 
Well obviously when you look at some of the programs that we 
may be able to deliver through the regional economic 
development authorities, which are really local boards that have 
the potential, I think, of delivering even more economic 
development than they do at the present time, I would like to 
think that we could do some experimenting with a delivery 
service, for example, for the small-business loans program 
through the regional economic development authorities. 
 
I know in Maple Creek this past year, in the provincial park, a 
committee of local people was set up to manage the ski hill 
which had been closed down for several years simply because it 
was too costly to do through the park system. So I think in the 
area of regional and provincial parks, there will be more things 
that communities and local business people may be able to do. 

And there’s just a litany of areas where I think private sector 
can be brought in to help deliver programs  the Tourism 
Authority, for example, where we’ve moved government 
employees out of the Department of Economic Development in 
the tourism area over to a joint venture between the private 
sector and public, and now with the announcement of the 
Saskatchewan Trade Corporation or STEP (Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), you will see people moving 
out of the department as government employees to be employed 
by a joint venture again between the private sector and 
government. 
 
And I think in these ways of doing partnerships, as opposed to 
having private sector doing one thing and government doing 
another, we can actually achieve much more and in some areas 
do it with less, although that’s not the main objective. The main 
objective is to do a better job and get more jobs created. 
 
Ms. Draude:  You made a statement a minute ago I was 
going to ask you about and I forgot. When you said that the 
small-business tax had been reduced  and I think that’s great 
news for companies that are paying tax  but I know of a great 
number of small businesses who don’t pay income tax. That’s 
not helping them at all. 
 
I’m wondering if you could tell me what percentage . . . what 
number of the small businesses in this province are actually 
paying tax so that this change in the taxation system has 
actually helped. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, I think one has to be very 
careful about a simplistic view of relating tax cuts in every 
instance to job creation, and somehow this being the panacea 
for job creation and economic creation. 
 
You remember back to the days of David Stockman, who was 
the chief adviser to Ronald Reagan, who in a very simplistic 
way said the only thing you have to do to stimulate an economy 
is cut taxes. You don’t have to look far back to remember when 
Grant Devine said if we just eliminate the gas tax, tourists 
would just flock to Saskatchewan. 
 
It doesn’t work that way. Grant Devine eliminated the gas tax. 
He eliminated it. Our tourism numbers went down. We had 
fewer people coming, because the fact of the matter is that very 
few of us, when we decide to go on a holiday, bother to check 
out what the price of gas is in the jurisdiction that we’re going 
to go to tour in. 
 
If my friend from northern Saskatchewan decided that he and 
his family were going to drive to California to Disneyland, I 
doubt that he would get out a handbook that would check out 
state by state what the gas price was before he headed out. 
That’s simply not how we think. 
 
And so anyone who would simplistically say, as Grant Devine 
did back in the ‘80s, if you eliminate the gas tax, get rid of $100 
million in revenue, somehow the increase in tourism would 
make up for it, it didn’t work and it doesn’t work. And so when 
you’re looking at tax as a tool for economic development, you 
have to really work hard to find out which  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

tax cuts are going to deliver the most punch. 
 
And I have, I think, an excellent article here, I believe from The 
Globe and Mail, written by Jeffrey Simpson, that relates to that. 
And I want to take a minute, Mr. Chairman, to quote from it 
because it talks about simplistic tax changes not doing what 
they’re intended. 
 
But in the article he says the most American idea of all is the 
one tried in the United States with the spectacularly negative 
results. He calls it a “stimulative tax cut.” President Ronald 
Reagan tried it, egged on by the supply side or the David 
Stockmans of the world, whose major mouthpiece was the 
editorial page of the Wall Street Journal. And the policy 
produced monstrous deficits. 
 
And that is exactly what would happen if in a simplistic way we 
said we’re going to eliminate all the taxes in Saskatchewan. The 
fact is then you wouldn’t have the $850 million to pay the 
interest on the debt; you couldn’t run the health care system; 
you couldn’t have any highways. And so this is very much an 
exercise of study, analysis, and careful judgement of which 
taxes you should change and when. And I appreciate the 
member saying that we have to look at those, and I would 
appreciate knowing . . . I mean, this is a good opportunity for us 
to challenge which taxes you would change, for example in 
your regime, in order to get economic development. I say that 
sincerely. 
 
If you believe that eliminating the gas tax or getting rid of the 
sales tax would be the impetus, I would like to see some study 
and analysis that would show that this is a well thought through 
process. Because just simply playing to the public and saying, if 
I’m elected I’ll get rid of the gas tax, I mean we’ve been there. 
We were there in 1982 and the public of Saskatchewan fell for 
that once. I don’t think they’ll do it again. But what it lead to 
was $15 billion in debt and the reimplementation of the gas tax 
with a vengeance, in order to try to catch up for the money that 
was lost and the lack of jobs that were created. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I can tell you I feel a little slighted 
when you tell me that I’m being very simplistic when I say that 
reducing tax . . . I don’t believe that reducing the tax for small 
businesses helped a lot of businesses get going because I don’t 
believe there’s a large percentage of the small businesses 
actually paying tax. And what I asked you is if you can tell me 
how many of the small businesses actually do pay income tax, 
that would have been affected by this number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, I want to say to the member 
opposite, I’m not referring in any way to you or even your 
caucus as being simplistic in the idea of tax cuts. That’s not my 
intent. 
 
My only intent by saying that is to say that some very 
sophisticated people in the world have tried this already, the 
simple statement. I’m not referring to you, but I’m talking about 
the American government  which is the most sophisticated in 
the world  under Ronald Reagan believed that if they just cut 
taxes, somehow miraculously there would be all these jobs 
created and wealth created. And they tried it with disastrous  

effect and impact. 
 
And I would argue that the former premier here tried it, with his 
idea that you could simply reduce taxes and hand out hundreds 
of millions of dollars, and somehow that would create an 
economy that then would flourish and create jobs. 
 
And what we found is two things happened. There were no jobs 
created; we went in debt by $15 billion; and leaving you and I 
here, and the population of Saskatchewan, after that 
government has disappeared off the face of the earth, to pay off 
the debt that they created. 
 
And so I think your ideas about economic development and 
selective tax changes, what I would urge you though is to 
identify those tax changes that you see in your community, or 
other members of your caucus see, within the parameters that 
we know we have, of having need for over a billion dollars for 
health and close to a billion dollars for education; $850 million 
for payment on the debt that we can’t get rid of. So we need 
taxes to pay for those items. I don’t think . . . you or I have no 
question about that. 
 
And we know we will be able to now manage for the first time 
in 14 or 15 years, small surpluses. We have identified that 
one-third of those surpluses we will allocate to reducing taxes. 
So then it becomes, within those parameters, what is it that you 
and I and other members of the community identify as selective 
tax changes that could mean the maximum number of jobs 
being created. 
 
And I guess what I appreciate about this debate, it’s being done 
in a reasonable way, without the nonsense that we heard back in 
the 1980s about eliminating whole ranges of taxes. Because 
everybody now knows, having tried it once in the 1980s, that 
those options just aren’t on. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I have one question before I go 
into my next set of questions. And that is, at some time can you 
tell me how many businesses were actually affected by the tax 
break. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I might be able to get that for the 
member. But I just want to say that what I do have here is sort 
of the profitability of Saskatchewan businesses, which would 
give you some indication because if they’re profitable they 
would pay tax. And just to say that the vast majority of 
companies are profitable, therefore would have benefited from 
them. 
 
But just to give you an idea of the sectors, the logging and 
forestry industry, the average net profit by firm would be 
14,200; mining and oil companies  and many of these of 
course being small companies  would be 25,000 on average; 
manufacturing, 24,000; construction, 8,000; transport and 
storage, 14,000; communications, 14,000; wholesale and trade, 
13,000. 
 
Now you may get the idea that these numbers are very low, but 
I will also give you for these the Canadian average. For 
example in wholesale and trade, the average net profit for  
  



808  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1996 

Saskatchewan firms is 13,500; the Canadian average, 9,000. 
And so in the area of retail trade, the average in Saskatchewan, 
8,176; the Canadian average, 5,000. So these are numbers that 
tell you what the average profitability of these companies. 
 
And so I can probably get you the actual number of companies, 
but the truth of the matter is is most of them are profitable and 
most of them would have received some benefit. And all 
industries all-in, the average net profit per firm in Saskatchewan 
 this is the average for the province  is $14,106. So if you 
applied that across all businesses and then reduce what their 
rate of small business tax was, you would get an idea what the 
implication would be. 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Draude:  I know that you’re well aware that over 90 per 
cent of the jobs created in this province are created by small 
employers that hire less than five employees. And I will be 
interested when you can give me those numbers because I 
believe most of those small businesses aren’t paying a lot of 
tax. 
 
But just to move on, I’d like you . . . could you give me an idea 
of the consultation process that was built in to the day-to-day 
operation of the department. When you say you’ve consulted 
extensively to build this Partnership for Growth document, can 
you talk about the type of people you’ve been consulting with 
and what this process actually led to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I will get for the member the 
numbers and groups that we met with. But my understanding is 
we met with about 50 different organizations throughout the 
period of November and December as we led up to the 
consultation  several thousand people. 
 
But just going back to the business climate in Saskatchewan to 
show how it’s changed in the last couple of years . . . and I 
don’t take very much credit for the change because a lot of it, as 
you know, comes from having wheat prices over $5. In fact this 
year the wheat prices are quite spectacular, and they’re going to 
keep going up. Oil prices have strengthened. Even uranium 
prices which were rock-bottom are now coming up nicely. The 
economy of the province is doing very, very well. 
 
And it’s indicated in the number of bankruptcies and the 
number of incorporations. And I just want to quote these for 
you because I think they’re important. But the total number of 
business bankruptcies for Saskatchewan in 1995 was 366, and 
this is the lowest level of business bankruptcies in the province 
since 1987. 
 
And so that tells you that as the bankruptcies go down . . . not to 
say that there won’t be bankruptcies; obviously there always 
will be. And on the other hand, the total number of provincial 
incorporations is at an all time high of 31,813. And the other 
thing is, in a survey of businesses anticipating job creation in 
the coming year, it is also high by comparison with any other 
year; 32.4 per cent of these businesses, I believe . . . No, but it 
says that in the survey indicates Saskatchewan business 
anticipate the largest relative job creation of all provinces. 

And so when compared in the survey, the Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business, when they checked with the 
businesses across the country, Saskatchewan has the largest 
number of companies believing that they would create jobs in 
the coming year. 
 
And while that doesn’t mean that our job numbers will be 
spectacular, it only adds to the litany of things that would 
indicate that the economy of the province has strengthened and 
will continue to strengthen for a large number of reasons, not 
the least of which though is the spirit of cooperation that exists 
between the government in Saskatchewan, between working 
people, and between the businesses and co-ops. And I think if 
you’re being fair  and I know the member opposite is a fair 
person  I think you would know that in terms of a partnership 
in Saskatchewan, it’s as good now as we have seen at any other 
time in recent history. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can the minister explain to me at the same 
time that business bankruptcies have dropped, why the number 
of personal bankruptcies have gone up then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I don’t have the personal 
bankruptcy numbers here, but I’ll take a look at those. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I also . . . you were going to give me a list of 
the businesses that you’ve been talking to. I have a question 
about the Partnership for Renewal. Were the goals and 
objectives set out in your original Partnership for Renewal, 
were they met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, I just want to say that in a 
general way almost all of the 31 initiatives were met: the 
commitment to set up the provincial action committee on the 
economy, for example; the Tourism Authority; the 
establishment of regional economic development authorities. 
And when you go through the list, you’ll find that almost all 
were met. 
 
And I think it’s important for government agencies to set these 
kind of goals. And it’s not that you’re going to get them right 
all the time or that you’re going to meet every one of those 
goals. But I find in life that if you don’t have that list in front of 
you all the time of what your objectives are, that you don’t 
reach very many. And so I think setting goals that are almost 
higher than what you think you’re going to be able to achieve is 
probably the right way to go. 
 
And there were also many people who said look, setting goals 
and objectives in terms of number of jobs that an economy will 
create is not realistic. And we challenged that and said look, no, 
we’re going to put 30,000 down by the year 2000, and we’re 
going to use the criteria . . . average year over year because 
there really is no other way that we could figure out to do it. 
 
Now we may be wrong on that. We may have put ourselves at 
risk because maybe you end up creating 25,000 instead of 30. 
But I would still argue that if you hadn’t set the goal of 30, you 
probably wouldn’t have got 25. You probably would have got 
20. So I think it’s really important that governments . . . just as 
business or individuals setting goals for what they want to  
  



April 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

achieve over a period of time . . . although risky, it’s important 
to do it. 
 
But I just have here several letters from individuals and groups 
who were involved in the consultation on Partnership for 
Growth. The Canadian banking association sent letters saying, 
I’d like to thank on behalf of colleagues, providing input and 
future direction on the economic development of the province 
through Partnership for Growth. 
 
SMPIA which is the Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry 
Association, they said: 
 

I’d like to express our appreciation to you and your cabinet 
colleagues for taking time to meet with our delegation 
February 2. We are pleased to learn that culture industries 
have been identified as a growth sector in Partnership for 
Growth. 

 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool says, during the past month 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool representatives have had an 
opportunity to meet with yourself, members of the department, 
and go on to say that following their submission, it is a further 
contribution to this consultative process. 
 
And there have been . . . there really is a lot of people who, 
whether they accept everything in the document or not, were 
very pleased with the fact that consultation had gone on. And 
most of these letters were written after the document was 
delivered and made public. 
 
BDM Information Services sent a letter. Bioproducts Centre, on 
March 7 sent a letter saying how much they appreciated: 
 

Thank you very much, Partnership for Growth, which 
arrived on my desk this week. Having been involved in the 
original Partnership for Renewal, I was very interested to 
learn the Government of Saskatchewan plans to implement 
the next and most important stage of the process, that is, 
growing the economy. 

 
Saskatchewan seed potato growers say they received a copy and 
are pleased to see the commitment to working with the industry. 
 
The Saskatchewan Business Teachers Association, 
commending the government for its recent release  and this 
one I think you will find interesting because it . . . in particular 
our association is very pleased with the objective no. 5 which 
emphasized the importance of and the need for entrepreneurship 
education for Saskatchewan students. And I think this is one of 
the areas where you and I have talked about the need to start at 
a very early age of training people for the possibility of looking 
at a business career. 
 
The city of Moose Jaw, Ray Boughen, the mayor, writes and 
saying: 
 

Thank you very much for the invitation to be involved. 
And I’m sure I speak not only for myself but also the 
council of Moose Jaw when I say the initiative and 
possibility for economic expansion are exciting  

developments for all of us. 
 
And Minds Eye Pictures, Kevin Dewalt writes to say that he 
wants to say that he appreciates the opportunity to have input 
into the process of Partnership for Growth and goes on to say 
that Minds Eye looks forward to continued partnership with 
SaskFILM corporation to ensure the Saskatchewan film 
industry continues to grow and create jobs and prosper in our 
province. 
 
So that gives you a flavour of the kind of response that I have 
got to the consultations that went on. And it’s fair to say that 
again, while obviously not meeting everybody’s needs, it 
certainly has met a broad spectrum of people’s and business 
needs. 
 
And I guess the truth will be known when this four-year 
segment is completed, and we find out whether or not the public 
says the next time we go to the polls, as they did in 1995, that 
while not perfect, it was a pretty good effort. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 783 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 783 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 783 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Deputy Clerk............................................................................................................................................................................... 783 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 
Murrell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 784 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Delegates Welcomed  

Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 
Manitou Health Centre in Neilburg  

Stanger ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 784 
Raymond Daigneault Bonspiel  

Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 785 
One Hundred Years of Service  

Scott ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 785 
Humboldt Peewee Broncos Win Hockey Championship 

Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 785 
The Premier’s New York Trip  

Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 785 
Fourth Annual Save Our Environment Guide 

Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................. 785 
New Entrepreneurs  

McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 786 
Library Branch of the Year 

Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 786 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

SaskTel Employees’ Strike  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 786 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 786 

Teachers’ Salary Costs  
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

Potential Flood Conditions  
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 788 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 788 

Health Districts Funding 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 788 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 788 

Family Services Funding 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 789 
Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 789 

Domestic Violence  
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 790 
Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 

Child Poverty  
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 
Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 791 

 
 



 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 791 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 791 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 791 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 793 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 

Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 

Bill No. 40  An Act respecting Pharmacists and Pharmacies 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 795 

Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act  
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 795 

Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................... 796 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 797 
Draude ................................................................................................................................................................................. 797, 800 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 798 

THIRD READINGS 
Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 801 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Economic Development  Vote 45  

Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 801 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 801 

 


