
























































May 21, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1705 
 May 21, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina here. They’re from Sedley; they’re from Francis; they’re 
from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities that people have signed their petition from are 
Langenburg, MacNutt, Rocanville, Marchwell, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Alameda and Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Most of the signatures on this petition are from Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, but also from Pilot Butte, Craven, and Balgonie. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Moosomin, Broadview, Pilot Butte, also 
Craven, and then many from the city of Regina. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
cause the government to take action to allow an increase 
on security deposits on rental properties. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments, 
regarding the Crown Investments Corporation’s loan 
agreements with HARO Financial Corporation: (1) what 
was the amount of cash flow generated by HARO during 
1995, according to CIC’s calculations respecting those 
loans; (2) what was the amount of net earnings or losses 
generated by HARO in 1995, according to CIC’s 
calculations respecting those loans? 

 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day 57 move an order of the Assembly do issue 
for a return showing: 
 

Minister responsible for SaskPower regarding employees, 
Mr. Jack Messer, and Ms. Carole Bryant: (1) provide a 
copy of the employment contracts for Mr. Messer and Ms. 
Bryant, including details of salary, perks, car allowances, 
memberships, and travel allowances. 

 
I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased and very proud to introduce to yourself and to the 
Assembly today, one very special person that has added a great 
deal of meaning and enjoyment to my life. I ask the Assembly 
to join me in welcoming my eldest son, Scott Julé, seated in the 
east gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If there are no other introductions, I would 
like to introduce 60 guests of mine who are seated in the 



1706  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Speaker’s gallery as well as behind the rail. These are grade 4 
students from Sunningdale School in Moose Jaw and are 
accompanied today by teachers, Trina Templeton, Kathy 
Sudom-Young, James Johnson, and parent supervisor, Mrs. 
McDowell. 
 
They will be seated in the gallery until 2 o’clock, at which time 
they will take a tour of the building. And with the assistance of 
the Deputy Speaker, I will meet with them as close as I can to 
2:30; it may be just a little bit late today. And I look forward to 
the visit and a chance to take a photo at 3 o’clock. I will ask all 
members to show welcome to these students from Sunningdale 
School in Moose Jaw here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Aboriginal Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is Aboriginal Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. This week has 
been observed to increase awareness and promote the 
contribution of aboriginal people across Canada. In the 
province we are very proud of the contribution of first nations 
people to our province over the many years. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues in the House, I would first of all 
like to congratulate the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations on its 50th anniversary. The FSIN’s (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) work on behalf of first nations 
people is benefiting all of Saskatchewan. It seems fitting that 
we recognize the 50th anniversary during this Aboriginal 
Awareness Week. 
 
There are some 80,000 first nations people in Saskatchewan 
and the population is comprised of 72 different governments 
represented by 9 tribal councils. Culturally they represent five 
different language groups: Cree, Dakota, Nakota, Saulteaux, 
and Dene. The FSIN is the representative body of the entire first 
nations of Saskatchewan. 
 
The unique customs, language, and culture of our first nations 
people is an important part of what makes Saskatchewan one of 
the best places in the world to live. Besides contributing to the 
culture of our province, the first nations organizations are major 
partners in our economy, helping Saskatchewan to grow 
economically. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to all first nations groups in the 
province as we recognize their contribution to Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also add 
to the following member’s statement that this week’s 
designation as Aboriginal Awareness Week . . . 
 
Aboriginal people make up a significant portion of 
Saskatchewan’s population. Our vibrant traditions and  

languages are a key part of Saskatchewan’s colourful history. 
Over the years, Saskatchewan’s aboriginal people have endured 
many hardships, but today we are looking for ways to overcome 
these challenges. 
 
Some perfect examples of aboriginal communities that are 
trying to equip themselves in the future are from northern 
Saskatchewan. These people are working to develop their 
resource industries like tourism, fishing, forestry, and hunting. 
The aboriginal communities are working to improve relations 
with government and corporations so that successful 
co-management projects can be developed. 
 
During this week of celebration, I’d like to commend the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations on its 50th 
anniversary. FSIN continues to strive for self-government and 
self-determination for all native peoples. 
 
Finally, I’d like to commend the efforts of the Saskatchewan 
Metis people who will soon be participating in enumeration. 
This step will hopefully present an accurate reflection of the 
population of Saskatchewan’s Metis. These new stats will be 
important when negotiating future agreements. 
 
I ask all the members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing 
Aboriginal Awareness Week with a common theme and 
message — that life is too short to spend time negatively 
focusing on our ethnic differences. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Olympic Skeet Shooters 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even though summer 
is never going to come to Saskatchewan, I do want to 
congratulate two young Saskatchewan men who will be 
competing in the 100th anniversary Summer Olympics in 
Atlanta, Georgia. Kirk Reynolds of Outlook and Rod Boll of 
Fillmore will compete in men’s double trap shooting event on 
July 24, five days after the opening ceremonies of the 
Olympics. 
 
Kirk was a double winner last year at the Pan-Am Games, and 
both Kirk and Rod qualified for Canada’s national team at the 
trials held in Atlanta on April 27. Kirk has spent the last four 
months training in the U.S. (United States), where it didn’t 
snow every day, and is shortly off to Italy and Germany for the 
world cup shoots in June. Kirk and Rod will join in Atlanta for 
two weeks of fine-tuning before the actual competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure both Kirk and Rod feel it is a privilege 
to represent their country and their province at the Olympics. 
I’m equally sure that win or lose, they’ll do us all proud. And I 
wish them a keen eye and a steady hand on July 24. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Spirit in St. Brieux 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

the newspaper in St. Brieux carried a thank-you letter from the 
Arnold Perreault family. The Perreault family wished to thank 
and recognize the citizens of St. Brieux for their compassion 
and understanding as they deal with the diagnosis of family 
members being HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) positive. 
 
Mrs. Perreault discovered that she was HIV positive during her 
last pregnancy in 1989. In March of 1996, their seven-year-old 
child was diagnosed HIV positive. The community of St. 
Brieux rallied around the family and started an education 
program in the school and community. 
 
They have received tremendous support from the whole 
community and it is that banding together in adversity that I 
would like to acknowledge in the House today. Citizens of St. 
Brieux, and the Perreault family, we remove our hats and open 
our hearts to you as you deal with this painful experience. It is 
my sincerest wish that we as a province can learn from this 
powerful example that you, St. Brieux, have shown us. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Skating/Curling Arena in Drake 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’d like to report on a tremendous example of community 
spirit in my constituency. This fall the community of Drake will 
be opening a $1 million skating and curling complex and they 
will do it without going into debt. Just about every man, 
woman, and child in the community has contributed to the new 
arena. 
 
Three years ago the community realized that the days were 
numbered for their old arena and they also knew how important 
it was to their community. It had become a central gathering 
place for everyone. In fact it was the heart of Drake in the 
winter months. 
 
So people got to work. They set up a building committee and a 
fund-raising committee. And then everyone got involved. A 
community auction was held, and a sport celebrity dinner was 
held. Volunteers offered catering service, held garage sales, 
dinner theatres, and raffles. There were corporate donations, 
and businesses donated goods and services for fund-raising 
events. There was a homecoming; bingos. Bottles and cans 
were collected; money was raised through sporting events; and 
a long-distance truck lottery was held. And there were 
numerous individual donations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then countless hours of free labour were put into building 
the arena. Equipment was loaned for the cause. Hot meals were 
supplied every day, and young people offered free baby-sitting 
services to adults so that they could volunteer their labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous example of community spirit 
and of doing things the Saskatchewan way. I’d like to 
congratulate every man, woman, and child in the community for 
their efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battered Women’s Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday 
evening in Weyburn, I attended a very moving, a very 
necessary, and, we all hope, a soon to be ended annual event. 
Last week was Battered Women’s Awareness Week. And in 
observance of that week, the Weyburn Committee Against 
Family Violence and the violence intervention program held a 
walk, a candlelight vigil, and a brief ceremony at which I was 
privileged to speak. As well, the Octavius Singers contributed 
their talent to the evening. 
 
About 75 people attended the ceremony which was built around 
the theme, Putting the Pieces Together to Stop Family Violence, 
and a quilt was created by those who attended, based on this 
theme. And as the week, but certainly not the blight on our 
society, has passed, it is worth re-emphasizing the fact that 
violence against women is in fact violence against the whole 
family. And violence against one family in one generation 
almost certainly means a continuation into a new generation. 
 
It was very reassuring to hear from Pat, who works with a 
violence intervention program, how effective and helpful our 
legislation, the domestic violence Act, has been. Some, but not 
all, of the pieces to stop family violence are legislation and 
government programs, societal involvement, and individual 
commitment. All must work together so that some year soon 
this week can be removed from the calendar. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Emergency Medical Services Week 
 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has been 
proclaimed as National Emergency Medical Services Week. 
 
The theme for the week is, EMS: It’s Up To You. The week 
provides an opportunity to acknowledge the contributions of 
emergency medical services personnel, to reach out to potential 
recruits, and stresses the importance of strong support for the 
EMS (emergency medical services) system. 
 
It also helps educate the public about the EMS system and its 
appropriate use, and encourages the prevention of illness and 
injury. Emergency medical services is a system of care for 
victims of sudden and serious illness and injury. It depends on 
the availability and cooperation of many different elements  
from the public recognizing medical emergencies, to a network 
of health care facilities that provide specialized care to the 
seriously ill and injured. 
 
The other elements necessary to ensure that the system is the 
best it can be include the 911 number, pre-hospital, police, fire, 
and emergency department personnel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government caucus I would like 
to extend our appreciation to all people involved in the EMS 
field in Saskatchewan. These professionals provide an 
important life-saving service and it is through their  



1708  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

contribution, along with others in the health care field, that 
Saskatchewan has the best health care system in North America. 
 
Thank you for your hard work and important service that you 
provide. It is very much appreciated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just on the 
past weekend there was a major incident at the railway crossing 
in Whitewood this past week. Unfortunate as it may seem, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and I think maybe it’s time we in this province 
started looking at agriculture in a more serious matter. 
 
What happened was customs and RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) officials were transporting a number of 
vehicles that they had seized and unfortunately one of those 
vehicles came in contact with the train at the railway crossing. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that would not have happened if we 
in this province would begin to support agriculture. 
 
I’m not sure where our Minister of Agriculture is when we talk 
about the Canadian Wheat Board, but the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Wheat Board we’re talking of as being Canadian, is 
strictly provincial . . . Western Canada has nothing to do with 
Ontario and Quebec, and they get the advantages. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan; we need to stand up for the agriculture 
producers. I don’t think . . . we need to stand up and give 
support to our farmers who are trying to get a fair price in 
difficult times. And we need to stand up against eastern Canada 
and the fact that we are a separate pooling system. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, this province and this government and 
this Assembly should support agriculture producers in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Long-term Care 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
meeting is scheduled to begin shortly in Swift Current in 
response to a recent announcement that the Swift Current Care 
Centre is being closed. This move has been described, and 
rightly so, as callous and inhumane. 
 
Once again it is the sick and the elderly who are feeling the 
brunt of this government’s underfunding of the health system. 
Because of this closure, 31 elderly residents of the facility have 
no idea where they will go, while another 40 remain on a 
long-term care waiting-list in the district. As a result, our 
elderly are being subjected to a great deal of stress and anxiety 
as they are left to fend for themselves. 

Will the minister explain how his government can force a 
closure of one senior care home after another when everyone 
knows how rapidly the population is ageing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, 
this decision was a decision of the Swift Current District Health 
Board. The Swift Current District Health Board has come up 
with a plan to streamline and consolidate their long-term care, 
Mr. Speaker, and that board has determined that this private, 
for-profit facility will not be part of their long-term plan. 
 
The facility, as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, will close on 
December 1 of this year. It is not closing immediately. And I 
have every confidence, contrary to what will be suggested by 
that member and what will be suggested by the opposition, that 
every one of the residents of that special care home will be 
placed in good and decent housing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, let me read a few of the 
comments from the seniors who are losing their home because 
of this government. 
 
Eighty-seven-year-old Minnie Woods says of this government’s 
action, and I quote: “. . . it’s brutal, it’s cruel . . . They’re 
turning us out on the street . . .” 
 
Another senior, Irene McIvor, says, and I quote: “My son put 
me in here because he thought I would be safe.” 
 
Vicky Thistlewaite, whose 76-year-old mother is also a resident 
of the Swift Current Care Centre, says, and I quote: “There’s no 
place for these people to go. Why not just say you have to die at 
age 65? Is that what the future is like?” 
 
Will the Minister of Health indicate in this House today what 
steps he is prepared to take to ensure that these seniors are not 
left to fend for themselves and that they’re properly looked 
after? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very disruptive for 
people, including especially I think senior people, when they 
have to move from one place to another. There is no question 
about that. 
 
But as the system changes from time to time, facilities are 
sometimes closed, they’re sometimes converted  the system 
changes. And when the people are moved, as long as they’re 
moved to good homes, Mr. Speaker, the people will be satisfied 
and happy with the homes that they have. 
 
It is not helpful to the situation of people who may be feeling 
some anxiety as a result of the change, Mr. Speaker, to have 
people suggesting that they will be thrown on the streets or that 
they will not have a home. It is true that some people, Mr. 
Speaker, will be going from one home to another, but I assure  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

the member and I assure the House that those people will have a 
good home and a decent home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, one of the most disturbing 
parts of this whole issue is the fact that the member for Swift 
Current remains strangely silent. While this government forces 
seniors from their homes, he sits by and watches. Has he 
forgotten that he was elected to represent and speak for his 
constituents? Instead of speaking for the sick and the elderly, he 
chooses instead to defend the actions of this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government  actions that cannot possibly 
be defended. I would encourage the minister from Swift Current 
to show some guts, defend those . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order, order. Order! Now 
I think the word that the member just used is not in order for 
use in the Assembly and I’ll ask him simply to withdraw his 
unparliamentary remark and to proceed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I accept your ruling and withdraw the 
remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the member defend those who elected him? Don’t simply 
cower in the back benches. Mr. Speaker, the elderly people 
affected by these actions do not deserve to be treated this way. 
Will the Minister of Health stand in this House today and 
apologize to the residents of Swift Current for the cut in the 
funding that is allowing this to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member should 
understand that as we go through changes in the health system, 
occasionally some facilities will close down. The Swift Current 
Health District Board has decided that this private, for-profit 
facility will not any longer form part of its long-term plans for 
long-term care. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the board has also said that they’re going to 
consolidate their long-term care beds at Swift Current Care 
Centre . . . I’m sorry, at Palliser Regional Care Centre and at 
Swift Current Regional Hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, none of 
these people that are resident in the care centre, the Swift 
Current Care Centre, who are understandably feeling anxiety 
because of a move in December, are going to be left without a 
good home and a decent home. 
 
And it is not helpful to the debate to have the member and 
others suggesting to these people and others that anybody is 
going to be put out on the street, Mr. Speaker. It’s not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been said in 
this House about the NDP government’s Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. We have all heard and debated the fact 
that the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) is  

bad for the construction industry, bad for taxpayers, and bad for 
business. 
 
Recently a leaked memo from the Economic Development 
department surfaced, providing proof that fair and open 
tendering was not what the government was after. The 
government had a choice. It could have scrapped this 
ill-conceived plan before it started. Instead, it chose politics 
over common sense. Mr. Speaker, the jig is up. The Liberal 
opposition has shown that Sask Water and SaskTel projects are 
inflating costs by as much as 30 per cent. 
 
Will the minister come clean on this deal and admit that the 
CCTA is merely a political pay-off that is contrary to public 
interest and must be scrapped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The intention 
of this government is to implement good public policy wherever 
the case may be, and that’s what we’ve done. 
 
In terms of the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, I 
don’t want to accept the hon. member’s figures as gospel 
because we know that in the House in the past he’s spouted off 
figures in the area of over $100 million when during that same 
period of time only about $15 million in entire Crown 
construction agreements had been put out in place. And he said 
it’s costing over $100 million. So I dispute those figures. 
 
What I want the member to listen to is what I’ve told him 
before, this month, in this House, and that is there have been 
meetings between the Crown Investments Corporation and the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association concerning the CCTA. 
Those meetings are ongoing and we expect to have a report 
some time near the end of this month. And when that report is 
released, the member, along with the rest of the public in 
Saskatchewan, will know the results of the review of the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it has come to our attention 
that Executive Council is discussing the possibility of raising 
the threshold for invitational tenders. This would allow the 
NDP to offer tenders to preferred union construction firms. A 
cynic might suggest that this is a backhanded way for this 
government to save face and scrap the CCTA while continuing 
its practice of union preference tendering. 
 
Will the minister confirm if these discussions are taking place, 
and if so does it mean that the CCTA will be eliminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I don’t why the hon. member 
opposite is so anti-union all the time. Unions have a very 
distinct place in our society, in Canada, in particularly in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan has less labour disruptions than 
any other jurisdiction in Canada. We have a good working 
relationship between government and the public sector, unions, 
the private sector; we think we have the economy going in 
Saskatchewan. 



1710  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

I repeat to the member opposite, unlike the scattered approach 
of them when they cut the throat of their leader, can’t get their 
act together on what public policy should be, make false 
accusations within this House, our attempt as a government  
to make sure we always put in what’s best, as public policy, for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
From time to time if we see there is problems, we review the 
public policies we put in place. Results of the agreement have 
been announced to the member, that they’ll be released 
sometime toward the end of this month. And we will continue 
as a government to implement good public policy for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has 
brought to the attention of the House a number of examples to 
demonstrate how the CCTA inflates costs of Crown projects by 
as much as 30 per cent. When speaking of the total amounts of 
projects that fell under this agreement last year, the Minister of 
Economic Development has put forward a figure of $30 million 
 a figure that is challenged by the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association. 
 
Even using this ludicrous figure, that would mean that this 
government is wasting at least $9 million a year. Mr. Speaker, 
$9 million preserved more than 300 long-term care beds in this 
province. 
 
Will the minister explain why he is choosing politics and union 
friends over our pioneers, who are being told that there may not 
be a place for them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, draws a long bow. I hope his string doesn’t snap on 
him when he compares the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement to whether or not seniors needing good public 
health care within the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Minister of Health has explained many times that we’re 
still on the leading edge of developing good health care for 
people within this province, whether they’re seniors, whether 
they’re long-term care, whether it’s emergency situations that 
arise. We work very hard in this government of public policy  
not like the members opposite in the Liberal Party, and certainly 
not like the members in the Conservative Party that decimated 
this province over the years that the Devine government was in 
office in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Where the members opposite falter, is that they never go after 
their federal cousins in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, when they slash 
their budgets. And we understand they have to get their deficits 
under control, but they slash their budgets without any thought 
to the social programs, the education, the health care, the social 
services that we have to provide within the province. We have 
historically been, and continue to be, the best public policy 
government in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-term Care 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, the 70 
elderly residents were informed over the weekend that their care 
home will close on December 1 in Swift Current  right before 
Christmas. The closure of this facility means 31 seniors literally 
have nowhere to go. And, Mr. Minister, home care cannot take 
care of these people because all of them are level 3 or level 4 
care, needing 24-hour nursing care, and their families cannot 
provide 24-hour care either. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve said over and over again that seniors will 
not be left out in the cold. It looks like that’s exactly what’s 
going to happen. Mr. Minister, it’s time you took some 
responsibility. It’s time you personally take some steps to 
ensure that no seniors are without homes or proper health care. 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? Will you personally get 
involved in this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence in the 
Swift Current Health District. What does not inspire confidence 
with me and what I think is a bit shameful, Mr. Speaker, is that 
member knows and his party knows and the Liberal Party know 
that as health reform has progressed in Saskatchewan there isn’t 
one senior who has been taken out of a special care home 
without anyplace to go. 
 
And I have said over and over again, Mr. Speaker, that it is the 
plan of the district health board to make sure that every resident 
of that care home has a good and decent home. These people 
are good people. They’re decent people, Mr. Speaker. And for 
the members opposite to engage in fearmongering and suggest 
that people on this side of the House and the Swift Current 
Health District would not be interested in everybody having a 
place to go, I think is a bit shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, you can continue to 
stand up and pass the buck to the health boards. You can 
continue to say that there are great health care facilities in rural 
Saskatchewan when there aren’t, but, Mr. Minister, we all know 
it’s you that call the shots. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve been invited to attend a public meeting in 
Swift Current tonight. You can hear firsthand what you are 
doing to those elderly people in Swift Current. The least you 
can do, Mr. Minister, is listen to them. Will you at least go to 
the meeting this evening and listen to the concerns of the 
seniors tonight? Will you personally attend that meeting that’s 
scheduled for this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
that I will be attending meetings in various parts of the province 
tonight and every night this week and into Saturday. And the 
next complaint that will come about next year from the  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

opposition will be the amount of money spent on travel for me 
to go to these meetings. 
 
But I will not be in Swift Current this evening, Mr. Speaker, but 
we will talk to some people at the meeting . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Speaker is having a 
great deal of difficulty being able to hear the answer provided 
by the Minister of Health, and I’ll ask all members of the House 
to . . . Order. I will ask all members of the House to provide the 
minister the courtesy of listening to his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  But I’m sure there will be people at the 
meeting that will let me know what was said at the meeting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that I just think it’s 
unfortunate that the members want to use what is in essence a 
simple decision to consolidate long-term care in Swift Current 
to play politics by engaging in fearmongering, by suggesting 
that there are people in this province that would not be 
concerned about seniors having good and decent places to live, 
when we know that the plan of the health district is to take care 
of those people, albeit not through the private, for-profit facility 
where they presently live, but through other institutions in the 
Swift Current district, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can certainly 
understand why the Minister of Health wouldn’t want to travel 
on Saskatchewan’s highways, because I saw a very shocking 
example this weekend of the disastrous shape our highways are 
in. 
 
On Highway 361 east of Alida, two semi-trailers were stuck in 
the middle of the highway. One of them was right in front of 
my farm, so I took some pictures to show the minister. The ruts 
on the highways were over a foot deep, and I have the picture, 
Mr. Minister, to prove it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the RM (rural municipality) came out and, at their 
own expense, patched up the problem, but that’s simply a 
stop-gap solution. And this highway is going to get worse, Mr. 
Minister. And there are many more . . . how many more semis 
are going to get stuck on this highway? And how many drivers 
or passengers have to be injured or killed before you start doing 
something about the terrible shape of highways in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for his 
question, Mr. Speaker. I am sure the member opposite knows 
the situation this spring, with the wetness and the rain and all 
the problems that that’s created to, not only the Department of 
Highways, Mr. Speaker, but also to municipal governments in 
the RMs. 
 
But I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that if his party 
10 years ago would have thought of the highway situation at  

that point in time and spent . . . instead of spending, spending, 
spending, getting us into all kinds of debt, we’d now have $851 
million in interest that we have to pay each and every year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Not only that, they sold off most of the highways’ equipment; 
we now have to try and replace that as best we can. So the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, should just look into the past a 
little bit before he makes those kinds of comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Wheat Board 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s also plain 
that that minister doesn’t drive on the highways in 
Saskatchewan either. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, it’s 
not often we see you and the federal Liberals in agreement. But 
you’re sure singing from the same song sheet when it comes to 
trampling on Saskatchewan farmers’ rights. 
 
When David Sawatzky was acquitted on Friday, you and Ralph 
Goodale should have taken that as a signal that the Wheat 
Board monopoly needed to change. Instead Ralph Goodale took 
immediate steps to prevent farmers from marketing their grain 
as they see fit. And you lined up right behind him, Mr. Minister. 
In fact you compared a farmer who hauls his grain across the 
border to someone who holds up a grocery store. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you really believe that farmers who simply 
want to get the best price for their product are the same as 
someone who robs grocery stores? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government. Mr. Speaker, this debate 
about the Canadian Wheat Board is an important one because, 
as far as this provincial government is concerned, and I believe 
the vast, vast majority of farmers in Canada are concerned, the 
single-desk marketing system of the Canadian Wheat Board has 
served this country and the farmers very, very well. 
 
That’s not to say that there can’t be made improvements to. 
There can be made improvements to the Canadian Wheat Board 
as there can be to any institution. But what we do not support is 
what the Conservatives in this province are advocating  
namely, some form of two-tiering; a breaking up of the 
single-desk marketing approach, which doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost all the buyers of the world of countries buy 
from a single desk. The only ones who benefit when you have a 
multiplicity of sellers are the buyers. It makes no sense to the 
farmers of Sturgis, Saskatchewan to be competing against the 
farmers up in Meadow Lake, or the farmers in Saskatchewan to 
be competing against the farmers in Alberta. 
 
We stand for the Canadian Wheat Board 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1712  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
polling shows that farmers want a change, starting with dual 
marketing. 
 
Your minister and Ralph Goodale seem to have missed the 
point on this whole issue though, because your minister kept 
referring to this as an illegal activity and yet the courts have 
ruled that David Sawatzky wasn’t acting illegally. 
 
Your minister says this ruling shows that the Canadian Wheat 
Board monopoly needs to change. 
 
The Western Canadian Wheat Growers say you should use this 
ruling as an opportunity to move towards a dual-marketing 
system. And a Wheat Board commissioner, who recently 
resigned, says the Wheat Board needs to change its marketing 
practices which he says costs Saskatchewan . . . not 
Saskatchewan, western farmers $100 million in barley sales last 
year. Everyone seems to recognize the need for change 
excepting the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, and Ralph 
Goodale. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own polling shows that the Saskatchewan 
farmers need more marketing choices. We have introduced a 
private members’ Bill to hold a producers’ vote on dual 
marketing; will you support that initiative, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the best 
efforts or, if I may say so, the worst efforts of the Conservative 
Party in this province to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board, 
you will not get us onside with that mission. 
 
I say that historically and in actual reality the single-desk 
marketing system in the Canadian Wheat Board has been one of 
the greatest advances for the farmers and the people of 
Saskatchewan and this country. It makes economic sense. It’s 
the right thing to do when we meet other competitors in the 
international market-place. And we’re not going to privatize the 
grain industry . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
Order, order. Now the Speaker’s having a great deal of 
difficulty being able to hear the Premier in his response. Order. 
And I will ask the members of the third party to please be in 
order to allow the answer to be heard . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Order. I’m not asking for comment about the 
Speaker’s ruling. I’m just asking for cooperation of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to close my 
remarks by saying that it may be — not may be  it is the 
policy of the Conservative caucus to be in the hip pocket of 
ConAgra and the large marketing grain companies international. 
It is not our policy. We support the Canadian Wheat Board 
because it’s the right thing to do and it makes sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Bond  

Rating Service and Moody’s recently decided not to upgrade 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating. Both firms registered concerns 
about the province’s debt as a reason for not upgrading their 
respective ratings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government continually blames the Devine 
government for the financial mess that they were left. But the 
fact remains the NDP has had five years to address this 
problem, which included a period of above average real 
economic growth, yet they made very little progress in paying 
down the debt. 
 
Given the fact that the economy is not expected to continue 
growing at the same rate, will the Minister of Finance explain 
why she wasted an opportunity to put a significant dent in this 
province’s debt? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. I would welcome that question. There is no other 
province in Canada that has reduced its debt as dramatically as 
Saskatchewan has. And I’m again amazed that the member 
opposite would cite the CBRS (Canadian Bond Rating Service) 
rating because, first of all, we already have an A with both 
Moody’s and CBRS. 
 
But what is absolutely fascinating is what they cite as the major 
problem the province faced in this budget cycle. The major 
problem, besides the debt which we inherited from those folks, 
was a $220 million reduction in federal transfers over the past 
two years, they say, which again the members opposite seem to 
support. 
 
So what these rating agencies are saying is we already have a 
very good credit rating with them. We’re doing a very good job. 
The problem is the debt inherited from them and the short-term 
problem from your federal counterparts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Finance 
neglects to tell the House today is that last year they had 
committed that they could handle any reductions in federal 
transfers, and that was the reason why their credit rating wasn’t 
affected. So I guess obviously what’s happened here is they 
haven’t fulfilled that promise; so be it. So now our credit rating 
hasn’t changed. 
 
When the economy was at a high, this government was 
electioneering with the taxpayers’ money rather than putting it 
towards the debt. The Canadian Bond Rating Service expects 
economic growth to be about a quarter of what it was in 1994. 
This does not bode well for growth in our provincial revenues. 
A downturn in the economy could spell a fiscal crisis. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 
produce a genuine debt-reduction plan, so the people of 
Saskatchewan and bond-rating agencies can feel confident that 
Saskatchewan will not be caught flat footed in the event of a 
recession? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, everybody else is very optimistic — Conference 
Board of Canada, recently very optimistic about the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
One of the liabilities we’re trying to deal with, though, are the 
irresponsible comments of the member opposite which is 
costing this province jobs. 
 
But what I would say again to the member opposite is this is a 
government that has committed this year to reduce the 
province’s debt by some $700 million. Going from 1994, the 
debt, relative to the size of the economy, was 68 per cent. It’s 
going down to 44 per cent by 1999. 
 
There is simply no other government in Canada that has 
reduced its debt in this way. The federal government still hasn’t 
balanced its books. 
 
But I would conclude by saying this to the member opposite. 
There is only one province in Canada that has had its credit 
rating upgraded in the last five years, and it’s something the 
Saskatchewan people should be proud of because the province 
that got an upgrade last year was Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 94  An Act to amend 
The Education and Health Tax Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Education and Health Tax Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 96  An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 97  An Act to amend  
The Department of Agriculture Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading on 
An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 98  An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of 

International Child Abduction/Loi concernant l’application 
à la Saskatchewan de la Convention sur les aspects civils de 

l’enlèvement international d’enfants 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the 
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child 
Abduction/Loi concernant l’application à la Saskatchewan de la 
Convention sur les aspects civils de l’enlèvement international 
d’enfants. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 99  An Act respecting Co-operatives/ 
Loi concernant les coopératives 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Co-operatives/du projet de loi relative à la Loi 
concernant les coopératives. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 
Bill No. 100  An Act respecting the Regulation of Drivers 

and Traffic on Saskatchewan Highways/ 
Loi concernant la réglementation de la conduite automobile 

et de la circulation sur les routes de la Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Regulation of Drivers and Traffic on 
Saskatchewan Highways/du projet de loi relative à la Loi 
concernant la réglementation de la conduite automobile et de la 
circulation sur les routes de la Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 101  An Act respect Wills/ 
Loi concernant les testaments 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill respecting Wills/du projet de loi relative à la Loi 
concernant les testaments. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 



1714  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 102  An Act respecting the 
Distribution of Estates of Intestates/ 

Loi concernant le partage des successions 
non testamentaires 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Distribution of Estates of Intestates/du projet de 
loi relative à la Loi concernant le partage des successions non 
testamentaires. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 103  An Act respecting Powers of Attorney/ 
Loi concernant les procurations 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Powers of Attorney/du projet de loi relative à la Loi 
concernant les procurations. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 104  An Act to facilitate the Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Judgments and Awards/ 

Loi visant à faciliter l’exécution réciproque des jugements et 
des sentences arbitrales 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill to 
facilitate the Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments and 
Awards/du projet de loi relative à la Loi visant à faciliter 
l’exécution réciproque des jugements et des sentences 
arbitrales. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 105  An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards/ 
Loi concernant l’application en Saskatchewan de la 

Convention des Nations Unies pour la reconnaissance et 
l’exécution des sentences arbitrales étrangères 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of the United 
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards/du projet de loi relative à la Loi 
concernant l’application en Saskatchewan de la Convention des 
Nations Unies pour la reconnaisance et l’exécution des 
sentences arbitrales étrangères. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 

The Speaker:  Before the Speaker takes his seat, can I ask 
for a little order in the House, please. 
 

Bill No. 106  An Act respecting the Maintenance of 
Dependants of Testators and Intestates/Loi concernant 

l’aide aux personnes á charge des testateurs et des intestats 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Maintenance of Dependants of Testators and 
Intestates/du projet de loi relative à la Loi concernant l’aide aux 
personnes à charge des testateurs et des intestats. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 107  An Act respecting the Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders/Loi concernant 
l’exécution réciproque des ordonnances alimentaires 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance 
Orders/projet de loi relative à la Loi concernant l’exécution 
réciproque des ordonnances alimentaires. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No 108  An Act to amend 
The Change of Name Act, 1995/ 

Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur le changement de nom 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Change of Name Act, 1995/Loi modifiant la Loi sur le 
changement de nom be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 109  An Act to amend 
 The Vital Statistics Act, 1995/ 

Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Vital Statistics Act, 1995/Loi modifiant la Loi sur les 
services de l’état civil be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 
Bill No. 110  An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995/ 

Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Education Act/projet de loi relative à la Loi 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Assembly, ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 
Contributory) Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 
 

Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill respecting the Wascana Energy Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a 
Crown Foundation for District Health Boards 

 and their Affiliates 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that The Crown 
Foundations for District Health Boards Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker:  Question 99 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 

 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 
Motion No. 10  Personal Injury Protection Plan 

 
Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to rise in this House today and commend this government for 
implementing the personal injury protection plan  PIPP. At 
the end of my remarks I will move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its support for the personal 
injury protection plan, which emphasizes rehabilitation for 
accident victims. 

 
Mr. Speaker, just for background, the auto fund is a financially 
self-contained, self-supporting program, administered by SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) on behalf of the 
government. It does not pay any dividends; it does not receive 
any subsidies. Mr. Speaker, in other words the auto fund does 
not borrow money from nor does it pay profits to the provincial 
government. All its funding comes from premiums, 
investments, and other miscellaneous income. 
 
In 1994, the auto fund suffered a $93.8 million loss. Close to 60 
per cent of this went towards injury claims. Court awards for 
pain and suffering were soaring. Insurance rates were rising 
because of growing damage and liability costs. 
 
Just to give a comparison of some of the interprovincial rates 
and what occurred to them from 1993 to 1996. In Alberta, the 
rates went up 4.8 in 1993; 6.4 in ’94; 4.8 in ’95; and went up a 
further 6 per cent this year. 
 
As a result of these increases the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, in consultation with various interest groups and the 
public — the good old Saskatchewan way — developed the 
personal injury protection plan commonly referred to as PIPP, 
or no-fault insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the old system, SGI was paying most of its 
settlement dollars anywhere from 60 to 70 per cent for pain and 
suffering, followed by loss of income, and last, rehabilitation. 
 
PIPP is a more caring system and places rehabilitation as the 
primary focus. The guarantee’s benefits are among the best in 
Canada. More emphasis is placed on rehabilitation, income 
replacement, and death benefits, than under the previous 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a few moments on the 
benefits which are available under PIPP and compare them to 
the benefits under the old plan. With regards to rehabilitation, 
PIPP will pay a $500,000 maximum for medical and 
rehabilitation expenses. Compare this to the old program where 
the maximum was $10,000. Under PIPP, it also includes $550 
per week maximum for personal home care expenses. This was 
not covered in the old program. 
 
Under the income replacement there are various categories. 
Under PIPP, 90 per cent of the net income derived from gross 
yearly employment income to a maximum of $50,000. In other 
words, a member making $50,000, hurt in an accident, would 
have income replacement of $45,000. 
 
Home-makers with dependants receive a child care allowance 
of up to $400 a week. Compare this to the old system where it 
was a maximum of $150 a week for two years for 
home-makers. That’s all. 
 
Students receive a maximum of 13,000 for each school year 
missed. If the disability continues past completion of school  



1716  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

then income replacement commences. In the old scheme there 
was a maximum of $75 per week for 52 weeks if confined to 
bed, hospital, or wheelchair. This also includes the full-time, 
self-employed, part-time, temporary workers, seniors, 
unemployed, students, and home-makers. 
 
With the death benefits under PIPP, 50 per cent of the income 
replacement benefit the deceased victim would have been 
entitled to will be paid to the spouse until her or his death, plus 
5 per cent to each dependent child until age 21. Lump sum 
payments are also an option. Compare this to the old program 
where the maximum was $10,000, and there was $1,500 for a 
dependent child. There was also $10,000 paid to the estate of 
victims with no spouse or dependants. In the old scheme it was 
$2,500. 
 
A $30,000 allowance for education and training to 
home-making spouses. This is a great plan in that it allows the 
home-making spouses time to retrain, get their education, and 
become contributing members of society. There was nothing 
like this under the old program. 
 
And there’s a $5,000 funeral allowance, which of course was 
not covered at all under the old program also. 
 
Permanent injury, depending on the extent of the injury and so 
forth, there is a maximum of 125,000 under PIPP. In the old 
program the maximum was 10,000. 
 
All of these benefits under PIPP are indexed to the consumer 
price index, the CPI, and the benefits in the old program were 
not indexed. 
 
And here comes the controversial one, as we read in the paper 
at times. Under this new program victims not responsible for 
the accident can sue for economic loss in excess of the personal 
injury benefits. In other words, if a member is making $70,000 
then he is allowed to sue for the amount above the $50,000. 
However he cannot sue for pain and suffering. In the old 
scheme they could sue for economic loss and pain and suffering 
in excess of the above benefits which they had. In both cases 
there is a $200,000 liability coverage paid under the plate 
insurance. 
 
As all schemes are not exactly perfect, an appeal procedure has 
been put in place. First of all there is the internal appeal. Mr. 
Speaker, if you were to be in an accident then you would 
discuss this with your adjuster. If you could not come to an 
agreement then you could discuss it with the manager; he would 
give you a written decision. If you were not satisfied with that 
written decision, then you could apply for mediation. An 
outside mediator, which would be chosen with mutual consent, 
would be chosen to hear the case. A $35 fee is charged. And 
why the $35 fee is charged, of course, is to keep complaints or 
mediation requests from ones which should not be. The 
mediator is paid by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
Again his decision is not binding. 
 
Then if you wanted to go a little further, then of course you 
could go to the Court of Queen's Bench. If you are successful in 
going to the Queen’s Bench, then the legal fees will be paid. If  

not successful, then of course the plaintiff would be liable for 
the fees. 
 
Just to give you a next idea of how well this plan is working, 
there were 6,654 injury claims last year. Of these, there were 48 
internal reviews. There were no mediations. There were no, of 
course, Court of Queen's Bench. And so this is . . . the scheme 
is working very, very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  The auto fund has also introduced some other 
initiatives which will make life a little easier for us. One is the 
daily vehicle expiry. I know some people wonder about this, but 
it was in response to the agents who are being flooded at the 
end of the month period. And so we now have a daily vehicle 
expiry which you place on your licence plate. 
 
Short-term registrations will be introduced in ’97. This of 
course should be of great benefit to farmers who only use their 
farm trucks perhaps three months, perhaps six months, of the 
year. Then they will only need to register them for that amount 
of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will also be of great benefit to RV (recreation 
vehicle) owners who only will have to register their vehicles for 
three months, six months, whatever period of time that they use. 
So this will be introduced in ’97. 
 
In ’97 it will also be possible for you to make monthly 
payments. Instead of paying out all of the money for your 
vehicles and so forth in one payment, you will be able to have 
monthly payments set up. 
 
Drinking and driving, of course, has a devastating effect on the 
families and friends of those who are injured or killed in 
alcohol-related crashes. It also increases the cost to society in 
terms of insurance, health care, and other government services. 
 
As a result of this, an all-party committee on drinking safety of 
eight MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) toured the 
province consulting with people on proposed legislation. Their 
recommendations were as follows. They recommended a 
reduction in the roadside suspension blood-alcohol content 
level for all drivers from .06 per cent to .04 per cent. They also 
recommended that driving without impairment, DWI program, 
be mandatory for new drivers losing their licence the first time 
with a BAC (blood alcohol concentration) of .04 per cent. In 
the case of experienced drivers, a DWI course would be 
required after a second suspension. 
 
A mandatory rehabilitation program was also recommended for 
convicted impaired drivers and new drivers with two .04 per 
cent suspensions and other drivers with three .04 per cent 
suspensions. As a result of these findings and so forth, 
legislation has been introduced at this time and will be going 
into effect. 
 
As a spin-off of all of this . . . one of the spin-offs, Mr. Speaker, 
has been that new emphasis that resulted in savings for the 
people of Saskatchewan. There has been no increase in car  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

premiums since 1994, whereas if we compare it to Alberta, 
remember that they had a 6.4 per cent increase in ’94, a 4.8 per 
cent increase in ’95, and a further 6 per cent increase this year 
in good old, tax-free Alberta. 
 
Injury claims alone dropped to 117 million from 225 million in 
1994, a huge financial turnaround from a loss of 93.8 million in 
1994 to a profit of 3.5 million  once again this government 
has placed Saskatchewan on the leading edge, not on the edge 
of bankruptcy that the former Conservative government led us 
to, not to the edge of social justice chaos which the Liberals had 
advocated — these same Liberals who would like us to believe 
that they have a monopoly on care and compassion, while in 
truth the only monopoly they have is their misplaced, stifling 
devotion to the policies of the federal Liberals. 
 
The same Liberals who  without any compassion, concern, or 
care  slashed the funding to health, education, and social 
programs by more than $100 million and whose dismantling of 
other social programs, such as the emasculation of the 
unemployment insurance at a time of many job losses, drastic 
proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan, and economic 
policies which led to the demise of the Crow benefit, 
deregulation of railroads, the abandonment of municipal 
airports, and in short the abandonment of rural Canada . . . And 
how can they justify spending $1 billion to cover up 
harmonization of the GST (goods and services tax) in Atlantic 
Canada while reducing the payments for education, health, and 
social programs? Mr. Speaker, we do realize where their 
priorities are. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has put Saskatchewan on the 
leading edge of social reform as we confidently enter the 21st 
century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move, seconded by the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its support for the personal 
injury protection plan which places increasing emphasis on 
rehabilitation services for accident victims. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to add 
my support to the motion put forward by my friend and 
colleague, the member from Swift Current. Much of what I will 
say has been said by my hon. friend, but I believe so strongly in 
this motion that I think it bears repeating. 
 
I’d like to begin with a little bit of background. SGI is the main 
corporation, the main Crown. It has two operations underneath 
it: the auto fund and SGI CANADA. The auto fund handles 
basic, compulsory vehicle insurance and SGI handles general 
insurance. If there is a deficit in the auto fund, which operates 
on a break-even basis, it cannot look to profits from SGI to help 
it out. They are separate entities. 
 

The auto fund does not borrow from the government nor does it 
receive subsidies from the government. It does not pay profits 
or dividends to the government. Premiums are paid by vehicle 
owners and drivers and then the corporation uses those 
premiums to pay for injury and vehicle damage claims. 
 
As a result of large losses in ’93 and ’94, the auto fund has an 
accumulated deficit of $108 million. Most of that money, nearly 
60 percent of it, went towards injury claims. Court awards for 
pain and suffering were increasing at a prodigious rate. Injury 
claims for people injured in vehicle collisions have increased an 
average of 12 per cent during the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, something had to be done to restore the 
financial health of the auto fund. After all, it had an 
accumulated deficit of $108.9 million. 
 
Something had to be done to avoid increasing vehicle insurance 
rates for Saskatchewan motorists. After all, Saskatchewan 
drivers enjoy some of the lowest rates in Canada. And with no 
changes, rates would likely increase by 8 per cent a year. And 
something had to be done  and this is most important  to 
improve benefits. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on January 1, 1995, the personal injury 
protection plan was implemented. And in keeping with our 
government’s commitment to involve the people of 
Saskatchewan, SGI consulted widely with various interest 
groups to develop this made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 
 
The personal injury protection plan provides improved benefits 
to every Saskatchewan resident injured in an automobile 
accident regardless of fault. All Saskatchewan residents injured 
in automobile accidents, whether in Canada or the United 
States, are covered. 
 
Under the old tort system, SGI was paying most of its 
settlement dollars for pain and suffering, followed by loss of 
income, and lastly, rehabilitation. With this personal injury 
protection plan, rehabilitation is the prime focus. 
 
This plan is a more caring system, with guaranteed benefits 
among the best in Canada. This plan does not allow the victim 
the right to sue the other party for pain and suffering. However 
this plan does preserve the right of innocent victims to sue for 
economic losses not covered by personal injury benefits. It was 
only by removing the right to sue for pain and suffering that 
SGI was able to redistribute claims payments to improved 
benefits, implement new rehabilitative programs, and freeze 
vehicle rates for ’94, ’95, and 1996. 
 
When the personal injury protection plan was introduced, there 
were no changes to vehicle damage coverage. The person at 
fault in the accident continues to pay the $500 deductible for 
vehicle damage and continues to receive an insurance premium 
surcharge on his or her licence. 
 
Now my good friend, the colleague from Swift Current, has 
talked at length about some of the benefits of the personal 
injury protection plan, and I would just like to highlight a few 
of them again. 
 



1718  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Rehabilitation and medical expenses are paid to a maximum of 
$500,000 including personal home care expenses up to $550 a 
week. 
 
Income replacement benefits are paid to injured people who are 
unable to continue with employment, home-making duties, and 
education as a result of their injuries. And there are various 
plans underneath that income replacement benefits for people 
who are working, seniors, farmers, home-makers with 
dependants, students, and people unemployed but able to work. 
All these benefits are indexed to keep pace with inflation. 
 
The personal injury protection plan’s emphasis is on 
rehabilitation and making people well. Under the old system, 70 
per cent of costs were incurred for pain and suffering. With the 
new system, costs have been redirected  35 per cent for 
medical and rehabilitation services and 32 per cent for income 
replacement. This move towards a less adversarial and more 
compassionate approach focuses on wellness and the 
rehabilitation of injured individuals which is benefiting SGI 
clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close, I’d just like to say a few more 
words about rehabilitation. SGI has committed $25 million over 
three years towards new rehabilitation programs. This would 
not have been possible without the introduction of this plan. 
Health care provider associations, for instance the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, chiropractors, and 
physiotherapy groups, have indicated they are pleased with the 
direction and efforts of SGI in this regard. 
 
In accordance with our increased emphasis on rehabilitation, 
SGI is now working with several health care organizations to 
improve services and support increased research. As part of the 
development and implementation of the personal injury 
protection plan, SGI organized a rehabilitation advisory board. 
This board is composed of representatives of Saskatchewan 
Health, district health boards, health care associations, and 
injury-related consumer groups which have worked closely with 
the auto fund to determine the province’s most pressing needs. 
 
As a result, SGI is now working with many different 
organizations. The World Health Organization based at the 
world famous Karolinski Institute in Stockholm, Sweden 
entered into a partnership agreement with SGI and the 
University of Saskatchewan in 1995 for a three-year study of 
neurotrauma, whiplash, brain, and spinal cord injuries. SGI is 
providing funding of $300,000 for the project. 
 
Late in 1995, SGI signed an agreement with the Regina and 
Saskatoon district health boards to provide another $1.5 million 
to each district annually to establish specialized treatment 
centres for new rehabilitative services. An additional 2.8 
million will be provided to the Saskatoon Health District to 
renovate and equip City Hospital for this new program. 
 
Under a three-year partnership with the Saskatchewan 
Department of Health, SGI will provide $9.3 million to enhance 
community rehabilitation services for people who suffer brain  

injuries. Motor vehicle accidents are a leading cause of brain 
injuries in this province. 
 
SGI continues its work with the University of Saskatchewan on 
a five-year $1 million research project into the assessment and 
treatment of soft tissue injuries, which was initiated in 1993. 
Through these projects, the auto fund is investing in 
rehabilitation and restoration of health. This direction is in 
keeping with the province’s wellness program as we work 
closely with Saskatchewan Health to improve the province’s 
injury rehabilitation resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the personal injury protection plan is not perfect, 
but it is a substantially better system than the one we had before 
1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  SGI’s staff have met the challenge to make the 
transition from an adversarial system to a more compassionate 
one, and they deserve our congratulations. Program delivery 
will improve as adjusters become more familiar with it. 
Benefits have improved, and there have been no rate increases 
in 1994, 1995, or 1996. The financial health of the auto fund 
has been restored, and in 1995 SGI received only 48 appeals 
from a total of nearly 7,000 claims. That’s less than 1 per cent, 
and that indicates a high level of satisfaction. 
 
The personal injury protection plan is in keeping with the vision 
of the auto fund: to provide quality, compulsory auto insurance 
and supporting services to Saskatchewan people; to be the 
leading insurer in the province; and to develop other markets by 
providing profitable, competitive insurance products in a 
manner which is responsive to and valued by its stakeholders, is 
affordable, and contributes to the growth, diversification, and 
economic well-being of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to support the motion: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its support for the personal 
injury protection plan which places increasing emphasis on 
rehabilitation services for accident victims. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter this debate on the issue that can have drastic 
impact on Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a minute to address the 
wording of the motion put forward by the member from Swift 
Current. The motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its support for the personal 
injury protection plan which places increasing emphasis on 
rehabilitation services for accident victims. 

 
I agree that rehabilitation must be considered as a priority for 
accident victims. We must concentrate on getting an accident  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

victim back to their pre-accident state of health. The personal 
injury protection plan does cover a lot of expenses which are 
not covered under the Saskatchewan health care plan. The plan 
will provide up to $500,000 for reasonable rehabilitation and 
medical expenses such as prescription drugs, physiotherapy 
travel expenses, dental costs, chiropractic care, mobility aids, 
ambulance costs, and home and personal care. And obviously 
this is a positive aspect of the plan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some very critical concerns that 
need to be addressed. There are cases that have been brought to 
our attention which are, without a doubt, slipping through the 
cracks. It is these cases that the minister responsible for SGI has 
to take a very close look at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first flaw in the personal injury protection plan 
deals with accident victims who suffer multiple injuries. These 
are people who are being let down by this plan. 
 
In one particular case, a family was travelling east on Highway 
No. 1 heading towards Moosomin when they were involved in a 
very severe accident with an ambulance. This accident has 
thrown this family’s lives into turmoil. Their daughter was 
killed and the father seriously injured. Since the day of that 
accident, this family has run into obstacle after obstacle due to 
no fault of their own. 
 
The extent of the injuries to the father of this family will 
prevent him from returning to his job as a fire-fighter in the 
same pre-accident capacity. He has been able to return to work, 
but working behind a desk due to his physical limitations. As a 
result of this accident and the personal injury protection plan, 
this individual’s career will undoubtedly suffer. His future 
career advancement will be impeded strictly because of the 
injuries he suffered through no fault of his own. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the personal injury protection 
plan does not provide for any compensation in cases such as 
this. Nowhere does the plan address the issue of pain and 
suffering for victims suffering multiple injuries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a family that has been forced to suffer 
socially, economically, physically, and emotionally. These cases 
may be rare, but the minister must place them at the top of his 
list of priorities. Even one family made to suffer the shortfalls 
of this plan is one too many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another problem with the personal injury 
protection plan deals with the death benefits. Death benefits are 
paid to the surviving spouse of a victim killed in an automobile 
accident. The surviving spouse receives an income replacement 
benefit until he or she dies. The benefit is 50 per cent of the net 
income the victim was earning. The spouse could choose to 
receive a lump sum instead of biweekly payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to ask the minister, how is the amount of 
the lump sum determined? If it was based solely on the 
individual’s net income, then I would hope the minister can see 
the problem this could cause. Take the case of a farmer who is 
involved in a farm accident and loses his or her life. I don’t 
believe that a benefit of 50 per cent of the victim’s net income  

is appropriate. 
 
(1500) 
 
What if the farmer has money tied up in capital assets. This will 
obviously affect the net income and ultimately the amount of 
the income replacement benefit. When dealing with cases like 
this it is not acceptable to have a simplistic formula in place to 
determine the amount of an income replacement benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family that is affected by such a tragic accident 
must be consulted and have input into the amount of the 
benefit. The needs of the affected families cannot be 
overlooked, rather they must be looked at very closely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rates paid by SGI customers have not increased, 
but this at the expense of a small group of victims who have 
been made to suffer through no fault of their own. There are 
some very significant cracks in the personal protection injury 
plan that need to be addressed before anyone else is made a 
victim. 
 
The minister has implied that there will be review of the plan 
after five years in order to determine where the plan has been 
successful and where the plan has failed. Mr. Speaker, five 
years is far too long a time frame. There are problems and 
weaknesses in the system that need to be addressed 
immediately. We cannot wait five years and hope that no one 
else is forced to suffer like some individuals already have. 
 
The personal injury protection plan must be reviewed on a 
continual basis and the plan must be changed when problems, 
flaws, and weaknesses are discovered. It is not good enough to 
sit back and document all of these problems and then attempt to 
fix them after five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, action must be taken now. This motion calls on 
this Assembly to affirm its support for the personal injury 
protection plan which places increasing emphasis on 
rehabilitation services for accident victims. 
 
In that, Mr. Speaker, I along with my colleagues in the official 
opposition, do support this motion. As I stated earlier, 
rehabilitation must be a priority for accident victims, with the 
hope that they can return to their pre-accident physical and 
mental state of health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although I do support the motion as it reads, I also 
strongly urge the minister responsible for SGI and his 
colleagues to take a close look at the problems that I have raised 
today. Don’t wait five years. Don’t let anyone else suffer due to 
the shortfalls of the personal injury protection plan. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
rise in support of the motion put forward by the member from 
Swift Current regarding PIPP, or personal injury protection 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auto fund was designed to be a self-sustaining 
program. I mean by this that premiums and other earnings of  



1720  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

the fund were to cover the costs of any losses incurred by the 
users of this program. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, due to rising liability claims, the 
fund in 1993 and 1994 found itself in a deficit situation. This 
government, instead of raising premiums like our neighbours to 
the east and to the west of us, Mr. Speaker, this government 
looked for a made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 
 
So SGI, in consultation with interest groups and the public, 
developed the personal injury protection plan. What PIPP does, 
Mr. Speaker, is provide improved benefits to every 
Saskatchewan resident injured in an automobile accident 
regardless of who is at fault. 
 
Under the old system SGI was paying most of its settlement 
dollars for pain and suffering followed by loss of income and 
costly rehabilitation. With PIPP, rehabilitation is the prime 
focus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PIPP is a more caring system with guaranteed 
benefits among the best in Canada. These new benefits include 
500,000 maximum for medical and rehabilitation expenses; a 
maximum of $550 a week for personal and home care expenses; 
90 per cent of net income derived from gross yearly 
employment income to a maximum of $50,000; home-makers 
with dependants receive a child care allowance of up to $400 
per week; students receive a maximum of 13,000 for each 
school year missed. If the disability continues past completion 
of school, income replacement commences. 
 
PIPP includes full-time, self-employed, part-time, temporary 
workers, seniors, the unemployed, students, and the 
home-makers. PIPP provides 50 per cent of the income 
replacement benefit to which a deceased victim would have 
been entitled; will be paid to the spouse until his or her death 
plus 5 per cent to each dependent child until age 21. 
 
Lump sum payments are also an option: $10,000 paid to the 
estate of victims with no spouse or dependants; $30,000 
allowance for education and training to home-making spouses; 
and $5,000 for funeral allowances, Mr. Speaker; permanent 
injury maximum of $125,000. 
 
Under PIPP, benefits are indexed to consumer price index. 
Victims not responsible for the accident can sue for economic 
loss in excess of the personal injury benefits. And this protects 
the victims, Mr. Speaker, because they will be able to take the 
law into the courts and have a civil suit if they want one. 
 
But what PIPP does not allow is the victim the right to sue the 
other party for pain and suffering. However PIPP does preserve 
the right of innocent victims to sue for economic losses not 
covered by personal injury benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was only by removing the right to sue for pain 
and suffering that SGI was able to redistribute claim payments 
to improve benefits, implement new rehabilitative programs, 
and freeze vehicle rates for ’94, ’95, and ’96. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Ward:  In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I think we know 
that with implementing a new program it will take some time 
for the public and the department to adjust to the new 
guidelines. But, Mr. Speaker, being a government of change 
and showing leadership in this area, I’m sure other parts of the 
country will soon follow our lead in providing good 
government and protection to their constituents, at a reasonable 
cost. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think it’s important that one take a moment just to 
address the motion that’s before us and bring to light some of 
the problems that people across this province are facing. 
 
And first of all I’d like to read into Hansard, a letter that we 
received  and I’m sure maybe all members in this Assembly 
received this letter  regarding SGI no-fault insurance. This 
letter is dated December 18, 1995. And this is what it says, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

I did not know how bad “no fault” SGI insurance was until 
close friends of mine were involved in a very serious car 
accident that has changed their lives forever. They were 
involved in a collision (no fault of theirs) in which a 
precious daughter was killed, plus serious injuries to the 
driver. Not only is this a life changing situation, but “no 
fault” insurance compounds their pain. My friends do not 
wish to profit from this accident, but just maintain the 
standard of living they had before this tragedy. SGI “no 
fault” insurance is cruel and does not think of the innocent 
victim. 
 
When I hear Premier Romanow talk about being a caring, 
compassionate government, this obviously does not apply 
to SGI “no fault” insurance. VICTIMS should not be 
treated this way. 
 
Please find attached a commentary about how SGI’s “NO 
FAULT” insurance has affected the Markwart Family. This 
is just a small portion of what they have endured. Feel free 
to contact the Markwarts if you have any questions or 
comments. 

 
It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I look at the letter and 
the information surrounding the circumstances of this . . . the 
reasons for this letter. It talks about the fact that . . . and the 
individual’s saying here: 
 

I finally wrote a letter to Premier Romanow on August 30, 
1995. We have yet to meet with him or one member of the 
Legislative Assembly regarding this new Act since the 
letter was sent. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this letter has been written by an 
individual from Regina living on Paynter Crescent; an 
individual very close to a family who were travelling out to 
Moosomin a little over a year ago to watch their son play in the 
Saskatchewan junior boys curling play-downs. 
 



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they didn’t make the 
play-downs. About 6 miles west of Moosomin their car came in 
contact . . . or vehicle came in contact with an ambulance. And 
as a result, you’ve heard through the letter, they lost their 
daughter, and the husband and father is in very serious 
condition. He’s trying to get his life back in order, trying to 
work, but is facing some very difficult times due to the injuries 
that he received in that accident. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is one of many incidents across 
this province where this so-called, no-fault insurance program 
has become a major burden to people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to individuals who have been hurt through no 
fault of their own, and as was the case here. 
 
The only problem in this situation was that this family 
happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. It wasn’t 
an accident that occurred because of a problem or the way they 
were driving down the road or their driving habits, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It had nothing to do with their driving habits. They 
were following the conditions of the road at the time. However, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve got to live with this new no-fault 
insurance program. 
 
And while I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I stand here 
and bring out these concerns, and the concerns of many other 
individuals who have contacted our caucus office, I raise them 
because of the fact that people are being hurt through this 
no-fault insurance program. 
 
And I understand in some ways where the government was 
coming from. There is no doubt we have seen outlandish 
lawsuits across our country; certainly it was appearing in this 
province. We’ve seen them in the United States, the U.S. of A 
(United States of America). It doesn’t matter where you look, 
where lawsuits like this get into the courts, it seems that we’ve 
just had outrageous court settlements. 
 
Now as this letter said, this individual said her friends are not 
looking to make a lot of money; they are looking for fair and 
reasonable compensation. And I would suggest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s where the no-fault insurance program fails 
people. It fails people because it sets a limit. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you were in your late 60s or 
late 50s, 125,000 invested might give you something reasonable 
enough to live on. But when you’re a wage earner or when 
you’re a young person in your late teens, early 20’s, or 30’s, 
you’re the breadwinner and you’re just in the prime of your life, 
and due to an accident you had no fault in, and you’re held to 
$125,000 to live for the rest of your life, I’d like to ask the 
members in this Assembly if they’d been willing to live for it. 
The member from Lloydminster, maybe the $4,300 that she’s 
taken in extra pay she could give towards the Markwarts to help 
them in a situation. She still has the ability to make an honest, 
good day’s living. And she’s going to make more than 
$125,000 in the next four years. 
 
What about, what about these individuals who have been hurt 
and because of a government policy are being penalized for 
something they had no control over. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find  

it very inconsiderate, and I don’t believe that government 
members or the Premier can even talk about compassion when 
we have people such as the Markwarts here facing what they’re 
facing today  trying to get their lives back to order, having 
lost a daughter. The individual who wrote this letter, having lost 
a very close friend, and having to settle for $125,000 to try and 
get their lives in order, in order to live and to provide for 
themselves on into the future. 
 
Not just to provide . . . if it was Mr. Markwart himself, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, maybe $125,000 might work. But he’s got a 
family to look after; he’s got young children  children who 
will be going to university down the road no doubt. And 
$125,000, how far does that go? 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that it would have 
been a lot fairer and a lot more logical, rather than just totally 
changing and bringing forward the SGI insurance program and 
bringing in this no-fault insurance coverage, it would have been 
appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to maybe have set some limits 
and some guidelines so that the courts couldn’t just give out 
outlandish and outrageous settlements in the millions of dollars, 
which as we see here, most people aren’t really looking for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it would have been appropriate and 
I think that still can be done. I think if this government really 
had the will they could reach the need of the Markwart family 
and many families across this province who have run into 
similar circumstances. And they could meet that need, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, by striking out that $125,000 maximum and 
setting what would be a reasonable limit based on years of 
working experience or the lifetime that a person may have to 
rely on insurance for their livelihood up to a maximum. And 
who knows whether that’s a million dollars or whatever, but it’s 
a far cry from the 20 or the 24 million that we’ve been seeing 
handed out. 
 
And that’s why I believe the government brought it in. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they didn’t realize that the 
amount they set is penalizing individuals for circumstances that 
they had no control over. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it appropriate to move an 
amendment to this motion. And I would like to move, seconded 
by the member from Cannington: 
 

That all the words following Assembly be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
strongly urge the government to reverse its decision to take 
away the rights and freedoms of individuals through the 
personal injury protection plan, and further recognize the 
hardship this policy has caused to many Saskatchewan 
families and seniors, and urge the government to take 
immediate steps to address this problem while keeping 
increased rehabilitation services for those in need. 

 
I so move. 
 



1722  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is one of those situations where an “I told 
you so” is appropriate. We informed the minister responsible 
for SGI, at the time the member from Athabasca . . . or 
Cumberland, the member from Cumberland, that all of the 
problems that my colleague talked about would come forward if 
this particular piece of legislation was implemented. It was 
implemented, and now we see the problems arising from that 
piece of legislation. 
 
The minister for SGI talked in Crown Corporations about a 
saving of 70-plus million dollars that was realized by the SGI 
auto fund because of the implementation of the no-fault 
insurance Act. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, indeed there has been 
a significant profit generated for SGI based on this particular 
no-fault insurance. 
 
But when you look at where the funds come from, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s only one place where that money was derived from, and 
that is out of the pockets, out of the bank accounts, out of the 
livelihoods of those that have been victims of accidents, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That is the only place where these savings that 
SGI claims to have made has come from. It has come from the 
backs of the victims, the innocent victims of motor vehicle 
accidents, Mr. Speaker, because they have limited very, very 
severely, the amount of compensation that is available to SGI 
accident insurance claimants. 
 
The minister for SGI says, well in the main this has been 
because of whiplash. It was victims of whiplash that were 
demanding these insurance claims and were receiving the 
compensations. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SGI has a large 
number of medical doctors on staff that determine whether or 
not an individual has been injured and if so, what their claim 
should be. When SGI medical staff and the insurance 
claimant’s medical advisers disagree, that’s when we go to the 
court system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the court system, a judge or a group of peers decides whether 
or not there is any validity to the claim, whether or not the claim 
for whiplash or any other injury is valid. If it’s valid, then an 
award is made based on the insurance, based on the life 
expectancy and the income expectancies of that particular 
individual. 
 
Under no-fault insurance, all of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 
been erased, is no longer available. The claimants against SGI 
no longer have a right to go before a judge and ask for 
arbitration or mediation on their behalf under the legal system. 
They no longer have a right to ask their peers to judge whether 
or not their claim is indeed valid. That has been totally negated 
by the government opposite and its members. 
 
The head injury association, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was in favour 
of changes to the SGI insurance Act. They wanted more 
compensation payable to victims who suffered soft tissue head 
injuries, who were, in some cases, totally incapacitated because 
of these injuries and received very little, in some cases, in way 
of compensation from SGI. 
 
Now I agreed that when the driver was the victim, they bore in  

some cases some responsibility for the accident. In those cases 
at times they received very little compensation. That needed to 
be increased  their protections, their support needed to be 
increased. But even the head injury association, Mr. Speaker, 
believed that it was wrong to deny the claimants for SGI their 
right to appear in the court system before a judge to make a 
claim. They agreed that every claimant against SGI should have 
the opportunity to go before the court, before a judge for a fair 
and equitable hearing. And that has been denied them under 
this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Ken Noble, a Regina lawyer who dealt with a large number of 
these cases, forecast that when these changes were made, any 
savings realized by SGI would be from the victims of motor 
vehicle accidents. And that is indeed the case as we see from 
the Markwart situation, as we see from a number of other 
circumstances across this province. 
 
There are a number of areas where there are improvements, Mr. 
Speaker, and we support those areas of improvement. But at the 
end of the day, we as citizens of Saskatchewan, we as citizens 
of Canada, ultimately have a right to appeal to a higher 
authority, to the courts for a determination as to whether or not 
any institution, any company, any individual is treating us in the 
proper and fair manner as outlined under the law. 
 
Unfortunately this government, as in a number of other cases, 
has chosen to erase the law in their favour. It goes back to 
similar matters where they deem to have performed acts before 
a date when the law said they had to do it. They didn’t write up 
the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) . . . or change the 
GRIP contracts on March 18, Mr. Speaker. They deemed to 
have done it on March 15, which was indeed not the case 
because the contract date closed on March 15. 
 
It’s been the record and the history of this government to 
change the law to suit their purposes. 
 
Another example with the judges situation. The Minister of 
Justice put forward a tribunal, a committee to set judges’ wages 
by arbitration, by mutual agreement between the government 
and the judges for binding results. When the committee came 
down with their results, the Minister of Justice didn’t agree with 
it, so he broke the law and then he changed it to put forward 
what he wanted in the first place. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this is another example in this 
particular circumstance where the government rewrites the 
laws, negates the rights of Saskatchewan citizens to serve their 
own purposes, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that’s wrong. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion by my 
colleague from Moosomin to return those rights and those 
freedoms which Canadians have traditionally enjoyed, which 
they should continue to enjoy, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I will 
be supporting this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t really 
intending on getting into this debate, but after hearing the  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

amendment from the member from Moosomin, I believe it’s 
misleading and I just have to get into it. 
 
For one thing, the one thing that . . . The member seems to have 
clouded the issue of income. Income, if you . . . people working 
at the time of the accident receive up to 90 per cent of their 
annual net income on a maximum gross pay of $50,000. This 
protects the vast majority of Saskatchewan wage-earners. 
 
And the thing is, that under the law that we have passed, you 
may sue for over 50 per cent. So you are allowed to . . . If 
someone feels that their income is more that 50 per cent, you 
are allowed to sue for that. People who earn more than 50,000 a 
year and are not responsible for the accident may make a claim 
against the responsible driver for economic loss over 50 per 
cent of yearly gross pay. Higher wage-earners therefore are 
protected by their ability to sue. 
 
For seniors, income replacement benefits continue for life 
without reduction at retirement. So there you are. 
 
Also, the member from Moosomin did not mention death 
benefits for instance. Death benefits are paid to the surviving 
spouse of a victim killed in an automobile accident. The 
surviving spouse receives an income replacement benefit until 
he or she dies. The benefit is 50 per cent of the net income the 
victim was earning. The spouse could choose to receive a lump 
sum payment instead of the biweekly payments. I don’t think I 
know of a plan anywhere in North America that is fairer than 
that. 
 
How about students, students that may have a potential for 
earning but aren’t working? Students receive a maximum of 
13,000 for each school year not completed. If the disability 
continues past completion of school, the income replacement 
benefits commence. Where do you, in North America, know of 
a plan like that? 
 
I’d like to see the members opposite give me an example of a 
plan that covers seniors; it covers the spouse, in death; it covers 
people not working, like seniors, for instance. 
 
How about farmers and other self-employed people? Farmers 
and other self-employed people receive an income replacement 
benefit based on the higher of their income or the cost of 
replacement labour. So I don’t think that you could be much 
fairer than this. And I certainly do not support the amendment 
that was proposed by the member from Moosomin. I just cannot 
understand why anybody would be against this plan. 
 
We studied every angle of it in our committee, in our 
employment on the economy committee. The one thing that sort 
of did upset me at first was when you thought of people earning 
over 50,000 and not being able to sue. But we amended that and 
made that provision so that people earning over 50,000 could 
sue. 
 
And also, for instance, the thing that got me was the 
rehabilitation. The rehabilitation just goes on and on in this 
plan. Rehabilitation and medical expenses are paid to a 
maximum of $500,000, a million dollars, including a personal  

home care expenses to a maximum of $550 per week. What 
other plan in North America does that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I love, Mr. Speaker, being in between  like a 
sandwich  being in between two hecklers, one on my side and 
one on their side. Anyway, the thing is that I don’t believe in 
this amendment. It’s misleading. 
 
Here are some of the hard facts. Why don’t the Tories listen up 
to some of the hard facts? More than 80 per cent of the PIPP 
claims were for soft-tissue injuries, the most common of these 
being whiplash. That was one of the problems. In recent years 
court awards for pain and suffering have sky-rocketed. 
 
(1530) 
 
So you have a few people receiving a great deal of money but 
what about the rest of the people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
that’s right. And a lot of money going to legal fees. SGI needed 
a plan to curb these costs without raising vehicle insurance 
rates. PIPP, with its focus on directing money towards 
rehabilitation, provided the solution. 
 
And look at what we are doing with brain injury and with 
soft-tissue injury in this province. The opposition members 
should be proud of the work that’s being done in that area 
instead of making amendments that are misleading and don’t 
have all of the facts in them. 
 
So I will be voting against this amendment. Thank you for your 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I support the 
motion made by the member from Moosomin and would like to 
bring out some information from a particular family that’s 
involved in this situation. And I think most of us are fortunate 
enough not having been involved in serious accidents and so 
sometimes it’s easy for us to go ahead and speak about what’s 
happened. But I think we need to hear specifically from some of 
the individuals that have had to suffer, and here is a situation: 
 

. . . Friday, January 13, 1995, we were hit by an 
ambulance. The accident killed our daughter at the scene 
and seriously injured my husband. The driver of the 
ambulance is to stand trial for this accident. No Fault 
Insurance came into effect . . . January 1, 1995. For the 
past 11 months we have tried to understand the effects of 
this new insurance and what we (have tried to) understand 
is that we are paying out of our pockets for expenses 
caused by this ambulance driver, through no fault of our 
own. I finally wrote a letter to Premier Romanow on 
August 30, 1995, we have yet to meet with him or one 
member of the legislative assembly regarding this new Act 
since the letter was sent. My husband has been employed 
as a firefighter for 17 years. He has built up sick leave of 
109 days during that time. My husband was off work for 
7½ months and only went back to work because he had 
only nine days of sick leave left. He wants to buy back his 
sick time from the City of Regina, the cost to buy back his  



1724  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

sick time and the 5 weeks (from the City of Regina) 
vacation time he . . . used to recover is $29,649, SGI paid 
him $18,000 which is 90% of his gross income after 
income tax . . . (is) deducted. SGI’s attitude is “why do you 
think you deserve this” when we asked them to cover the 
difference. We don’t think we deserve it we think we are 
entitled to it. This accident was not our fault. My husband 
is now to go to therapy 4 days a week plus work all of his 
shifts while physically trying to recover from this accident. 
Work alone wears him out, let alone the therapy. The 
consequence is he has to put his recovery in slow motion, 
by cutting down his therapy, so that we can live. . . . (Why 
should this happen) What should happen if he . . . (gets) 
seriously ill next week, he has only 9 days sick leave left. 
Was this accident our fault  no. Liability insurance from 
the ambulance company should cover this but this new act 
took this away. . . . (This) new No Fault act does not cover 
any of the jobs my husband performed around the house. 
They do cover home care and housekeeping. The adjuster 
told us that I could be paid to look after my husband, I 
declined. Now because I wrote to the Premier they feel 
obligated to pay us for the time I looked after him. People 
of Saskatchewan we are paying a high price for this 
insurance. We are not getting what we paid for. We must 
stand up for our constitutional rights and good business 
policies. When you purchase house insurance you get 
coverage to suit your budget and needs. We are forced to 
purchase auto insurance from SGI . . . 

 
The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. The members will be 
aware that the rules of the House prohibit reading of speeches 
and that traditionally that has been provided a great deal of 
latitude. However, reading direct quotes has been much 
different.  
 
And I have been listening very carefully. The member is 
engaged in a very extensive quote from a letter, I believe, and I 
would ask him to simply . . . if he needs two or three more 
sentences that he wants to quote directly . . . but then to get on 
to other items and to move off his direct quote. It’s been very 
extensive, and I’ll ask the member for Rosthern to move on. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, rather than a direct quote, I consider 
this reading into the record this particular letter that deals with 
this issue. 
 

The following is an outline of the inadequacies we have 
encountered from this new SGI auto plan: 
 
 7 day waiting period to qualify for benefits. During this 
time my husband was in hospital in excruciating pain, and 
we had to make funeral arrangements from the hospital. I 
only wish my daughter had another 7 days. 

 
Second concern: 
 
 no compensation for pain and suffering . . . (that’s all 
right) but . . . no compensation for sick leave, (however no 
compensation for) vacation time, pension benefit lost 
through no fault of our own. 

 

Third: 
 
 no compensation for the duties my husband performed 
around the house: the car is sitting without a motor, yard 
work, sinks need to be fixed, carpentry work, electrical 
work . . . 

 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I have asked the . . . 
I’ve provided for the hon. member some latitude to take another 
two or three sentences to finish what he feels is necessary, and 
you’ve gone beyond that. So I’ll ask the member to move 
beyond the direct reading of the document he has. Certainly 
welcome to make reference to it, but not direct quote. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  A point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that, while my colleague the 
member from Rosthern is reading this letter, the motion brought 
forward by the government was a motion commending them for 
what no-fault insurance is doing. We have brought an 
amendment to this motion, indicating that there are people in 
this province being hurt. 
 
The letter here is relating some very specific circumstances. 
And what it’s doing, Mr. Speaker, it’s bringing out 
circumstances that really indicate the personal suffering of 
individuals as a result of this piece of legislation. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate that 
. . . and it certainly can really enter into the debate of the 
motion, of what the motion reads. It answers all those 
questions. And I feel it would be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to 
allow that to be brought into the debate today. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order, and I will accept it not as a challenge to the ruling of the 
Chair but as a point of order. 
 
It is the practice of this House to be lenient in the reading of 
speeches but to be much more stringent in the direct quoting of 
documents. I point out to all members that that in no way 
prohibits members from making frequent reference to that, but 
it clearly does prohibit the extensive, direct quoting from a 
document of any sort. 
 
I have . . . Order, order. And I have listened to the point of 
order. I find that the point of order is not well taken in this 
circumstance. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay. Concluding in the gist of this 
particular letter, it goes on to discuss the shortfalls that have 
taken place, the concerns and the hardships that the family are 
facing, and the very serious concerns that they have, that when 
that is all taken in consideration, they are left without the ability 
to sue for the amount that they feel is justified in this particular 
situation. And having gone through that, this family 
understands better than any of the rest of us what the effects of 
this no-fault insurance is. 
 



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

And I think when we look at the letter and the information that I 
was allowed to read, it indicates that the suffering and the 
shortfall that they have had as a family is much greater than 
anything that this particular insurance policy allowed them to 
do. And for that reason I support the motion from the member 
of Moosomin. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to let you know at the outset that I support the motion. I 
do not support the amendment. 
 
The amendment before us is simply . . . if the amendment were 
adopted and if the government were to act on the amendment, 
we would go back to the days that we had prior to the 
introduction of the personal injury protection plan and  in my 
view and I think in the view of most people in Saskatchewan  
would get us back to a system that is much inferior to the 
system we have now for the great majority of Saskatchewan 
people and would have a system in which the cost would 
sky-rocket. 
 
That by itself, that the cost would sky-rocket and therefore you 
had greater charges for Saskatchewan people, is not something 
that would be of great concern to the Conservatives, given their 
sort of record of financial management in Saskatchewan. But 
that is something that does concern us and is something that 
concerns SGI. 
 
And one of the reasons that the personal injury protection plan 
was introduced and also, I might add, is one of the reasons that 
I think the province of Manitoba  I stand to be corrected?  
the province of Manitoba is one of the jurisdictions that has 
also introduced a plan of this nature . . . now the reason that the 
plan was introduced, because we were faced with sky-rocketing 
costs in the insurance sector. And if I can quote, Mr. Speaker, 
from a newsletter about SGI’s personal injury protection plan 
dated March 1996, and I quote: 
 

For the past few years court awards for pain and suffering 
for people injured in vehicle collisions have sky-rocketed 
(sky-rocketed). Injury claims have increased an average of 
12 per cent per year during the past decade. 
 

Now I don’t know if accidents themselves, if accidents 
themselves increased by 12 per cent a year. I rather doubt that. 
But it’s interesting to note that court awards for pain and 
suffering for people injured in vehicle collisions have 
sky-rocketed. And those costs, injury claims, have gone up. 
 
And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, you have to go very far outside 
of this Assembly to find someone who favoured the old system 
because it was kind of like the lottery system; boy, if you struck 
it, you could really strike it rich. You know there’s a lucky few 
that benefit from that system. But that was one of the reasons 
that the system had to be changed. The majority of people were 
being obligated to pay ever-increasing insurance cost, 
ever-increasing insurance cost for a system that was, in the view 
of many, an inferior system. 
 
Now if the Progressive Conservatives are saying by their 
amendment, and if the Liberals are saying by what is rather an  

unclear statement in this regard, a very unclear statement, that 
they want to see a return to sky-rocketing costs and to a system 
that is much more expensive for Saskatchewan drivers . . . 
that’s how I read the amendment before us. That’s how I read it. 
 
Now the other reason that the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance went to the personal injury protection plan system 
and why it was approved by the Legislative Assembly was that 
the system we have provides far superior benefits, far superior 
benefits for most of the people or virtually all of those  not 
everyone, not everyone  but virtually all of those that are 
injured and need to apply to SGI for insurance protection. 
 
Now I heard the member for Rosthern say, well I have an 
individual here. And I heard the member from Moosomin say, I 
have an individual here. And these individuals weren’t helped 
the way we would like to see them helped by the system. The 
old system might have helped them more. 
 
So because we have these concerns about these few individuals, 
we should change the whole system that we have — a system 
that again reduces sky-rocketing costs for motorists and those 
that need to be insured in Saskatchewan. No small issue, I 
might say these days, to do something that contains costs for the 
vast majority but also provides far superior benefits for those 
that are injured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous speakers have talked about how the 
plan provides improved benefits in the way of income 
replacement for the vast majority. And there is an opportunity 
for those that don’t feel that income replacement is sufficient to 
be able to go to the courts to seek further redress that way. But 
certainly there’s an agreement that the rehabilitation services 
are much, much improved under this system than they were 
under the old system. 
 
Now you might say, and the Conservatives would say, well we 
should have the old system and pour money into it. So that it’s 
not enough to have sky-rocketing costs, if I understand their 
amendment, you should have those costs sky-rocket even 
further. Because again, being Conservatives, money is not 
something that they’re particularly concerned about. I don’t 
know what it is, it’s like their second nature that if it’s money, 
let’s not worry about it. I don’t know, I guess I’ll never 
understand the Conservative mind, that you can be in charge of 
public administration and not concern yourself about money. 
But that’s the Conservative approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for me, when I look at the two systems, I have to 
ask myself which system is the most comprehensive  most 
comprehensive. And there is no doubt, there is no doubt that the 
most comprehensive system . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now the Speaker’s 
having a little difficulty hearing the hon. member for Regina 
Victoria who isn’t seated all that far away. 
 
Order, order! And I’ve noticed a bit of a phenomenon here 
where members speak and then can feel compelled to continue 
to speak after they’ve taken their seats. 
 



1726  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

I’ll ask all members of the House, on both sides of the House, 
I’ll ask all members to cooperate with the rules of the House 
and allow the hon. member for . . . order . . . and allow the hon. 
member for Regina Victoria to make his remarks. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I look first of 
all at comprehensiveness. And the Tories are proceeding with 
their motion and in their statements in its regard now and as 
they did originally when this matter was before the House, on 
some silly notion, silly notion that if you didn’t like what SGI 
was going to get you, why you could just go off to court and get 
what was coming to you. You could get your proper due. 
 
Well this is the silliest thing I’ve ever heard and certainly isn’t 
borne out by the practice. The majority of people didn’t end up 
going to court. They had no notion how to take an insurance 
company to go to court . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’s 
your idea that everybody should be able to go to court. This 
wasn’t the practice . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask the 
hon. members on both sides of the House to come to order. 
There will be plenty of opportunity to enter into debate and to 
put your remarks on the record. Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  No, the very idea that everybody in 
Saskatchewan who didn’t like what they were getting from SGI 
would then just simply go off to court and to sue, and to sue to 
get what they thought they were entitled to, might be the kind of 
notion that drives the Tories. After all, these are the people that 
always talk about rights and freedoms in a most ethereal way, if 
never in a practical way. 
 
But you know when you look at it, the system that we have is 
far more comprehensive because everybody  everybody  is 
entitled, if they’ve been injured, to income replacement. 
They’re entitled to effective rehabilitation services and other 
benefits, so it’s far more comprehensive than the courts could 
ever be. Not everybody went to court. Not everyone is in a 
position to go to court. It’s just not practical. 
 
But then again, there’s that word, practical. That’s not 
something that . . . I don’t know. There seems to be as wide 
divergence between the Tories and the word practical, as there 
is between Tories and the words, financial responsibility. 
 
Finally I have to look at what’s most effective. Now when you 
look at the benefits that are provided under the present program, 
and having listened to some of the previous speakers I think 
most people would agree, that you have a far superior program 
when it comes to income replacement. You have a far superior 
program when it comes to rehabilitation services. And you have 
a far more effective program when it comes to a number of 
other benefits. 
 
But the courts, the courts, the courts were only there . . . who 
could successfully prove, successfully prove that they had pain 
and suffering related to some injury  all very unclear in many 
cases  but nevertheless were able to convince the courts. Now  

it seems to me that this program that we have is far more 
effective than the courts have ever been, in terms of ensuring 
that the money was getting to those people that needed it to be 
able to deal with the questions of income replacement and to 
ensure that there were effective rehabilitation services. 
 
The courts didn’t concern themselves with those issues very 
greatly. The courts concerned themselves with other issues. And 
I might say, in a way that cannot be supported by the public of 
Saskatchewan, because it’s seen to be that it resulted in 
increasing costs  sky-rocketing costs are the words that have 
been used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Tories, and I think their major 
problem in this is that this is a program, the personal injury 
protection plan, that has been organized by a public agency for 
the public. These people are basically opposed to any public 
involvement in anything. These are the people that if you ask 
them they would say, well we’re opposed to public auto 
insurance. We oppose the idea that the public, or that 
government, can somehow be involved in providing the service 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They would take the position that no, we’re in favour of private 
auto insurance. You ought to be able to get just whatever you 
can get out there from whatever company is available. Doesn’t 
matter if it’s higher, but those . . . or higher costs. That’s what 
you get when you have the freedom and a choice. 
 
But that’s the same thing that’s happened in terms of injury 
protection in Saskatchewan. Again you had the freedom and 
you had the choice, but many people weren’t being helped by 
that. Some were being helped by that and costs to the majority 
were increasing rapidly. But I think, in the main, these people 
opposed this because they see it as public involvement in an 
area that they think that the government and the public ought 
not to be involved in. It’s strictly a private matter. 
 
And this is a very, very clear divide on ideological grounds 
between them and between us. We stand for government being 
used in an effective way to help the majority of people, in this 
case with lower cost automobile insurance and an effective 
program for personal injury protection. They say no, it should 
be left up to the individual. And you sink and swim on that 
basis. 
 
Well that is the difference between us. In this case, I think the 
facts are on our side. We provide a vastly superior program. It’s 
done in a way that’s able to contain and to reduce the costs for 
SGI. They say we ought to go the other way. Well I stand 
four-square behind the original motion. I think the amendment 
makes no sense, but I’m not surprised, seeing where it’s coming 
from. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:53 p.m. until 4:03 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

Yeas  4 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner   
 

Nays  29 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Pringle Koenker Trew 
Bradley Teichrob Cline 
Serby Stanger Hamilton 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Ward Sonntag 
Flavel Murrell Thomson 
Aldridge Belanger Bjornerud 
Julé Gantefoer  
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak a 
bit on the motion in reference to the no-fault insurance. The 
portions of the Act is very confusing to the average citizen out 
there, and we really want to look at the Act in terms of its 
compassion. And multiple injuries is one of the big problems 
that we have with the Act, and that doesn’t address that in terms 
of the specifics of this particular Bill. 
 
As Liberals, we feel that we have to be certainly responsible to 
the citizens of Saskatchewan. And the whole process we’re 
talking about here really has to do with responsible government. 
We don’t want to see a government that’s in debt on every 
corner that we turn. We don’t want to see a government that is 
sacrificing the future of this province and its residents and its 
people for the next 10, 15, 20 years. 
 
So part of the thing about being a responsible government, Mr. 
Speaker, in reference to this particular Bill, is we have to ensure 
that many of our Crowns and many of our government-owned 
institutions, if they’re government owned and continue to 
remain government owned, must be viable in this free market 
economy. So therefore, being a responsible government, we 
have to ensure that we run certain organizations and certain 
departments on an even-keel basis. 
 
When you talk about the Act itself, the Liberals believe that 
responsibility lies with every single member of this particular 
House and certainly with every member of the Saskatchewan 
community. 
 
So responsible government is not running up debt after debt 
after debt in every Crown corporation that we have. We have to 
make sure that these Crowns and these agencies remain viable 
and certainly vibrant because it is our responsibility to insure 
people that are working within these organizations are 
employed on a regular basis. So when we talk about responsible 
government, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on about 
the number of portions of this Act that fits the financial 
guidelines that we should have as government. And we know 
that we can’t continue throwing things out the window in terms 
of trying to be all and do all for every single person in the 
province. We all have our horror story when it comes to 
different ways that people haven’t been insured properly, and  

there’s 10 to 10,000 different examples of that. 
 
However, when the Liberals believe that we have to be a 
responsible government, and we have to ensure that many of 
these organizations do remain viable and competitive, we also 
must have compassionate policies, Mr. Speaker. We’re not in 
this business of governing for the simple sake of creating 
dollars. By the same token, we’re not in this business of 
governing for giving away dollars. 
 
We have to understand that certain families  and we talked 
about a family today  really have a justifiable case in which 
the government has to be compassionate. And the whole 
process we speak about again goes back to the simple 
philosophy that the Liberal Party has in reference to this 
particular Bill: we have to be a responsible government with 
compassionate policies. 
 
Now these policies won’t be compassionate if we don’t take 
into consideration many of the horror stories we hear from the 
various members of the third party and certainly some of the 
problems that many of the other members opposite may have 
heard throughout their terms as elected officials. Again we look 
at the whole process of governance and the whole process of 
compassionate policies, we can’t forget the people that we 
serve, Mr. Speaker. These people that are out there, when they 
come to the insurance company, they get insurance. They 
realize what they’re getting, and they pay properly and duly for 
that insurance. Then they should be covered by that insurance. 
 
When there’s a grey area, we all have to go back and 
re-examine that grey area to ensure that this thing does not 
basically compromise the two positions I spoke about, which 
again is responsible government and compassionate policies. 
 
If we want to clear the debt of this province and if you want to 
make sure we have enough money for education, for SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and for 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
for northern Saskatchewan, what I speak about, then we have to 
make sure that we have at least viable enterprises and certainly 
Crown corporations that are making . . . if not making money 
then at least remaining competitive and viable. Not only do we 
do that for the rest of the areas we speak about, but we certainly 
do that so we can reduce the debt overall. 
 
So again I cannot stress to you the degree of emphasis that 
we’re certainly placing and I’m certainly placing on being a 
responsible government. Irresponsible governments cannot 
continue to operate, not in Saskatchewan, not anywhere in the 
world. We have to watch every bloody penny that we certainly 
get. 
 
So I ask the members today, is this being responsible 
government? And I would say to a certain extent that we really 
do think that this is part of the solution to being a responsible 
government. I guess in reference to that, you’re talking about 
the compassionate policies. We really have to examine every 
single aspect of this particular Act, and the multiple injury 
portion of this Act really does have some concerns. 
 



1728  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Okay, and in closing, Mr. Speaker, we sincerely see that there is 
some value in being a responsible government. We sincerely 
see that there is value in having compassionate policies because 
we can’t forget about the Markwarts. And we can’t forget about 
our responsibility to the taxpayers, and we certainly can’t forget 
the mistakes made of irresponsible government, so we continue 
making these mistakes over and over again. So in reference to 
that, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 

Motion No. 11  Unfair Crown Construction 
Tendering Policy 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased once again to discuss the government’s unfair Crown 
construction tendering policy or their so-called fair wage policy 
brought in by the members opposite, the government. 
 
It’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker; the NDP forced through the 
unnecessary labour legislation over the past few years since 
they have to gain back some political support of the unions of 
this province. It doesn’t matter that the legislation wasn’t 
needed or that it would kill jobs or that it didn’t make sense. 
The NDP simply didn’t care about that. All they cared about 
was scoring a few political points with the unions of this 
province. 
 
The same is true for the leaked memo prepared by the 
Department of Economic Development, the department that we 
pay experts for advice on very important economic policies and 
ideas. And what do the NDP government do with the memo 
prepared by their own government professionals? Well they 
took one look at it, and they decided against what was right for 
Saskatchewan people, against what would create jobs in this 
province, against the advice of their own department, and did 
what was good for them politically, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
problem with this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s pretty sad that a leaked memo has to surface several months 
later proving that we were right all along, that our concerns our 
caucus and the business community brought up were the same 
concerns the Economic Development officials had in the 
minister’s own department. 
 
(1615) 
 
From the beginning, PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus, 
along with the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business, the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association, and other 
organizations were against the NDP’s union-preference Crown 
tendering policy. We took this position for a number of reasons, 
Mr. Speaker. The policy is unfair to non-union contractors and 
non-union construction employees. It significantly increases the 
cost to taxpayers, in some cases by up to 30 per cent. And it 
forces non-union contractors to subsidize union contractors 
through additional fees and the like. 
 
The union tendering policy, Mr. Speaker, brought in by this 
government, is a policy that requires the government . . . or  

pardon me, that requires contractors bidding on Crown tenders 
must be prepared to hire 75 per cent unionized members if they 
get the contract, even if it means laying off existing employees. 
The other 25 per cent of employees can be non-union, but they 
must get union wages and benefits, and they must pay union 
dues. 
 
And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker. We had a conversation not 
long ago with a contractor; I believe it was in the Yorkton area. 
And this gentleman was a very relatively small contractor; it 
was himself and four other employees. Those four employees 
happened to be his sons, however, Mr. Speaker. And under this 
policy, he would have to lay off  what would it be? three 
out of five of his . . . or pardon me, four out of five of his sons 
in order to qualify for a project under this policy. And on top of 
that, Mr. Speaker, the remaining members of his family would 
have to pay union dues even though they don’t belong to a 
union, or a union under this policy. 
 
So we think that, Mr. Speaker, this is a ridiculous situation 
when you have contractors in this province forced to hire union 
employees even when they are a non-union company. Our 
objections are, because it’s discriminatory. Only 20 per cent of 
Saskatchewan construction employees are unionized in 
Saskatchewan currently, and yet they are guaranteed 75 per cent 
of the jobs under this policy. Non-union employees are 
prohibited from applying for these non-union designated jobs. 
 
We have challenged, Mr. Speaker, we have challenged this 
policy under the Human Rights Code. If the government 
prohibited, as an example, Mr. Speaker, if the government 
prohibited certain people from applying for jobs based on sex 
or race or religion, that would clearly be an illegal 
discrimination. Yet they are discriminating against those who 
don’t belong to a union. I don’t see the difference, Mr. Speaker, 
and I don’t think the contractors of this province see the 
difference either. 
 
We believe it’s also unfair to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
because they’re being forced to pay union wages and benefits 
that will force labour costs up. That will result in much higher 
costs for Crown construction projects And we’ve seen evidence 
of that, Mr. Speaker, coming forward on a fairly regular basis 
now. And the minister responds by saying it’s only $9 million 
or 10 or 15, whatever it is, of contracts that have been let out, 
and so what if it’s only 15 to 30 per cent higher on that number. 
Still the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, it’s a higher cost for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
In British Columbia, independent studies have shown that a 
similar policy has driven construction costs up by that exact 30 
per cent, or in Saskatchewan’s case the potential for a hundred 
million dollars of additional costs. This will result in higher 
taxes, higher utility costs for the people of Saskatchewan, the 
taxpayers of this province. It’s top down union organizing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If a non-union contractor is forced to hire 75 per cent unionized 
employees, a certification vote is almost sure to follow, Mr. 
Speaker. This leaves contractors in an unacceptable position of 
being forced to choose between bidding on government  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

contracts and being forced to unionize, or not bidding and 
forgoing a lot of potential income from the project that they are 
considering. 
 
It also results, Mr. Speaker, in something that we think is very 
wrong as well, and that’s a union slush fund. And I don’t think 
you can term it as anything else because every employee . . . or 
employer, pardon me, every employer must pay 21 cents an 
hour into a union slush fund whose stated purpose is for more 
union organizing. This fund will give the firms the benefit of an 
unfair competitive advantage over non-union firms in this 
province. 
 
We think it’s also unfair to rural areas in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. The union hiring halls and most of the unionized 
employers are from Saskatoon and Regina. So local 
non-unionized workers will lose jobs to unionized workers 
from Saskatoon and Regina. Clearly this was a political pay-off 
to non-union . . . to buy union support just before an election, 
Mr. Speaker. And we think that it is very, very wrong for a 
government to come in with a policy like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our position with respect to government tendering 
is really quite simple. All government tenders should go to the 
lowest qualified bidder, union or non-union, with no hiring 
quotas. This is the only fair policy for employers, employees, 
and, most importantly, for the taxpayers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now we’ve taken this particular position for a number of 
reasons. The policy is unfair to non-union contractors and 
non-union construction employees. It significantly increases 
costs and forces non-union employers to subsidize union 
contractors through additional fees and the like. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what did the NDP say when we brought these 
concerns forward? They say their union-preference tendering 
policy, otherwise known as the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement, was not a pro-union policy, that it was a means to a 
fair tendering policy and there’d be no increased costs to the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
Well last week we all found out that that simply is not the case, 
Mr. Speaker. Last week we found out that the NDP was 
misleading the public on this issue from the very start, and that 
we were right. A leaked memo from the Department of 
Economic Development to the minister, dated November 19, 
1994, revealed the department recommended against 
implementing this policy. Their own minister . . . his 
department recommended against implementing this policy. 
 
In fact the memo described the CCTA as a union preference 
policy instead of the fair-wage policy that the government tried 
to promote, and that union contractors would receive 15 to 20 
per cent more work than before. It further states that the CCTA 
could increase Crown tenders by 30 per cent, the cost. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, the PC caucus and the business 
community can say to the government, I told you so. 
 
In addition to the information that the government has been  

putting forward in order to sell the union unfair policy, the 
memo also states that the bureaucrats were instructed to prepare 
an article for the NDP’s party magazine, The Commonwealth. 
 
You can only wonder, Mr. Speaker, what would be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Who said that? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  It said it in the memo. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Who? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  It said it . . . the Department of Economic 
Development. The memo that was leaked, the memo that came 
from Treasury Board. The memo that came from Treasury 
Board. Your own Treasury Board is pretty . . . it’s leaky and 
you don’t even realize it. 
 
The memo also called for a letter-to-the-editor campaign and 
approaching a few employers to contract specific business and 
political reporters for pre-announcement positive stories on 
similar union preference agreements. 
 
As one editorialist put it: 
 

Getting business to manipulate reporters, writing phoney 
letters to the editor, civil servants writing to The 
Commonwealth  our hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars at 
work. It makes the last 14 per cent SaskPower hike seem 
all that much more worthwhile. 

 
This issue, I don’t think is over, Mr. Speaker. Currently a 
so-called internal review of the policy is taking place. In other 
words, the public will hear about as many facts about the CCTA 
as we did about the memo sent to the minister two years ago  
nothing. 
 
We have called on the NDP to scrap this policy all together. We 
have also called the NDP to conduct an independent review of 
this policy. It’s the very least, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP can 
do. Unfortunately I doubt the taxpayers will get even that 
consideration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move this 
motion, seconded by the member from Cannington. And the 
motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement, CCTA, which 
demonstrates unfair preference for unionized contractors 
and which moves government away from the principle of 
contracting with the lowest qualified bidder, hence driving 
up the costs of government borne by taxpayers; and further 
demand the government immediately cancel this agreement 
and instead implement a policy in which all government 
construction tendering projects are awarded to the lowest 
qualified contractor, whether union or non-union. 

 
So moved, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1730  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I support the 
motion as presented by my leader and my colleague from 
Kindersley. 
 
I believe the CCTA is nothing more than a political policy, Mr. 
Speaker, not a financial policy. It’s simply a means by which 
this government is using to transfer taxpayers’ dollars into the 
union coffers, which in turn will transfer those dollars from the 
union funds back into the NDP party. It’s just a circular motion, 
Mr. Speaker, for the NDP and the government to gain more 
access to the taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s what the object of this is  and it 
certainly seems to be what it is  I’m not sure why the 
governments just don’t directly transfer the funds they want to 
the unions so that they can turn around and give them back to 
the political party. Why do they have to funnel it through a 
corporation, a construction company? Because the construction 
company has to pay 21 cents an hour for every employee they 
have employed on the construction site to the unions. They’re 
going to pass that money on, claim it from the government at 
the construction site, turn around, funnel it through their 
accounts to the union. 
 
Why doesn’t the government just simply pay the union 21 cents 
an hour directly for every union job in the Crown corporations? 
It would certainly be a lot simpler and a lot less bookwork. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it would also be clearly evident then exactly what 
is happening, and that the government  this particular 
government  is directly funding the union operations with 
that 21 cents. And they want to try and confuse the issue a little 
bit, cover it up, dirty the tracks. It’s like walking across sand, 
Mr. Speaker, and the Premier is behind there with the little 
bush, brushing out the tracks, trying to cover up what he’s 
doing. Well, Mr. Speaker, every sidewinder leaves a track, and 
that track is there to be seen by the public, and they have seen 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a question of priorities, Mr. Speaker, as to what happens 
with the taxpayers’ dollars in this particular province. This 
government wants to provide assistance to their union 
membership to gain the vote from them. They would rather pay 
out roughly 30 per cent extra on those construction jobs, instead 
of providing it . . . the member from Swift Current brings a 
motion to this House today, when a nursing home in his own 
constituency is closing down. 
 
Money that the government is spending on the Crown tendering 
policy could be used to keep that open, Mr. Speaker, to provide 
homes, shelter, support, and medical care for those 70 people. 
But what do they want to do with the money, Mr. Speaker? 
They want to spend it on their union buddies, who will in turn 
pay back some of that to party coffers, to simply allow them to 
be re-elected again at some future point. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, there is a stench to this whole Crown 
tendering Act. And that stench can be again clearly seen in the 
fact that in the Minister of Economic Development’s own 
analysis, his department’s analysis, it requests that a piece of 
propaganda  a piece of propaganda — be written specifically 
for The Commonwealth, the NDP’s party organ. 
 

(1630) 
 
The particular piece of propaganda was not to be distributed to 
the Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix or the Oxbow Herald or 
the P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald or any other newspaper or 
media outlet in the province. It was simply for the NDP’s party 
mouthpiece, The Commonwealth. And I believe that is an 
absolute disgrace, Mr. Speaker, and an absolute waste of 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
What does the CCTA call for? It calls for all construction 
companies who tender on Crown projects of more than $50,000 
to fire the majority of their employees and hire union members. 
Now if there’s a Crown construction project in my own 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, there are very few union members 
there. There are a number of construction companies. So what 
happens? If they win a tender, they have to fire their own local 
employees and hire someone to come in from outside whom 
they have never worked with. They have to pay them for 
accommodations in one of our communities where the people 
who were already living there wouldn’t have to be paid 
anything extra for accommodations  simply the wages. 
 
But that’s not good enough because the unions don’t get the 
jobs, and the government doesn’t get the political benefit. And 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, local contractors are not bidding on these 
construction projects because they do not wish to be unionized. 
They are not union. They don’t wished to be abused by the 
unions. They don’t get the jobs, Mr. Speaker, even when they 
tender on them. 
 
I was asking the minister responsible for SaskPower the other 
day, the member from P.A. Northcote, about the construction 
tendering proposals under his jurisdiction. And there were 20 
projects, Mr. Speaker. Of those 20 projects in the last year, one 
 one  went to a non-union contractor for $44,000. The 
other 19 went to union contractors. Well okay, maybe they were 
the low tenders. That wasn’t the case, Mr. Speaker; they were 
not the low tenders. And the fact is in some cases . . . there was 
one union contractor tendered on a project and 27 non-union 
contractors, and the one union contractor got the job because he 
fell within the qualifications as outlined by this government — 
that you have to have 75 per cent union membership. 
 
Contractors in Swift Current and Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, are 
refusing to tender on Crown projects because they disagree with 
this Act, because they disagree with what will be done to their 
corporations, what will be done to their employees. So they’re 
simply not tendering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what happens? Companies from outside of the province 
tender on these projects. They bring in the management, then 
they hire local union contractors who pay salaries . . . pay the 
salaries in Saskatchewan, pay the taxes. But as soon as that job 
is over and done with, they move back to wherever they came 
from: Manitoba or Alberta, B.C. (British Columbia) or Ontario. 
And they only pay their taxes while they’re here in 
Saskatchewan; the rest of their tax money is paid in their home 
province. And our own contractors go without work, Mr. 
Speaker, because of this idiotic policy. 



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

In British Columbia it’s been proven that Crown tendering costs 
30 per cent more  30 per cent more, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Minister for Economic Development, his own department 
agrees with that number  that it will cost up to 30 per cent 
more to have this policy in place rather than allowing simply an 
open tendering process where the lowest tender wins the bid. 
 
One of the arguments that’s being put forward by the members 
opposite is that you have to have this in place so that 
Saskatchewan people will have jobs. Well again, that’s a very 
laudable comment. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s not true. 
 
Members opposite were using the example of the Shand project 
as an example of how people from out of province were coming 
in and taking Saskatchewan employees’ jobs. Again I ask the 
member from P.A. Northcote, who is the minister for 
SaskPower, what evidence do you have that people from 
outside of this province had the jobs at Shand? Because that 
was an open site; there was union and non-union people there. 
 
His statement was that the majority of people on SaskPower 
sites are, and were, Saskatchewan people and employees. So 
again the minister’s own words refutes the arguments being 
presented by the members opposite. 
 
When I asked him, well how do you know if you’re . . . under 
the current policy, the CCTA  that the employees being hired 
for these construction projects are Saskatchewan people? He 
says, well I don’t know; we’re not tracking them. So one of the 
major planks and the reason to have the CCTA is to hire 
Saskatchewan people, and yet they’re not even tracking whether 
or not they’re hiring Saskatchewan people. 
 
So another proof, Mr. Speaker, that what they’re bringing 
forward are not the real reasons, are not the truth for this policy, 
but the truths are to provide funds to the unions who in turn can 
provide those funds back to the NDP party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a failed policy which cost the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan an unreasonable amount of money. 
It shows the lack of priorities that this government has, that they 
would prefer to pay their union buddies an excessive amount 
rather than provide funding for nursing homes such as the one 
in Swift Current, rather than provide funding to maintain our 
highways which provide for the industrial use of our province, 
to bring tourists into our province. 
 
But I guess, Mr. Speaker, I guess, Mr. Speaker, one should not 
expect too much from people who believe that a $4,300 raise in 
one year is actually a cut in pay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 
opportunity to enter into the debate, particularly following the, 
well I guess I’ll say typical, comments from our Conservative 
friends across the aisle. To listen to any sort of a lecture from 
the Conservative members of this House about fair and open 
tendering is simply an affront to the memory of the people in 
this House who watched what happened when the Tories were 
in power many years ago, because what was happening then 
was anything but fair and open tendering. 
 

What we saw happen was, we saw an approach to tendering that 
took it to the lowest, basest levels that we expect to see from the 
Tories in Nova Scotia and their pork barrel. It was an offensive 
approach. It was not fair. It had the business community up in 
arms. That’s what we were talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agreement that is before us today and the 
motion concerning the CCTA is in fact a very straightforward 
piece of public policy. What it deals with is a serious . . . and I 
think maybe what we should do here is just review the facts 
here for a second. 
 
Now the members opposite say that this is going to inflate the 
costs hundreds of millions of dollars. The fact is, only $15 
million in the 1995 year was covered by the agreement. If you 
take a look at the fiscal year, it’s only $30 million  $30 
million worth of agreements covered, and yet this is going to 
jack up the price a hundred and eighteen. That’s the same kind 
of math that got us back into this deficit. It’s the same kind of 
Tory math that almost bankrupted the province. That’s where 
the problem is. The problem is with the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about this escalating the cost by 20, 30 . . . I’m just 
waiting for them to up the bid again to 40 per cent. What we 
know happens is that even before the CCTA, even before that, 
we would see the costs fluctuate by as much as 20 per cent. 
Now I think when we take a look at this  and of course the 
policy’s under review now  when the review is done, I think 
you will see that the costs have been much less than 10 per cent 
off. 
 
This is an issue which really comes down to one simple 
principle, and that’s fairness. Mr. Speaker, the CCTA is an 
agreement which covers a small part of the government’s 
tendering. It attempts to level the playing-field between union 
and non-union contractors. And it’s important to level that 
playing-field because I think we need to remember what the 
situation was in the 1980s  a situation that the members 
opposite, particularly the Tory members, would have us revisit. 
 
We saw a government during those 1980s where they passed 
the infamous Bill 104  I think it was 104  Bill 104, which 
was one of the most regressive pieces of labour legislation this 
province has ever seen. Now they’re not prepared to simply go 
back to Bill 104 if they ever came back into power. They want 
to go further than that because they want to completely 
eradicate the unions. 
 
Let’s not mince words here. The member for, I believe it’s 
Cypress Hills, has a Bill that he’s continually putting off in this 
House which would require union certification, decertification, 
and strike action by secret ballot. Well what’s that aimed at? 
What’s that aimed at? Sounds to me to be an anti-union piece of 
legislation. We have a Bill affecting the accountability of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
What we have here is an attempt, with some flowery wording, 
to essentially dismantle these pieces. We’ve seen them with the 
right-to-work legislation. We’ve seen them with regressive 
labour standards legislation. 
 



1732  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

The Tory Party is an anti-union party  is now, was before, 
always will be. Their opposition to this piece of fair, public 
policy is simple; it’s based on ideology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to listen to the members opposite you’d think that 
the sky was falling. The fact is it’s not. What we are doing is we 
are re-establishing a fair policy. Business, I don’t think, 
particularly understood it. I think that there were some 
communications difficulties. There’s obviously some concern, 
and this government’s agreed to take a look at that. Let’s let the 
review progress. Let’s leave the ideology behind, and let’s start 
to move forward. 
 
Now I appreciate that the members opposite, the Tory members 
opposite, have some interesting ideas on labour policy. In fact 
you might say that they’re also preparing for the new century. 
The problem is they’re some of the greatest 19th century minds 
ever elected to this Assembly. While we’re preparing for the 
21st century, they’re getting ready for the 20th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just think this issue is not even worth debating 
further, and as such I’ll move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 12  Taxation System Reform 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 
of my remarks, which I hope I’ll have a chance to do today, 
would be the moving of the following motion, seconded by the 
member from Regina Victoria: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its support of the work done by 
SUMA, SARM, SSTA, and SAMA in updating and 
reforming the taxation system to reflect a fair and equitable 
base for local government taxation. 

 
In trying to do this, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to hit three essential 
points, and the first would be the history and background to the 
work done by our partners, SUMA, SARM, and the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). The second 
would be to provide an overview of the assessment issue that 
these organizations have worked on for so long, and some tax 
facts. And the third would be to outline to you what bearing the 
legislation before the Assembly has on the ’97 property tax 
year. 
 
So first, and very quickly, a brief background of the work done 
by SUMA, SARM and the SSTA. The story has its beginnings 
back in 1985 at a time when I was the first . . . a new member of 
an elected council who was appointed to the SUMA board. 
 
Our first report that was handed to us was a report called the 
Local Government Finance Commission Report. It contained a 
number of recommendations to the government of that day to 
begin a process of updating the assessment system for 
Saskatchewan. The diagnosis of the commission was that 
Saskatchewan assessment system needed an overhaul. And 
why? It needed an overhaul because it was outdated. The 
outdated time frame that we were working on and the base for 
the assessment was causing shifts, and who was paying, who  

could afford to pay, and whether or not it was a fair reflection 
of the market value of their property and the home that they 
lived in. 
 
(1645) 
 
There were a number of cases before the courts, and some 
serious cases that were contemplating that the fairness of the 
system has now a great impact on properties such as malls 
within the city of Regina, smaller homes within inner-city 
neighbourhoods, and residential homes in the suburbs, and the 
new developments and the new buildings that were being put 
into place in communities. 
 
There were also calls for SUMA and SARM and SSTA at their 
conventions to go ahead and urge the government to go ahead 
in the assessment system. So subsequently we had the birth of 
SAMA, the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, 
which came into force by an Act of the Assembly in 1987. 
 
In 1987, the make-up of SAMA was a coming together of 
representatives from SUMA, SARM, and the SSTA, and having 
some members who would be supportive in the administrative 
capacity to this group. The city of Regina was allowed one 
member by SUMA, who would be in rotation with a member 
from Saskatoon, to represent the interests of the largest cities on 
a rotating basis. 
 
The new partnership began. SAMA was established and was 
given the mandate to develop sound assessment policies and 
procedures and supervise the valuation of properties. The 
legislative framework for property assessment exists in the 
assessment provisions of the municipal Acts, and I’ll speak to 
that at the closing of my remarks. 
 
So we’ve come to the point where on January 1, 1997 all 
property in Saskatchewan will be reassessed. And the 
reassessment will be driven by SAMA, which has grown from 
the first board that was contemplated in the legislation in 1987, 
to an expanded idea of SAMA and how people are going to be 
able to get the message out to their communities and the 
involvement of communities. And that’s through a SAMA 
convention. 
 
So again we see the strong relationship of people who now 
come to a SAMA convention, who represent our partners of 
SUMA  the local municipalities who represent the interests 
of the school boards with the SSTA; who represent the interests 
of the smaller communities through representation from SARM, 
and come together in a convention once a year to look at the 
assessment base and what would be contemplated under the 
base of assessment to be a fair, market-driven value for 
deliberating on what the local communities would use as a base 
for their taxation. 
 
So what is property assessment? It’s a way to determine the 
value of your property, your land and buildings, for tax 
purposes. A fair and equitable assessment will ensure that the 
owner of a high value property be assessed more than the owner 
of a lesser value property. A modern property assessment 
system must reflect the accepted principles and practices in  



May 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

widespread use. 
 
So those adopted by SAMA are: accurate and up-to-date 
assessment base; that they be based on professional standards; 
that they be defensible in the system that the municipalities 
have in place for assessment appeals, but also in the courts; that 
the system be understandable, it be universal, it be 
cost-effective and easily administered, equitable and fair for all 
property owners. 
 
So people say, well what does this assessment then have to do 
with property taxes? Property taxes are the levies used by 
government to raise the revenue needed to run municipal 
programs and services. Deciding how much each property 
owner should pay is a three-part process. 
 
First, property values are assessed. The Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency sets assessment policy and 
ensures that assessments are carried out fairly and equitably 
throughout the province. 
 
Next, that taxable assessment is calculated by applying the tax 
policy decisions made by provincial and local governments. In 
our case, it would be the percentage of value that we would 
allocate to each category of property and land. And in the case 
of local governments, it will be the mill rates that they set on 
top of the areas where they’re able to also do some adjustment 
on the categories of property and/or land within their 
communities. 
 
And finally, the taxable assessment is multiplied by the local 
mill rate to calculate the taxes a property owner will have to 
pay. 
 
So when we looked at that we said, how are we going to be 
going through this? How can we give local governments a new 
system of taxation, the new assessment base that can be 
accepted by all of them at their convention and passed, which 
was done last November by the vast majority of our partners  
the local governments, the SSTAs, the SUMA and SARM, the 
SAMA members. 
 
And we decided that we needed to have widespread 
consultation that took us over a number of years and will end at 
the end of the system in place, about the end of May, 1997 
when the new system will be in place. 
 
January to May, SAMA and the province were going to finish 
the legislation, and it’s before the House. The province passes 
its tax legislation and regulations. The city analyses their tax 
policy choices. 
 
From June until September, the city can finish the new 
assessments based on this information, and they’ll gather their 
public views on tax policies that each individual have to put in 
place to respond to their communities concerns. Councils will 
then make tax policy decisions. They do that in their open 
council chambers and with discussion with their community. 
 
And by October, the city will be able to provide each owner 
with a projected 1997 assessment and tax change. You can see  

in January ’97 that the city will be sending out assessment 
notices, and by May the city will send out the tax bills based on 
the new assessment system. 
 
It’s been a long and arduous process, and it’s not without its 
political pitfalls for all levels of political involvement because 
of course people will see that there are shifts, once you update a 
system that’s now 30 years out of date. 
 
But there are opportunities each step along the way to use the 
tax levers, the tax policy available to us through the percentages 
of value set on each property, to the local governments on their 
tax policy tools, and how they’re able to mitigate the effects of 
the changes in shifts to be able to phase in over a three-year 
period of time, and to be able to have in place a system that 
follows, indeed, the principles that have been outlined but can 
be defensible in the courts. 
 
The Act before the legislature has also an appeal process that 
will be set up in two levels that will help to have local 
municipalities be involved in the changes and to be able to have 
those changes in an appeal process where all of the local board 
revisions will be made in writing, time for business and 
property owners to file appeals, written materials to be filed. 
The appellant may request a taping and transcripts of the 
hearing, and an appellant cannot further appeal to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board unless their agent is present . . . 
they themselves or their agent is present at the time of the local 
board of revision hearing, although deferrals may be requested. 
 
So we now have a system in place that has gone through a long 
calendar of events with all of our partners in place. They have 
very often been giving information and advice to us, have been 
asking for the changes in every step along the way through 
resolutions to their bodies, through the SAMA conventions to 
say, let’s get on with updating the assessment system. Give us 
the tools and the flexibility to be able to adjust to this over a 
three-year time period that we can have our communities 
understanding what is happening along the way. We can get 
information out in our public meetings and through the open 
council chambers and through the debates that have occurred at 
the local governance levels. And let’s have a system in place 
that everyone in Saskatchewan can feel is fair and defensible. 
 
To that end, there’s been a long calendar of events that have 
taken place to look at some of the changes that we’ve put 
forward in the Act. In April 1995, SAMA held their first annual 
meeting, a general meeting. The preliminary discussions were 
held individually with SARM, SUMA, the SSTA on tax policy 
review process and background papers. 
 
In May ’95 discussions were held with SARM board and a few 
of the stakeholders, and there was a presentation to government 
finance officer’s association at that time. 
 
In June ’95 there was discussion of tax policy by SARM and 
SUMA at their district and regional meetings across the 
province. Department meetings were held with stakeholders and 
with other provincial departments, and local government 
associations and stakeholders advised consensus building 
sessions that were organized for August, including the topics  



1734  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1996 

and the dates that would be discussed. 
 
In July ’95 there was presentation on tax policy issues to the 
west-central municipal government association that was held in 
Rosetown, presentation on tax policy issues to the north-central 
rural municipality association in Prince Albert in August ’95, a 
meeting August 4 with three local government associations to 
review plans for the consensus building sessions, and the 
department tabled a summary of the submissions that had 
happened to date or had occurred to date. 
 
There were consensus building sessions facilitated by the 
department throughout August on such issues as taxation of 
machinery and equipment for mines, pipelines, oil and gas 
wells, on the implications for urban municipalities and rural 
municipalities, on the cities, the managing of the tax . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and the business tax issue in August of that year, 
’95 and the business tax issue again on August 30 of that year. 
And there was a presentation of a draft background paper on 
rural tax exemptions prepared by the department to the SARM 
board and discussion of this issue. 
 
In September there were again consensus-building sessions 
summaries that were distributed, meetings with other 
departments to discuss the tax policy proposals, and SAMA 
held an annual meeting that concluded September 29. The list 
goes on and on of the meetings. 
 
Most recently, in March ’96, tax policy and reassessment 
amendments were now introduced in the legislature. Provincial 
communications activities to accompany introduction of the 
amendments occurred. Municipal councils are now going to 
have to decide what tools they’ll use once SAMA releases the 
assessment figures for properties. And department will continue 
to work on tax policy and regulations. 
 
Completion of provincial work on percentages of value, 
property classes, and other supporting regulations should 
happen by June of this year. And from June into the fall, 
there’ll be advisory work to prepare councils and administrators 
for the 1997 reassessment. In the fall, SAMA will release the 
property-by-property figures, and by January ’97, the 
reassessment proceeds. 
 
So much work has been done . . . So little recognition given to 
the players and our partners who will now be in a position to go 
forward with a tax system that is fair and equitable, that can be 
defensible to the public. 
 
So it is my pleasure, and I’m very proud today to be able to 
stand and support the motion and move the motion: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its support to the work done by 
SUMA, SARM, SSTA, and SAMA in updating and 
reforming the taxation system to reflect a fair and equitable 
base for local government taxation. 

 
Seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased to second this motion which essentially 
congratulates the people who are working in the four 
organizations  SAMA, SARM, SUMA, and the SSTA  on 
the work that they have done over the past  I think for nearly 
a decade, Mr. Speaker, as long as they’ve been working on it  
and that they’ve at this stage come to a consensus on what they 
believe and are convinced will be a fair property taxation 
system for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in that vein, they have asked also the Government of 
Saskatchewan to pass some legislation which is being done this 
session. And through this legislation, the people in these four 
organizations will be provided with the tools and the flexibility 
that they will need to give us a fair and a modern taxation 
system. 
 
The time being close to 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I will stop at 
this time and adjourn debate on this motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1705 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1705 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1705 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Aboriginal Awareness Week 

Kasperski ..................................................................................................................................................................................1706 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1706 

Summer Olympic Skeet Shooters  
Stanger ......................................................................................................................................................................................1706 

Community Spirit in St. Brieux  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1706 

New Skating/Curling Arena in Drake  
Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................1707 

Battered Women’s Awareness Week  
Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1707 

National Emergency Medical Services Week  
Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1707 

Support for Agriculture  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1708 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Long-term Care  

Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
Cline.................................................................................................................................................................................1708, 1710 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1710 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................1709 

Highway Maintenance  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1711 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1711 

Canadian Wheat Board  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1711 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1711 

Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1712 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 94  An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 96  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 97  An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act  

Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 98  An Act respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International 
Child Abduction/Loi concernant l’application à la Saskatchewan de la Convention sur les aspects civils de l’enlèvement 
international d’enfants 

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 99  An Act respecting Co-operatives/Loi concernant les coopératives 

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1713 



 

Bill No. 100  An Act respecting the Regulation of Drivers and Traffic on Saskatchewan Highways/Loi concernant la 
réglementation de la conduite automobile et de la circulation sur les routes de la Saskatchewan  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 101  An Act respect Wills/Loi concernant les testaments  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
Bill No. 102  An Act respecting the Distribution of Estates of Intestates/Loi concernant le partage des successions non 
testamentaires  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 103  An Act respecting Powers of Attorney/Loi concernant les procurations  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 104  An Act to facilitate the Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments and Awards/Loi visant à faciliter l’exécution 
réciproque des jugements et des sentences arbitrales  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 105  An Act respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition 
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards/Loi concernant l’application en Saskatchewan de la Convention des Nations 
Unies pour la reconnaissance et l’exécution des sentences arbitrales étrangères  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 106  An Act respecting the Maintenance of Dependants of Testators and Intestates/Loi concernant l’aide aux 
personnes á charge des testateurs et des intestats  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 107  An Act respecting the Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders/Loi concernant l’exécution 
réciproque des ordonnances alimentaires  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No 108  An Act to amend The Change of Name Act, 1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur le changement de nom 

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 110  An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc.  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates 

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS  

Motion No. 10  Personal Injury Protection Plan  
Wall ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
Toth .................................................................................................................................................................................1720, 1724 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1722 
Stanger ......................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................1725 

Recorded division ........................................................................................................................................................................1726 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1727 

Motion No. 11  Unfair Crown Construction Tendering Policy  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1728 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1730 
Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1731 

Motion No. 12  Taxation System Reform 
Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1732 
Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................1734 

 


