


























































May 24, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1823 
 May 24, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present names of people throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Assiniboia, Rockglen, and Limerick. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition are mainly from the Regina area and 
rural Saskatchewan in the South. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
again present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 
Denare Beach, Melville. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition from the citizens of southern Saskatchewan regarding 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer read as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many concerned citizens 
from the communities of Lumsden, from Regina Beach, and 
from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
petitions of names of people in Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 
 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Chaplin and Moose Jaw. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reverse the decision to close the Swift Current Care Centre; 
and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce on behalf of the Premier a group of 34 students seated 
in your gallery this morning. They are from St. John School in 
Saskatoon. They are grade 6 and 7 students, and they are 
joining us this morning for a good portion of question period. 
So if you’d join with me in welcoming them, it would be 
appreciated. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very 
pleased to introduce on behalf of our Premier, the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, a group of 60 students seated in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. This is the Saskatoon French School. They 
are here accompanied by their two teachers, Lucien Deux and 
Clément Bertoncini, and their chaperons, Mrs. Jerika and Mrs. 
Brooke. 
 
I hope that they enjoy themselves in the gallery. I know that I’ll 
be looking forward to meeting with them later on this morning. 
So please join me in extending to them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and to all the members of the House, a group of people 
in your gallery. I see 11 teachers from the Canora Junior 
Elementary School, a school within the Canora division. 
Welcome, and I hope you enjoy the day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Universities’ Spring Convocation 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the 
end of a week-long ritual of convocation exercises at our 
province’s two universities and affiliated colleges. In total, 
more than 4,000 students are receiving degrees, diplomas, and  



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

certificates in the full range of fields. 
 
Our Saskatchewan universities are providing world-class 
education to Saskatchewan residents, many of whom have gone 
on to make remarkable contributions to our national culture and 
economy. 
 
This week, two of our Saskatchewan-born cultural icons are 
being honoured for their contributions with honorary 
doctorates. Actor Eric Peterson and singer-songwriter Buffy 
Sainte-Marie are being honoured by the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and U of R (University of Regina) respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by conferring these honorary degrees and the more 
than 4,000 other degrees and diplomas this week, our 
universities are recognizing the confidence our province places 
in the abilities of these fine people. 
 
I want to make special mention this morning of Brad Hornung 
who is receiving a degree in history from the University of 
Regina. Mr. Hornung, as members may remember, is the former 
Regina Pats hockey player who, because of an injury, is now a 
paraplegic. A decade after his accident, he is now receiving his 
degree and has been awarded the Campion College Award of 
Merit for his courage of spirit. He is only the fourth recipient of 
this award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to congratulate Mr. Hornung, 
Ms. Sainte-Marie, and Mr. Peterson, as well as the other 
graduates, for their fine accomplishments over the past several 
years. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Place Essay 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
recognize a constituent from Weekes, a grade 11 student, 
Lindsay Grisdale. Lindsay placed first in the Saskatchewan Elks 
and Royal Purple literary contest with her essay, “How to say 
no to drugs and alcohol and still keep your friends.” Her essay 
also received an honourable mention at the national level. 
 
Lindsay’s closing paragraph, which shows much insight, is 
pertinent for youth and adults. She writes: 
 

By using your resources such as communication, friends, 
self-belief, and self-control, you can accomplish a major 
task. The task is saying no to drugs and alcohol and still 
keeping your friends. It takes a lot of courage to go against 
the crowd to do what you believe in your heart is right. To 
anyone reading this who has made this decision and has 
had the strength to follow through with it, I commend you. 
You, as an individual, have done something of utmost 
importance. In our society, you have become a model 
individual which is a highly honoured role and you are an 
incredible person for doing what you have done. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Lindsay’s essay shows a wisdom that many adults 
lack. I ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating Lindsay 
on her first place for her insightful essay. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women’s March Against Poverty 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We heard yesterday 
the Women’s March Against Poverty will pass through 
Saskatchewan for four days beginning today. 
 
The caravan of marchers will arrive in Lloydminster at noon 
today and will make stops in Saskatoon, Weyburn, Regina, 
Moose Jaw, and Qu’Appelle. As well as recognizing the 
marchers, I believe we should acknowledge the organizers 
because, as we all know, an event of this magnitude does not 
happen just because someone wishes it will. It has to be 
planned and organized by individuals banding together in 
common cause. 
 
The march is sponsored by the National Action Committee on 
the Status of Women and by the Canadian Labour Congress. 
 
Sunday will see the march begin at 3 o’clock with activities in 
the park  Victoria Park  from 4 o’clock until 9 in the 
evening. Their call is a simple and profound one. They are 
marching to call attention to the fact that we in Canada still 
have a long way to go to eliminate poverty and injustice for all 
people and to remind us that none of us can rest easy until 
social justice is universal. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Youth Centre’s New Building 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to inform the Assembly about a ground-breaking ceremony 
taking place today at 2 p.m. in Weyburn for a new Weyburn 
Youth Centre. The foundations are being poured and two 
buildings, one from Goodwater and one from Colgate, will be 
moved in, renovated, and will become the new Weyburn Youth 
Centre. 
 
This project began about two years ago under the guidance of 
Jerry Dennill. The purpose of the centre was to address the 
needs of youth aged 12 to 19 in the Weyburn area. The centre 
firmly believes that if you invest in youth, you are investing in 
the community and the future. 
 
The task of building a permanent home for the centre began 
about one and a half years ago. To help in this project, the city 
of Weyburn recently donated a piece of land for this centre to 
build on. Through community and business support, the centre 
has managed to raise all but $49,500 of the money necessary to 
complete the project. Youth employment through provincial 
and federal programs has also been established to help with this 
project. 
 
The new Weyburn Youth Centre will include services such as a 
games room, café, gym, and a weight room. Programs will 
include sports leagues and annual outdoor trips targeted for 
financially distressed families and the disabled, although 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

anyone will be able to take part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the Weyburn Youth Centre 
on this important initiative. I would also like to commend them 
on the outstanding service they provide their community. The 
foundations being poured today are more than concrete; they 
are the future of a strong community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Walkathon 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
understand that this weekend there’s going to be a special 
walkathon in the city and possibly across the province to do 
with multiple sclerosis, as far as raising funds for more research 
in the area of that disease. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate and I think we need to recognize 
and say thank you to the individuals who will take the time this 
weekend to march on behalf of the multiple sclerosis 
individuals who are suffering from that disease across this 
province. 
 
It comes a little more closer to home when all of a sudden you 
find a relative or friend is struggling with a disease such as 
multiple sclerosis, which most of us haven’t really thought 
about in the past. And another significant thing is this province 
does have one of the highest incidences in Canada. 
 
So I would like to say hats off to each and every individual who 
is thinking of their fellow colleagues and fellow friends and 
neighbours who are suffering from the disease and giving of 
their time to raise funds to help in research to find ways of 
overcoming the problems this disease creates. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of the Metis People of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, this is Aboriginal Awareness 
Week. On Tuesday I was pleased to make a statement focusing 
on our aboriginal people represented by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Today I want to recognize the 
continuing struggle for recognition and ongoing contribution to 
Saskatchewan society by the Metis people, another of our 
founding peoples. 
 
I want to make special recognition of the political arm of the 
Saskatchewan Metis people, the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, 
and its president, Mr. Jim Durocher. As Mr. Durocher has said, 
and I quote: 
 

All Louis Riel wanted was land for his people and the 
ability to govern themselves. The same principles apply 
today. 

 
Perhaps progress towards this goal has been slow, but some 
progress has been made and there are some significant  

examples of Metis accomplishment, not the least of which is the 
Gabriel Dumont Institute and many programs devoted to 
educating Metis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Aboriginal Awareness Week draws to a close, I 
wish the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and all Metis people 
well in their endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Big River Trade Show 
 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend Big 
River is demonstrating its community spirit in a very big way. 
On Saturday, Big River is hosting their annual trade show, and 
as of yesterday over 60 booths were registered, offering food to 
financial services, and everything in between. 
 
The day kicks off at 8 o’clock with a pancake breakfast, and the 
show starts at 10 and runs until 4. The host of this activity is the 
Big River Chamber of Commerce. The chamber is also hosting 
the northern final in the provincial trucking competition. The 
winner of that competition will go to the provincial finals. 
 
The Big River volunteer fire department will be hosting and 
operating the dine and dance, with music by the Diamond 
Ridge, in the evening at the curling rink. There is also a 
loggers’ rodeo being hosted by the Weyerhaeuser timberland 
division, and a weekly farmers’ market. 
 
It is the kind of big, bold activity that makes Saskatchewan the 
best place in the world in which to live. I ask my colleagues in 
the Assembly to join with me in congratulating the dozens of 
volunteers, town officials and businessmen, who have done 
their part in making Big River the place to be this weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Light Opera Production 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
congratulate the Regina Lyric Light Opera on their latest 
production, The Mikado. I was there on opening night and 
enjoyed every minute of it. 
 
This version of The Mikado is different. It’s set in modern day 
Japan with electronics, fax machines, rock stars, and the other 
trappings we surround ourselves with today. The style of this 
production is fresh, innovative, and highly entertaining. You 
might say this modern version updates the original by poking 
fun at today’s corporate environment just as Gilbert and 
Sullivan poked fun at the people of their own time. 
 
It’s also fun when stage productions poke a little fun at people 
in your own community, and this one included a special 
reference to our colleague, the Deputy Premier, in one of the 
songs. It’s always nice to recognize someone in the cast — in 
this case, Noel Hamilton, son of the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
This excellent production was funny, witty, and absolutely 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

delightful. It was also the work of countless dedicated 
individuals, some of them on stage, but many more not. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Regina Lyric Light Opera society for its 
latest production. I would recommend it to everyone. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Assinboine Valley Health District Funding 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, an all too familiar story was 
heard last evening in Canora. About 450 people attended a 
meeting to discuss what to do in the face of major health care 
funding cuts from this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. 
 
Those in attendance heard how acute care beds in the 
Assiniboine Valley Health District have dropped more than one 
third in the past year. They also heard to expect a further 8 per 
cent reduction in acute care funding in the next two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one positive aspect of this rally was that 
community leaders from the district were not fighting each 
other. They focused their frustration where it truly belongs  at 
this NDP government. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain what steps he’s prepared to 
take to ensure that the residents of Canora, Preeceville, 
Kamsack, and others in the district are provided proper acute 
care funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the meeting called by the 
district health board in the Assiniboine health region was in fact 
to discuss that very point, their plan to provide acute care to the 
people in the communities of Canora, Preeceville, and 
Kamsack, and the surrounding communities. 
 
The member will know that last year the previous board had a 
plan to convert the Preeceville hospital into a health centre, and 
that was not popular in the community. Now the board has a 
plan under which they’re trying to keep those three acute care 
facilities open. That’s what the board’s trying to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I have every confidence that the board has analysed the 
number of acute care beds necessary in each of those three 
communities and they’re trying to come up with the best, most 
logical number of beds in each of those communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention to 
the Minister of Health that three of those board members 
resigned last year when that plan was found . . . that it could not 
work. And such is taking place again. We have a plan that is 

 not working. 
 
Mr. Minister, there have been massive reductions in health care 
funding and the quality of health care for Saskatchewan 
residents, particularly those in rural areas, is deteriorating. It is 
not Ottawa, but rather the misplaced priorities of this 
government that are at fault. The sick and the elderly are 
waiting for the Minister of Health and his government to begin 
taking some responsibility for its actions. They don’t want more 
excuses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard last night that the announced cuts will 
leave the Assiniboine Valley Health District with 42 acute care 
beds, or 2.3 beds per 1,000 residents  possibly the lowest rate 
in all of Canada. 
 
Will the minister stand in this House and justify these actions 
 a direct result of his government’s lack of acute care health 
funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that 
in terms of overall funding to the Assiniboine Valley Health 
District, that funding was cut by .4 percent this year. It was 
almost the same as last year. 
 
But I want to point out to the member and to the House  and I 
wonder if he pointed this out to the people at the meeting  
that the federal cut to health care, translated for that district, 
means that approximately $500,000 less was received from the 
Liberals to put into health care in the district this year. 
 
And I wonder, when the member was talking about so-called 
cut-backs from the province, whether he mentioned that the 
Liberals had taken half a million dollars out of the district in 
effect and that every dime of that money was put back in by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if he mentioned that to the 
people present at the meeting. But I doubt that he did, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Health Centre 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
attended last night’s meeting in Canora and heard firsthand the 
frustration and the anxiety that this NDP government has 
created because of its under-funding of the health system in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Further adding to those feelings were comments from the 
government member from Yorkton, who indicated that health 
care and educational services should only be centred in larger 
urban areas where they can be provided cost effectively. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain if this is the government’s 
aim — to centralize these services and allow health care to die 
in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I have pointed out in the House before 
and to the member, Mr. Speaker, many people go from rural 
areas to get certain services in the larger centres that could be 
provided at home. 
 
And one of the points that we have been trying to make is that 
the seven largest districts in Saskatchewan have 61 per cent of 
the population but are providing 94 per cent of the surgeries 
and 79 per cent of the births. And that’s something we have to 
talk about because there are services that people can get close to 
home, and we have to encourage them to do so. 
 
But at the same time I say to the member from Arm River, that 
if one of his constituents chooses to go into another centre to 
get health care, one of the principles of health care is that we 
will pay for that health care where they chose to get it. But the 
fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the dollars follow the people. We do 
not encourage this. But at the same time if anyone from 
Saskatchewan needs health care and they go to a particular 
place to get it, they are entitled to have it paid for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The comments last 
evening by the member from Yorkton only confirmed what 
many have believed to be true for some time. This government 
has absolutely no commitment to health care beyond the 
borders of Regina and Saskatoon. They fail to realize that 
communities such as Canora, Swift Current, Melfort, Estevan, 
many others which have recently experienced devastating cuts 
in health care, are major rural centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if in fact the aim of this government is to 
centralize all health care services, as the member for Yorkton 
indicates, will the minister table this government’s list of 
communities that it sees as the sole location for health care 
services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the member 
that the Assiniboine Valley Health District has the highest 
percentage of population over age 75 in the province. And to 
meet the needs, the district has increased home-based services 
and is continuing to do so; increased respite care through both 
home care and district facilities; increased adult day programs; 
and is increasing, Mr. Speaker, the number of long-term care 
beds, increasing the number of beds. 
 
But I want to say to the member that if he thinks that the people 
of the province accept the solutions he has been proposing . . . 
which are, yesterday he said that we should not have a national 
medicare system funded in part by the federal government, a 
notion that we reject, Mr. Speaker. A few weeks ago he said 
that people should have to pay user fees for their health care, a 
notion that we reject, Mr. Speaker. And yesterday he also said 
that we should be imposing premiums on the people, which, 
Mr. Speaker, is another form of taxation. And the member 
should be upfront with the people and tell them what he’s 
actually proposing, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Joseph’s Hospital Funding 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this government is bringing 
down a package of Bills that will give the minister all 
encompassing power to dictate what services will be provided 
by what facility in the health care districts. 
 
Last night the Minister of Health met with representatives from 
the health board in Estevan who raised their concern over a $1 
million cut to St. Joseph’s Hospital, a cut that’ll cost jobs and 
severely harm patient care. Did the minister tell the people of 
Estevan last night that because of the new legislation, it’ll be 
his ultimate control to decide what services will be provided at 
St. Joseph’s Hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member says, I did 
meet with the Estevan . . . or Southeast Health District and 
others in Estevan last night. And the member doesn’t say that 
the major problem that the St. Joseph’s Hospital has faced in 
Estevan is that they have lost about a million dollars in funding 
from Alberta which was paid to treat Alberta residents who 
came there for alcohol addiction treatment. Alberta has 
discontinued that, and that’s been difficult for the health board 
to deal with. 
 
But that has been the major cut, Mr. Speaker. The member isn’t 
being completely straightforward when he doesn’t point that out 
and suggests that we’ve cut funding to that district by a million 
dollars, which we have not done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister of Health 
assured the people concerned about the cuts that he would meet 
with them. It’s about time. I just think it’s sad that it takes a 
protest to get this government’s full attention. Will the minister 
now agree to meet with communities’ coalitions in Canora and 
in Central Butte and in Melfort and in Wadena and every other 
community coalition to address their concerns? Or will they 
have to throw a full-scale protest before you’ll even consider 
this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, 
that I was very pleased to meet with the people in Estevan last 
night, and they were quite reasonable actually  more 
reasonable than the members opposite, if I may say so. 
 
They expressed their concerns quite clearly. They’re concerned 
about the health system, and they work hard in the health 
system. 
 
But before the member gets too carried away, I want him and 
his fellow Liberals to know that they didn’t have very much 
good to say about the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. In fact when I sat 
down with them, they said that they knew about the federal  



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

transfer cuts for health care and understood that a major part of 
the problem was what the Liberal Party is doing. 
 
Moreover, they are opposed to the end of national medicare as 
proposed by the Liberals. They are opposed to the two-tier, 
pay-as-you-go system advocated by the Liberals. They are 
opposed to the user fees that the Liberals advocate as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Health Legislation 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions as well are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 
your Crown foundation of district health boards Act is another 
example of the NDP spending money on health bureaucracy 
and not on health services. 
 
Mr. Minister, Bill 114 calls for a government-appointed board 
of up to 12 people to decide where charitable donations to local 
health facilities and districts will go; 12 people who will be 
paid per diems and salaries and mileage, Mr. Minister, for no 
good reason. People have been donating funds to their local 
hospitals for years and the system has worked fine. 
 
Mr. Minister, why all of a sudden is it necessary for you to set 
up yet another level of bureaucracy to oversee charitable 
donations to health facilities when health care services are 
being slashed and health care dollars are so scarce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a question 
that I’m prepared to deal with at length when the Bill is before 
the House and I’ll certainly do that with the member. But I want 
to say to the member that this Crown foundations legislation is 
something that is being recommended by health care 
fund-raising organizations because it would assist them in their 
activities. 
 
This is something that they want for large donations which 
would be channelled to them, Mr. Speaker. This is not money 
that would go to the government. In fact this would cost the 
government money in the form of foregone revenue. But I think 
if the member checks with the people that work in hospital 
foundations and so on, they actually welcome this legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, this Act states that the appointed 
board will take into consideration the directions of the donator, 
but the board isn’t bound by those directions. In other words, a 
person can will or donate money specifically to their local 
hospital but your board can take the money and put it anywhere 
you want it to go. That, Mr. Minister, is not right. 
 
Just this week you said, and I quote from Hansard: “either you 
believe in local decision making or you do not.” Well, Mr. 
Minister, you’re proving once again that the NDP do not 
believe in local autonomy and that the wishes of Saskatchewan 

people don’t matter to you. 
 
Mr. Minister, do the right thing, amend this Bill so people will 
receive additional tax credits for health donations but abolish 
your government’s money grab from local health donations. 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll certainly be 
prepared to take the member’s suggestions into account when 
we get into the Bill and we can analyse what the member says. 
But I want to assure the member that he’s drawing a very long 
bow. This is legislation designed to accommodate federal tax 
rules to allow people to give donations to local people and 
receive a complete deduction for their donation. There’s no 
interest on the part of the government, Mr. Speaker, in raising 
money for government purposes. That is not the intent of the 
Bill. In fact the Bill will actually decrease revenue to 
government. I think the member’s drawing a very long bow 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Service Districts Act 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to 
whichever minister available today would like to take 
responsibility for yet another broken promise. A month ago . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now I remind the Leader of the 
Third Party that questions in question period must  order  
must be directed to ministers in the context of their portfolio, 
and I ask him to put his question that way. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  I’ll direct my question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Premier. A month ago the Municipal Government minister 
promised SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) that The Service Districts Act would be pulled 
this session. Now they’ve been informed that you intend to pass 
the legislation through but have promised not to proclaim it. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s like putting a gun to someone’s head and 
saying: don’t worry, it’s not loaded; trust me. Your assurances 
just aren’t good enough. Will you honour your government’s 
promise? Will you pull The Service Districts Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
minister, in responding on behalf of the Minister of Municipal 
Government, has been very clear in that it is her intention to 
pass this legislation in this term of government and that it 
would await proclamation before further consultations take 
place with municipal governance structures. 
 
And I think the minister has been very straightforward with that 
regard. The member, the Leader of the Third Party, may not 
agree with her position, and that certainly is his prerogative. But 
I would want to say that the minister has been very open in 
working with local governments and assisting them to 
consolidate, where they desire, some of their operations. And I  



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

think it’s a very straightforward, I think it’s a very reasonable, 
approach to take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
why then did the minister responsible for Municipal 
Government give the promise to SUMA and SARM that you 
were going to pull the legislation? 
 
SARM has been requesting a meeting with your government 
and you have refused. They are worried about your 
government’s forced amalgamation of municipalities, just like 
you did with health care districts. They are worried about what 
your government has in store for them. They have many 
concerns and you are refusing to listen to them; you are 
ignoring them. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you commit today to meet with SARM 
immediately, as they have requested, as they have requested of 
the Premier? Will you personally contact SARM today and set 
up the meeting that they have requested, that you should be 
giving them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 
that discussions with SARM and with SUMA have been 
ongoing by Municipal Government over the last months with 
respect to this legislation and other issues. The minister has 
been very open, very accessible, and will continue to be. For the 
Leader of the Third Party to suggest that dialogue with respect 
to municipal government has not been ongoing and that there 
hasn’t been discussions with SARM and SUMA is just simply 
not correct. 
 
With respect to his comments on forced amalgamation, I think 
the minister’s been very clear in that regard. The member is also 
aware about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too have had 
many calls from RM (rural municipality) boards who are very 
concerned about the recent announcements about the district 
health Act. The Minister of Municipal Government indicated to 
the media recently that The Service Districts Act would be put 
on the back burner. She stated and I quote: 
 

We don’t intend to proceed with it any further at the 
current time until we’re sure that we have a pulse on what 
the majority view is out there. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it has come as a great shock to hear reports that 
the NDP government now intends to push through this 
proposed legislation. Is it true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, my answer to this 
member is the same as it was to that member  that the 

minister has been very clear with respect to the legislation and it 
will pass through this House. It will await proclamation pending 
further consultation with the stakeholders. 
 
I think the minister has been very clear in that regard. That may 
not satisfy the member but that is the process that the minister 
has indicated she intends to pursue and that of course will be 
her decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

911 System Funding 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members of this 
Assembly are aware, the minister responsible for Municipal 
Government and her NDP government justified breaking a 
promise to return 10 per cent of VLT (video lottery terminal) 
revenues to local governments by stating that this money would 
be instead directed into establishing a province-wide 911 
system. 
 
Yet when questioned on this issue on April 22 in the House, the 
minister stated that municipal governments will now be called 
upon to help fund the establishment of a province-wide 911 
system. Will the minister or her designate explain why it would 
appear this government is preparing to break another promise to 
local governments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, the member again has 
not got his facts right and I wish he would spend some time 
doing some research or at least hire someone capable of doing it 
for him. 
 
He may not be aware of this, but the fact that the VLT revenue 
being allocated to the 911 system was by agreement with the 
stakeholders. I would urge the member to spend a little time, 
discover in fact what the facts, what the truths, are and then 
bring questions related to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the minister stated a number of 
times that the government is committed to establishing a 
fully-enhanced, province-wide 911 system. However, under 
questioning in this House, the minister stated, and I quote: 
 

The problem with providing for mandatory fully enhanced 
is that there will be more sparsely populated areas of the 
province that simply don’t have the resources to make a 
significant contribution, to have locally a call centre of 
trained people available 24 hours a day. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister or her designate explain if this 
NDP government is truly committed to fully enhanced system 
for all Saskatchewan residents, or is the government working 
towards a patchwork system in which rural areas are once again 
left in the dark? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me say that the 
member may be in the dark, but I can commit to him that rural 
Saskatchewan residents will not be left in the dark. The minister 
has been very clear with respect to 911 in that she intends to 
introduce a system and work with municipal governments in 
rural Saskatchewan to ensure that people have access to this 
kind of service. 
 
I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that this particular 
member is doing more to destroy morale, more to destroy the 
confidence of business in this province, more to divide urban 
and rural Saskatchewan residents, than any member that I’ve 
witnessed in this province. And all you’ve got to do is read the 
Regina Leader-Post and see what comments are made by 
corporations in this province that hire hundreds and hundreds of 
people, like Crown Life, in order to confirm exactly what I’m 
saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Patient Death 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, one month ago I brought to the 
attention of this House the death of 84-year-old Moose Jaw 
resident, Jack Nicholson. As members of this Assembly may 
recall, Mr. Nicholson suffered a fall while in the hands of home 
care last September. On October 3, he died. 
 
When I raised this issue the minister stated, and I quote: “If 
something (was) wrong . . . this should be properly 
investigated”. 
 
However, the only parties to look into this issue have been a 
home care supervisor and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), the district board’s insurer. Both are self-interested 
parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lorraine Michon, the daughter of Mr. Nicholson, 
does not believe this is good enough. Will the Minister of 
Health explain if any further investigation will take place in this 
matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I consulted with the Moose 
Jaw district to see if this matter had in fact been investigated. 
And I was assured by the district that it had been investigated 
and that the result of their investigation was that they felt that 
the matter had been properly handled. 
 
Now the . . . I understand that this matter is currently before the 
courts. I’m led to believe that an action has been started by the 
family and I’m led to believe that they will be pursuing this in 
the courts. And if that is the case, then in fact I think that would 
be the appropriate place for it to be resolved and it would not be 
appropriate for me to comment with respect to the matter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the circumstances leading up to 
the death of Mr. Nicholson do need to be looked at further. He 
was placed under the watch of home care only after it was  

determined that no nursing home or palliative care beds were 
available. One . . . only days later, he had suffered a fatal fall. 
 
In a letter from SGI, which I can share with the minister, 
indicates that during each of Mr. Nicholson’s frequent trips to 
the bathroom, he was accompanied by a home care worker. Yet 
the same correspondence states, and I quote, “He was left only 
momentarily when he requested a drink of water.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lorraine Michon feels the onus is on the Minister 
of Health to ensure that such an incident is fully investigated so 
as to prevent such a tragedy from taking place again. If this 
government is prepared to go to extreme lengths to clear the 
names of cabinet ministers, will the minister make a 
commitment to thoroughly investigate this fatality? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, there is a difference in terms 
of versions of events, I think, between the family and the 
district health board. The advice I have received is that the 
district health board does not agree with the version of events 
put forward by the family. 
 
I believe that the family wishes to put its version of events 
forward. They’ve initiated legal proceedings in that regard. And 
I think it would be inappropriate to comment on this matter 
which is before the courts, but the family will have every 
opportunity to put the facts before the court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to introduce young people to this Chamber, and it’s 
doubly so today because we have seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, a group of 36 students from Stony Plain, Alberta. 
 
They are here visiting from High Park School. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Koreen Kerswell, and their 
chaperons, Mrs. Eleniak, Ms. Goebel, Mr. and Mrs. Martfeld. 
They are going to spend some time in the gallery and then have 
a tour later on of this fine building. 
 
So please join me in welcoming our neighbours from Alberta. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, to introduce a motion 
with respect to the estimates of the Legislative Assembly being 
referred. 
 
Leave granted. 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I will, at the 
conclusion of a few brief comments, refer the estimates of the 
Legislative Assembly to the Committee on Estimates, as we do. 
 
Just before doing, I want to make a comment about . . . This 
may be an appropriate occasion to make a comment about our 
staff in the Legislative Assembly. Each year they’re here, 
through thick and through thin. At this time of the year the 
hours get awfully long, as they stayed here until 20 after 11 last 
night, then they’re here early in the morning preparing for our 
Friday morning session. So I want to thank them. 
 
In particular, I want to extend congratulations to one of the 
members of our staff. Some members are here for year after 
year, some are normally only here one year. That includes the 
pages. 
 
This year we have one of the pages who is today convocating at 
the University of Regina. This is a proud moment for you and 
it’s a proud moment for us. I want all members to join me in 
congratulating Leasa McDougall on her convocation. Perhaps 
stand up, Leasa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With that having been said, I will 
move, seconded by the member from Watrous: 
 

That the estimates for the Legislative Assembly, being vote 
21, and the estimates for the Provincial Auditor, being vote 
28, be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Convert, convert. 
 
The Speaker:  Question 105 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 92 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 92  An Act 
respecting Elections be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 

92, An Act respecting Elections in our province is a very long 
and detailed piece of legislation. It’s also legislation that’s long 
overdue in the province. The world has changed so much in the 
last 25 years and our province has changed right along with it. 
 
Clearly it was time to take a second look at The Election Act to 
see what changes or improvements were necessary. Then, Mr. 
Speaker, a great many changes have been made; many of them 
minor, but a few major. And on a whole I think the majority of 
the amendments that have been made to the Act are for the 
better. Certainly not to say that we don’t have some serious 
concerns with the proposed legislation. We’ll touch on those 
concerns later. 
 
But always wanting to remain positive, I would like to first talk 
about some of the details of the Bill that we do very much 
support. Much attention has been paid to the fact that this Bill 
now makes it easier for people to vote in a general election in 
our province. And anything that would accomplish this is 
obviously a step in the right direction.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents can be proud of the fact 
that in most general elections the voter turnout rate is among 
the highest in the entire country. Well turnout dipped a great 
deal in the last provincial election; one hopes that that was only 
an aberration and the high voting patterns will return in time for 
the next election. And I’m sure they will, since often people do 
turn out in greater numbers to defeat a government. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I think the changes that have been 
made in this Bill will encourage more people to vote, and it 
makes it easier for them to do so. The advent of mobile polls is 
a great move. It will aid those who find it difficult to leave their 
homes for health reasons, in order to get to a polling station, to 
have a polling station brought to them. Therefore people who 
might otherwise skip casting their ballot because of the 
inconvenience are now able to do so. That’s a good idea and 
one which we wholeheartedly approve of. 
 
As well the extension of the absentee and mail-in ballot 
procedures are good news because it would give those who are 
out of province temporarily, such as overseas members of the 
armed forces or students attending institutions outside of 
Saskatchewan, a chance to exercise their franchise  an option 
many of them did not have prior to making these changes. 
Again we think that’s a good move and we support that 
completely. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill gives some latitude to the Chief 
Electoral Officer in cases of emergency to act quickly to ensure 
everyone gets a chance to vote. If these options had been in 
place in time for last year’s provincial election more people 
could have cast a ballot, in particular those in northern 
communities who were evacuated from their homes during the 
fire season. As a result, they were away from their community 
on election day and they were unable to vote. 
 
I’m glad to see this same situation could be handled in future 
elections in a different manner. The same would go for the case 
of the men who were fighting the fires, who were unable to 
vote. 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

I believe another positive aspect of this legislation is the move 
towards a permanent voters’ list and the sharing of information 
with the federal government. Anything we can do to make the 
process more streamlined and more accurate is a good move in 
our estimation. 
 
Giving the Chief Electoral Officer the right to commence 
enumeration prior to election calls, rather than restricting him to 
enumerating only after the writ has been dropped, will make the 
job easier and the process run more smoothly with less people 
being left off of the initial list. 
 
Making this process run better as well, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
the legislation now recognizes we’re fast approaching the end 
of the millennium, and that the world now makes use of 
computers. As I understand it, the current legislation 
specifically spells out voters’ lists and the like must be typed 
out on manual typewriters. So obviously the change that’s being 
proposed here . . . being a minor one, but actually it’s a huge 
leap back into the 1980s really if the truth be known. The use of 
computers in this manner will no doubt make life easier for 
election workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also attempts to put some clarification into 
some of the rules we as political candidates live under. I think 
we can all identify with problems faced as first-time candidates 
trying to get a grasp of all of the rules involved in the process. 
And I know any of the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) sitting here today probably had to wait months for 
their electoral expenses rebate. Some maybe are still waiting. I 
think anything that could be done to clarify the rules and speed 
up the process is a good step. I understand the Chief Electoral 
Officer will publish guidelines to help the various parties and 
their candidates in following proper procedures. 
 
This, along with the aspect that brings about greater 
accountability, is something we all have to take seriously. As 
the Tories have just proven with their sudden discovery of 
$400,000, parties have to be held accountable and there must be 
procedures in place to allow the Chief Electoral Officer to make 
sure that accountability exists. 
 
On this aspect of the new legislation we will be asking for some 
greater clarification in committee over the exact powers the 
Chief Electoral Officer will have and how much scrutiny 
individuals will be under. There’s also many housekeeping 
issues in the Bill that we may require some clarification of but 
again that would be able to be done in committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s much in the Bill that the official 
opposition is in favour of, but it’s probably not surprising to 
anyone that a Bill of this length and breadth, there are some 
concerns that we feel must be debated fully in the House. Of 
course, as has been widely reported in the media, the official 
opposition does object strongly to the change allowing Crown 
corporations to advertise during election campaigns.  
 
We understand fully the pressure that is being put on our 
Crowns as finally they are beginning to face the real world of 
competition, and in that real world, advertising and marketing 
are components to doing business. We understand that but, Mr.  

Speaker, we also understand as long as these corporations are 
under the control of government they can and will be used to 
political advantage. And I’m afraid we saw examples of this in 
the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, who is 
responsible for drafting this piece of legislation, states that any 
party in power that dares try to use these rules for political 
advantage is asking for troubles from the voters. He says any 
government so blatant in its political machinations will surely 
pay dearly at the ballot box. Mr. Speaker, that could very well 
be, but we’ve seen in this province in the last 10 or 15 years 
that we’ve had governments that have bent rules to their own 
advantage to gain political favour or advantage. 
 
We can understand the need for certain ads to be taken out by 
Crowns such as in the case of public safety. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the changes are far more wide-ranging than that. The changes 
allow for Crowns to continue to run ads that were contracted 
before the election call. 
 
Now one might call me cynical, Mr. Speaker, but I believe that 
the government usually has a pretty good idea when elections 
are going to be called, especially now that the government has 
more or less committed itself to elections every four years and 
in the spring. And it’s not too difficult to imagine a Crown 
corporation contracting an advertising campaign prior to an 
election call, even though it knew fully well such a call was 
coming. I think that’s not stretching one’s imagination too far. 
It’s not too difficult to imagine that the advertising could very 
easily be put in place to manipulate voters, just like any other 
election advertising. This is a concern that we have. 
 
While watching the Tories and the NDP work, as I say, it’s not 
hard to imagine, as unfortunate as we may find that. I think, 
with this change, we’re heading towards even more 
manipulation by government, and using public dollars to 
perform the manipulation makes it that much more difficult for 
us to stomach. While the government opposite and particularly 
the minister responsible for the Bill may say it’s absolutely not 
going to be the case, I wish we could be so sure. 
 
This is our major concern with the Bill that is proposed, and we 
do have a few others as well that we’ll be addressing in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, so we just now move to send the Bill 
to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1100) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts 
respecting Highways and Vehicles 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to proceed through this Bill 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

again this morning. I have with me, Mr. Bill McCallum, who’s 
the manager of driver licensing, to my right. Immediately 
behind Mr. McCallum is Anna Young, who’s the manager of 
traffic and safety promotions. And, Mr. Chairman, directly 
behind me is Mr. Alan Cockman, who’s the vice-president of 
the auto fund. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 
minister’s officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last time we were discussing this Act, we left 
off at the part where we were discussing the meaning of the 
new driver. The minister referred to four categories of new 
drivers. Mr. Minister, could you refresh our memories on those 
four classifications we discussed last session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Madam Member. The 
definition of the new drivers  and we have really three bullets 
we’d like to share with you  the first one is anyone who’s 
validating their first driver’s licence or who held a valid driver’s 
licence in the last five years, regardless of class, would be the 
first recognition. 
 
Someone who is . . . out-of-province drivers who do not have 
two years driving experience in the licence class higher than a 
learner’s licence. 
 
And thirdly, would be a driver entering Saskatchewan from 
outside of Canada and the United States — would be the three 
categories, Madam Member, who would be in that classification 
of designation of  or definition of — who would be 
considered a new driver. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you feel that 
this definition is really clear enough. In interpretation section 
89.1, there is no definition of new driver. Only in section 78.1 
do we actually get a hint of what you mean. Do you believe you 
could be more forthcoming in this definition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Madam Member, the definition will be in 
the regulation and will more broadly define the definition than 
what it is in the Act. It will certainly cover the sections that I 
have . . . or the points that I’ve talked about but will be more 
broadly expanded then in the regulation. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I think that it’s wrong that it’s 
not in there. 
 
Mr. Minister, while the vast majority of new drivers are 16 
years old or near that age, there are cases of new drivers in their 
20’s and 30’s and even older. How does this Bill take those 
drivers into account? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Madam Member, anyone who would be 
applying for their driver’s licence for the first time under the 
definitions under which I have described would be categorized 
as a new driver and it wouldn’t matter then what their age 
would be, whether they’re 20 years old, or whether they’re 16 
years old, or whether they’re 50 years old. It isn’t age 

respective. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. New rules have been 
developed regarding the seizure of vehicles by police. How are 
these rules different from what they were before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Of course police could certainly seize 
vehicles for financial reasons, as it is current. But as our 
legislation addresses itself in this Bill, it’s specifically for 
unlicensed vehicles . . . drivers. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Have the police actually been given new 
powers then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  They’ve been given authority to impound 
but they of course can’t practice that until the legislation of 
course is proclaimed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, do you feel these rules give 
police any more significant powers in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  This wouldn’t give them any . . . This 
would just given them additional power, expanded powers that 
they don’t currently have in the legislation until the legislation 
is proclaimed. But it doesn’t expand their authority. 
 
Ms. Draude:  This provision makes it necessary to serve 
notice of a vehicle seizure on the unauthorized driver, the 
owner, a garage keeper, and the administrator of the program. 
Did the government given any consideration in serving a similar 
notice on a company that holds the mortgage on the vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  We won’t know that until we complete the 
search on the vehicle. So once the search is completed, then that 
particular action could implement itself. But we wouldn’t know 
that until the search would be conducted. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do you believe there would be any advantage 
in doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think there would be some advantage to 
that only in the case of unclaimed vehicles, and then of course 
the appropriate notifications would have to be provided then to 
the garage keepers prior to the disposal of the vehicle. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the garage keeper that stores 
these vehicles has a lien on all the vehicles for unpaid amounts 
incurred for the seizure and storage. These amounts are to be set 
out in the regulations. Does the minister know what kind of 
costs we’ll be looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  The amounts will be set out in regulation, 
as you’ve indicated, and there will be a number of charges that 
will be included here. And I might just share them with you. 
 
In the first area, for towing and transportation of impounded 
vehicles with a registered gross weight not exceeding 5,500 
kilograms from the place of seizure to the place of 
impoundment including pick-up and whatever means necessary, 
and the first day of storage, cost, remitting, administration fee,  



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

credit card discounts, and any other costs and charges for any 
service not otherwise specifically provided for in this schedule, 
that particular cost will be then $45. 
 
The storage per day of impounded vehicles with a registered 
gross weight not exceeding 5,500 kilograms will be $5 a day. 
And then of course there’ll be towing and transportation of the 
impound vehicle to a registered gross weight exceeding 5,500 
kilograms from the place of seizure to the place of 
impoundment, including pick-up and whatever means necessary 
from the first day of storage. That particular cost would then be 
$100. And the storage per day of impoundment vehicles with a 
registered gross weight not exceeding 5,500 pounds would be 
$5. 
 
And this rate would be consistent then with our neighbouring 
provinces of both Alberta and Manitoba. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, if the costs aren’t paid, the 
garage keeper has the right to sell the vehicle under this Bill. 
This Bill doesn’t specify how the proceeds of selling the vehicle 
will be divvied up. Does the minister believe that this type of 
detail should be included in the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Those would be all dealt with under 
regulations; and under The Garage Keepers Act, the distribution 
of the funds would then categorically describe how those 
proceeds would be distributed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So you’re saying that actually under the 
regulations it is broke down on how the money will be split up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s correct, Madam Member. 
 
Ms. Draude:  For the release of a vehicle under this Act, a 
hearing would have to be conducted under the authority of the 
hearing officer under section 89.21. Then under 89.3(1) a 
vehicle may be released by the administrator. My first question 
is, who has authority over whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  The hearing officer would actually look 
after the release of the vehicle. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So where does the authority come from and 
what is the qualifications of either one of these positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  The authority would come under the 
Highway Traffic Board and the hearing officer means a hearing 
officer as defined in the regulations. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do you feel that the court should have any role 
in making these decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  We think that there is a role for the use of 
justice of the peaces and certainly in the review that conducted 
this piece of legislation, that brought it forward, also 
recommended that there be some recognition of the use of 
justice of the peace and hearing officers in concert. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, under the Act of course the limit 
for blood alcohol content resulting in a 24-hour suspension is 

lowered to .04. I know you have been dealing with the SADD 
(Students Against Drinking and Driving) group and other 
groups, with a lot of consultation. Can you provide us with the 
evidence that this will in fact save lives? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that when the committee went 
around the province and met with a variety of different folks 
and the consultation process, as you can appreciate, and have 
learned . . . have been extensive. Throughout that review period, 
there was also a great deal of work that was done in terms of 
looking at the technical levels as how blood alcohol contents 
within the . . . that someone has consumed would affect them in 
terms of their driving habits and the management of the vehicle. 
 
And some of that work that was done . . . and I have some 
information in front of me here that I certainly would be 
prepared to share with you if you don’t have it. When we start 
looking at where the risk of crash by someone who is 
consuming alcohol would really start to begin, we’re looking at 
about .01. That level intensifies itself to about .05 where we 
really start to become somewhat concerned about the abilities of 
one managing and controlling the vehicle in which they’re 
operating. 
 
When you ask about the kinds of statistics that have been put 
together across the country, I think that when you look at the 
number of impaired drivers, for example, convictions in 1995 
itself, we see that we have about 6,540 to be exact, the number 
of convictions of people who are drinking and driving. 
 
And of course during that period of time, we see about 1,779 of 
those people that have been convicted while driving while they 
were disqualified. We simply share that with you. 
 
When we look at making comparisons of those statistics to 
other parts of the country and we look at drinking and driving 
charges per 1,000 . . . or 10,000 drivers in Saskatchewan, for 
example, in 1992, we see that we’re 35 per cent higher in 
Saskatchewan than we are in Alberta. We’re 57 per cent higher 
in Saskatchewan than we are in Manitoba. And we’re 88 per 
cent higher than we are across the country when we take our 
comparisons with that of the statistics in Canada. 
 
I think the other question that you were raising with me is 
drinking and driving in Saskatchewan and the alcohol-related 
deaths. We’re recognizing that 35 to 50 per cent of traffic 
deaths involve alcohol and more than 50 deaths in this province 
annually. And if you take a look at the number of fatalities, 
homicides, car crashes in the provinces, impaired driving is 
leading as a criminal cause of death in Saskatchewan between 
the years of 1988 and 1993. 
 
We’re seeing that there are more than a thousand injuries 
annually and more than $35 million in health care costs and 
income, to property damage costs annually due to drinking and 
driving. 
 
The council on drug and alcohol safety have said that the 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

recommendation of course is that — the working group — is 
the implementation of the blood alcohol threshold of really .05 
is what they’re recommending. So when we look at the 
recommendation that’s coming forward in our Bill at .04, of 
course, we’re just slightly below that, but believe that the 
statistical data that has been put together for us . . . And 
certainly the individual’s ability to manage adequately the 
responsibilities of a motor vehicle really start to reduce 
themselves significantly as you start to exceed that .04 level. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information, 
and if it’s possible, I would appreciate some of those facts. 
 
Just a couple more questions. Can you tell me how many 
24-hour suspensions are currently given out under the Act and 
what do you predict to rise to under the new Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t have, Madam Member, the exact 
number . . . or we don’t have a statistic that we can give you on 
that, and our best guess on it currently is that that would be 
about 2,000 annually. Of course under the new legislation, what 
we’ll see is that we’ll have a tracking mechanism in place. And 
we’ll be able to provide for anyone who asks the question that 
you just raised, the exact number in the future because part of 
the new process under the legislation, of course, will be that 
we’ll be tracking all of that information for our benefit and also 
those who may want to know that and also to assist us in our 
work. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me what the 24-hour suspension 
level is in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  For those provinces that have it . . . for 
example, Alberta, .05, 24-hour roadside suspension for blowing 
a warning on a roadside screening device. British Columbia is 
also at .05. They have a 24-hour administrative suspension. 
Manitoba has a .05; they have a six-hour suspension for 
blowing a warn at a roadside screening device. 
 
New Brunswick has .05 as well, which is a 24-hour roadside 
suspension. And theirs has been there since 1968, and for 
blowing a warn at a roadside screening device. Newfoundland’s 
is .05 as well, which is a 24-hour impaired driving charge, 
where an officer judgement of four- to twelve-hour 
administration suspension . . .  
 
Nova Scotia doesn’t have it. The Northwest Territories doesn’t 
have it. Neither does Quebec. Prince Edward Island has a .05 
which is the 24-hour roadside suspension for blowing a warn. 
And then of course Saskatchewan is recommending here the 
.04. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, my last question is the cost to 
recalibrate the Breathalyser machines, and asking if the 
government will be picking up the cost. 
 
And just for the record, I’d like to let you know that I think this 
is probably some of the better dollars that you’ll be spending 
this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I know that the member was  

indicating that the government very wisely and responsibly 
looks after the expenditure of all its funding. And you were just 
simply wanting to indicate that as we proceed to continue to do 
that, that we will make another such wise investment and 
management of the  and prudent  funds of the government. 
The cost of the calibrations would be approximately $100 per 
machine. This total cost would be about $25,000, that which is 
in fact in the Justice budget for the 1996-97 budget. And as 
you’ve indicated, and we certainly support, this would be a 
small expenditure in terms of the cost savings to personal 
injuries here. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, we had a 
bit of a debate and discussion over this clause in specific . . . 
with specifically item 67(3)(f) about the disconnection of 
lighting equipment or lamps required in regulations made 
pursuant to The Vehicle Administration Act. And I indicated 
the other day that I didn’t really feel that was necessary. 
Certainly there are ways to shut the lights off. 
 
I think the argument you used is if a police officer happens to 
be by the side of the road . . . Well number one, if they are off 
the road, they can certainly . . . as soon as you turn your ignition 
off, those lights shut off. And generally speaking, if you’re not 
facing traffic, the lights would be directed away. You wouldn’t 
really notice it anyway. You wouldn’t. Also you wouldn’t want 
lights shut off if you’re sitting on the shoulder of a road as that 
would certainly . . . wouldn’t be a safe way of . . . or a very safe 
or a wise way of having a vehicle on the road. And we see it all 
the time where people happen to have a problem, had a problem 
with the car, maybe forgot to put the warning lights off, or 
maybe the battery’s already dead on that vehicle. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, that this section isn’t . . . or this clause 
really isn’t necessary. It isn’t essential, and therefore I’d like to 
move an amendment to clause 7 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill by deleting clause 
67(3)(f) as being enacted therein. 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I certainly respect the position that 
the hon. member takes, and puts forward the position that he’s 
concerned about the public safety. And certainly as we talked 
about this issue on the last occasion that we were in committee, 
recognize that the police forces across the province really are 
designated to provide not only security and surveillance but 
good public safety for all of us. 
 
And because this particular request is coming from the 
enforcement agencies across the province, it seems to me that 
we need to pay at least respect to the fact that these individuals 
are in the business of protecting us. And in part of their work in 
providing security and surveillance and protection to the people 
of Saskatchewan, there are obvious actions that they need to  



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

participate . . . or be permitted to participate in, in order to make 
that job a little easier for them. 
 
Of course, as we’d indicated earlier, that all of the new vehicles 
that are currently manufactured, when you turn them on their 
lights then come on. Of course if the member is suggesting that 
they can do their surveillance, particularly in Saskatchewan in 
the winter months, without the vehicles operating and running it 
becomes a very difficult task in my opinion, considering that 
the weather in this province gets fairly cold. Fortunately only 
for short periods of time. 
 
But in order for them to be able to do their work in a fashion 
that of course we would be satisfied with, we think that it 
would be important that we look seriously at making sure that 
this amendment is . . . or that this piece of the proposed 
legislation they’re requesting us to support, is in fact supported. 
 
And I have a real difficulty in supporting the amendment and 
suggest that we not do that. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my 
concern isn’t with surveillance and most people don’t have a 
problem with that. We acknowledge that. But we’re into a 
process of safety on the highways. We are promoting Lights On 
For Life and yet you see vehicles  fairly modern  vehicles 
of police forces travelling down the highways now with their 
lights off. That’s because they’ve disconnected that light. And 
whereas everybody else, we’re trying to promote that. 
 
And for the areas of surveillance it would seem to me, Mr. 
Minister, there should be at least some controls, not just a wide 
open . . . the police forces in this province can disconnect their 
daytime running lights and use the argument that it’s because of 
surveillance. 
 
When they’re on the roads they should obey and have to operate 
under the same guidelines that the traffic and all other 
personnel in this province operate under and the fact that we 
promote safety and running lights are on. If they need to 
disconnect then, in order for other avenues of surveillance 
where they’re not actively on the highway, then there should be 
at least some requirement when they’re proceeding down the 
highway that those vehicle lights . . . that they have their lights 
turned on, that they recognize the rules of the road. I realize this 
isn’t a rule that you make or break, and you’re held 
accountable, and there’s a fine for it, but I think, based on 
driving down the highways . . . 
 
And certainly I acknowledge the fact that with new vehicles we 
do have the automatic daytime running lights. But those 
daytime running lights can be disconnected, and therefore I 
would at least strongly urge, Mr. Minister, if you are going to 
refuse this amendment, that you at least acknowledge and 
request that police forces in this province follow the same 
guidelines we’re trying to get the traffic . . . or the average 
citizen in this province to follow when they’re proceeding and 
driving down the highways. 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I just want to make one further comment 
on this. Just picking up on where the member had left off, 
because as he was concluding, he was talking about the 
requirement for the, I think for the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), or any other police enforcement body in the 
province really, to obey the rules of the road. And really this is 
what I was talking about earlier. And under section 67(7), the 
way in which it reads, there is a requirement here that they carry 
out his or her duties. 
 
A peace officer may of course do a variety of different things in 
order to do that. And one of those of course would be that they 
would then be able to shut their lights off as they proceed in 
making sure that they’re carrying out their duties. But obviously 
it would be in such a fashion that they would be obeying the 
rules of the roadway and that they wouldn’t be endangering any 
public safety here. 
 
In the same way as I described the last time we spoke about this 
. . . is that sometimes they need to exceed the speed limit on a 
highway in order to overtake somebody, to bring them to a stop. 
In the same way that from time to time I’ve witnessed them  
and fortunately it wasn’t because they were chasing me  but 
turn around in the middle of a roadway to overtake someone 
else, which of course if you or I were to do that there may be 
some need for them to charge us. Of course in the operations of 
their duties and their work, there is permissiveness here for that 
to happen in order that they can carry out their duties in a safe 
and effective fashion. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, on 
the same vein, if the amendment that you have proposed comes 
into force, you’re suggesting then that the police officers will be 
able to disconnect their headlamps. Will you be allowing the 
police officers then to travel at any time during the day  the 
24-hour period  while they are in motion with those 
headlamps off, or will you insist that they have them back on? 
First question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think, Mr. Member, as I’d indicated 
earlier, that the only time that they would proceed to work 
under this particular piece of legislation  if it were to change 
 is really for the purpose of carrying out his or her duties. So I 
think that that would be self-explanatory, in my opinion, from 
the point of view of when the police officer in fact would 
exercise that particular privilege. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  But, Mr. Member, if you recall when Lights 
On For Life was introduced in this province I, as an insurance 
agent at that time, received brochures. We received bumper 
stickers. We received letters from SGI encouraging us as agents 
to tell our people not only to have the lights on on the automatic 
cars that automatically came on but to in fact encourage people 
to change to a system that would keep their lights on during the 
daylight. 
 
That has occurred, Mr. Minister, across the province. I think 
you realize that when you travel now, that lights are on during 
the day as well. Many accidents have been prevented because 
people are now driving with their lights on during daylight 
hours. Big problem when you’re looking at the hours just 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

before dusk, just at daybreak, where it’s very difficult to see 
vehicles. Now we’re going to be allowing police officers, in the 
guise of doing their duty, to travel with lights off. 
 
How can you have two standards? One that says to the public, 
you must keep your lights on or you should keep your lights on 
all the time when you’re travelling. Please begin this program 
of turning your lights on if it’s a manual switch or the automatic 
cars. And now we’re going to put in place a ruling that says to 
police officers, well if you think you’re carrying out your duty 
driving down the highway at dusk because there might be 
something happening over the next mile, you’re now going to 
drive with your lights off, and allow then an accident to occur. I 
don’t think it makes sense, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think you’re right, Mr. Member. 
What you’ve said, in my opinion, doesn’t make any sense 
because I would be of the opinion, as I expect most of the 
public not only in Saskatchewan but across the country, where 
you have police forces that are entrusted in protecting the public 
and ensuring that you have good public safety, would exercise 
their discretion in carrying out good public safety policy and 
practice to ensure that not only is what they do safe, but that of 
the public. 
 
So what we’re saying here is that you’re right. I mean the fact is 
that we do have a Lights on for Life program, an excellent 
program. And we encourage the motoring public to use that 
practice even in vehicles where the lights don’t come on 
automatically any more. 
 
But to suggest that police forces across the province would be 
acting some way or somehow in a fashion that would jeopardize 
the safety of themselves and/or the motoring public, in my 
opinion, simply is an unreasonable statement, in my opinion. 
 
And of course I think that there are occasions where police 
forces need to do things that are not usual to what you and I 
might do, in order to ensure that the enforcement practices of 
the law are maintained. And I think that that’s necessary for 
them to do that. 
 
This is certainly one of those such requirements that they think 
that they would need to have in place in order that they’re not 
contradicting the legislation. And I’m of the opinion that police 
forces would be using that at a discretion that wouldn’t 
jeopardize any of the public safety and/or theirs. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Final comment, Mr. Minister. I concur with a 
lot that you have said. Of course in the middle of winter if they 
are at a stake-out or trying to sit in an area and be 
inconspicuous, of course the lights must be off. And if the 
engine’s running to keep warm, you have a problem. So you’ve 
addressed that concern, and I think legitimately so. 
 
My concern is that if I, as a police officer, am driving down the 
highway and in my judgement I am looking for something 
that’s occurring, and my lights are off, it’s not necessarily the 
fault of the police officer but somebody else who takes a look 
and doesn’t see any lights coming and proceeds into an  

intersection and hits the police officer. 
 
What are the ramifications then when the police officer has 
made a judgement that yes, it was daylight hours, I didn’t need 
to have the lights on, but now someone else who has committed 
a fault and of course didn’t check clearly, but has missed the 
fact that these lights are not on? 
 
Very difficult in the wintertime, I might also add. Many police 
cars are white in colour. And in the wintertime, when you have 
snow conditions like we do have in this province, it’s very easy 
to get a glare off the snow and all of a sudden you don’t see a 
white car until it’s right there . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  What sort of argument is that? 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You know it’s correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I guess, Mr. Chairman, my 
understanding of police forces is that in the preparation for 
them to perform their duties in providing good security and 
surveillance and road safety to the people of Saskatchewan, 
they’re certainly well trained, go through a rigorous training 
program, which part of it of course includes how they manage 
their vehicles and how they use their vehicles of course in their 
work, because it’s a very important tool in them performing 
their duties as police officers. 
 
And I can’t believe for a moment that we have members of this 
Assembly who actually would suggest that we have police 
officers in this province that would violate the legislation, from 
the point of view it would violate the legislation and put in 
jeopardy not only themselves but that of the motoring public. I 
can’t believe that we have people who work in the system who 
would do that. 
 
Now if the members opposite are suggesting that we have 
people who are employed in the police force who are behaving 
in that kind of fashion, I think they should be making that 
known to the Department of Justice or the police forces in 
which they operate. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1145) 
 
Clause 31 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to: 
 

Amend clause 31 of the printed Bill: 
 
By amending, after clause 78.2(1)(a), as being enacted 
therein the following new clause: 

 
“(a.1) being a person 16, 17 or 18 years of age, drove a 
motor vehicle having consumed any quantity of  



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

alcohol;” 
 

(b) by repealing section 78.2(7) as being enacted therein 
and substituting the following: 

 
“(7) An order of suspension issued pursuant to clause 
(2)(a) 

 
(a) with respect to reasonable grounds based on clause 
(1)(a), (b) or (c), expires 30 days from the date of the 
order of suspension; and 

 
(b) with respect to reasonable grounds based on clause 
(1)(a.1), expires 6 months from the date of the order 
of suspension.” 

 
(c) by repealing subsection 78.2(9) as being enacted 
therein and substituting the following: 

 
“(9) An order of disqualification issued pursuant to 
clause (2)(b) or (c): 

 
(a) with respect to reasonable grounds based on clause 
(1)(a), (b) or (c), expires 30 days from the date of the 
order of disqualification; and 

 
(b) with respect to reasonable grounds based on clause 
(1)(a.1), expires 6 months from the date of the order 
of disqualification.” 

 
Can I make a comment? 
 
Mr. Minister, I have asked for this clause because I feel very 
strongly, and after speaking to members of the SADD group as 
well, that zero tolerance for any young adult between the ages 
of 16 and 19, where they’re not legally allowed to drink in a 
liquor establishment . . . I can’t see how we as government 
officials or representatives of the people can say it’s okay to be 
drinking in vehicles. 
 
And I’m also hoping that if this amendment is passed, that 
young adults not accustomed to drinking before they . . . in 
vehicles are . . . (inaudible) . . . until they’re the age of 19 will 
realize that it’s not necessary and they don’t have to, and 
perhaps maybe we’ll get towards zero tolerance in all drinking 
. . . drinking and driving. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Madam Member, and I appreciate 
the amendment that you put forward and certainly recognize the 
significance and importance particularly in light of the 
statements that I’d made earlier regarding . . . and your question 
as it relates to the number of young people who lose life across 
the province and the growing numbers of young people who are 
certainly involved in drinking and driving, road accidents, and 
death. 
 
I’m a bit concerned about changes to this piece of . . . or 
amending this piece of the legislation from the point of view 
that when we looked at . . . the all-party committee in particular 
looked at this particular issue and went across the province. 
And as you can appreciate, the great deal of consultation that  

was undertaken, and not only with young people but certainly 
with adults all across Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we spoke with . . . and when they spoke with young 
people of course, one of the biggest issues that they’d identified 
is that they would like to move to the zero tolerance level  
without any doubt. 
 
But the recommendation of . . . the all-party committee that 
deliberated this particular item long and hard for days came 
with the recommendation that .04 was really a beginning point 
for Saskatchewan. And it already exceeds any levels that are 
established anywhere in Canada as being the lowest level and 
certainly ties to it a number of expectations if in fact the new 
drivers are stopped with a blood zero . . . alcohol content of . . . 
that’s greater than .04. So we have obviously in this piece of 
legislation some of the toughest requirements for anyone. 
 
The concern of course that SADD raised, in spite of the fact 
that you indicate that it’s supported very strongly by them  
and certainly it is  is the fact that what your amendment 
would do by and large is that it would really discriminate 
against those other new drivers that we’re talking about here. 
 
And SADD supports . . . what SADD really does support here 
is not just 16- to 18-year-olds. But what SADD supports is all 
individuals who are new drivers. And they weren’t selecting out 
only that particular individual grouping. 
 
And I know that a couple of consultations that I was a part of in 
my community and the one in Canora, which are obviously . . . 
any time you attend an event in Canora, you’re always well 
welcomed, and people express their opinion in a very 
favourable fashion. And of course the young people in both of 
those communities that I participated in clearly indicated that 
what they wanted to see is they wanted to see the zero 
tolerance. But if they were able to achieve the zero tolerance, 
that it would not only be for the discriminatory ages of 16 to 18, 
but that it would apply across the piece for all new drivers. 
 
If that couldn’t be achieved, then what they were suggesting is 
that we move to the stage of .04, which of course is the 
toughest  as I’ve indicated to you  legislation anywhere 
across Canada as it relates to drinking and driving suspensions. 
And then would work at trying to achieve, as time passes and 
public attitude changes, what you’re recommending in your 
amendment. 
 
And that would be then the zero tolerance level of course, and 
that would certainly be the position of the committee whose 
wisdom I’m really paying a great deal of attention to from the 
perspective that that all-party committee, as the title of the 
committee indicates, is an all-party committee and it reached 
the consensus on the current blood alcohol level of .04 that we 
have. And I have a difficult time moving away from that, based 
on that position that has come forward, both by the committee 
and I think SADD’s position, as it relates to what your 
amendment tries to address. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Our amendment isn’t 
trying to discriminate against anybody; we’re trying to  



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

protect some of these children. Ages 16 to 19, they’re not 
considered adults in lots of cases and they’re not allowed to go 
into a drinking establishment. 
 
You already told me a few minutes ago that from some of the 
studies and results you’ve had that there is an effect at even .01. 
And when you take into consideration somebody the age of 16, 
17, or 18, they’re not considered mature and any kind of an 
effect on their judgement can cause problems. 
 
We’re talking about children’s lives here. I know we all have 
something that . . . have had accidents we can relate to that hurt 
us deeply and I think that if we can do anything that will cut 
down on that effect we have to do that. That’s what we’re 
elected for and that’s what we’re responsible for. We have to 
keep everybody’s best interest at heart but at the same time we 
have to protect our children. 
 
And I’m asking that you seriously consider this. We’re talking 
about a legal act where people are . . . we’re saying you can’t go 
into a bar and drink but you can drink and drive. I don’t 
understand that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, I recognize the position 
that the member takes and not distantly away from what she’s 
suggesting in terms of . . . I’m not condoning for a minute  
and the legislation certainly isn’t either  that we’re wanting 
young people to drink and drive, because the legislation is 
certainly the opposite to that. 
 
The problem of course that we have, I think, with your 
amendment is that what it does do is that it moves us away to 
some degree from the recommendation of the all-party 
committee. And as I say to you, that would be somewhat 
troubling to me if we were to proceed on that today on the basis 
that, if there has been a piece of legislation that has come to this 
Assembly in my short lifetime here that has had the viewing of 
the Saskatchewan public in a more broader perspective than 
this, it would be hard to find. 
 
And so the consultation processes that have been undertaken by 
the joint committee, the all-party committee, in my opinion 
have been absolutely exceptional. To move beyond that at this 
point in time would, in my opinion, be difficult. 
 
And also based on the early premiss of the point that I made, 
and that is that what SADD supports here and will try to 
achieve, I think, over its lifetime, will be to get to the zero 
tolerance that you talk about, and that the majority of, I think, 
adults in this province who have children will support as being 
what we would like to see. 
 
But to begin there, in our opinion, based on the 
recommendations of the committee, would be a difficult 
starting point for us. And so I’m . . . Although I have a great 
deal of appreciation that the member makes in terms of the 
amendment, at this point in time, it would be difficult for us, I 
think, to support. 
 
And as you know, SADD wants a zero percentile for all drivers, 
not just for that particular category. They view that as really a 

discriminatory grouping and are really suggesting that they want 
it for all drivers. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I can tell you that our official 
opposition as well as the Conservative Party do agree with us 
and we are . . . I know that you had an all-party committee, but 
at the same time we all represent the people of Saskatchewan, 
and as individuals we are responsible for the 15,000 people, 
whoever would have elected us. And I think that that’s what we 
have to be able to do ourselves, is to go back to our 
constituency and say that we did the best thing we could for our 
children, irregardless of whatever some committee said. That’s 
what we’re elected to do  is to represent the people out there. 
And I feel strongly, and I’m hoping that you will let your 
members decide here today if they agree with this amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I want you to have some appreciation 
that the people who served on the all-party committee were all 
elected officials . . . or all elected representatives of the 
province of Saskatchewan, other than the specific officials that 
worked with the committee. And so I’m of the opinion that that 
all-party committee that went around the province and provided 
the kinds of consultation that it did, really did represent not only 
the people who live in my constituency of 15 or 17,000, or your 
constituency of 15 or 17,000, but that all-party committee really 
did represent the views of all constituencies in Saskatchewan 
and all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the recommendation that they bring forward, in my opinion, 
represents the views in the very collective and collected fashion 
where they believe this particular piece of legislation should be 
going. 
 
And I guess I’m of the opinion that for us to move away from 
this amendment . . . or to support your amendment and moving 
away from the recommendation of the committee, would not be 
one that I would be supporting at this particular point in time, or 
suggesting that the government support it at this particular point 
in time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I just have one final comment, Mr. Minister. I 
think that . . . I don’t know if you’re realizing we’re asking for 
two categories of new drivers: those that are caught with the 
.04; and those that would have been caught with alcohol who 
are 16, 17, or 18 years old. 
 
The Criminal Code kicks in at the age of 18 and they are dealt 
with under the law. But what we are talking about are 16-, 17-, 
and 18-year-olds. And I really feel strongly. I think that the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan feel that our 
responsibility is to protect our children. That’s one of our main 
concerns. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:59 a.m. until 12:09 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  6 
 
Aldridge McLane Draude 
Krawetz Gantefoer Toth 

 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

Nays  19 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Anguish 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Renaud Calvert Trew 
Lorje Serby Hamilton 
Murray Langford Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Murrell 
Thomson   
 
Clause 31 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 32 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 38 
 
Ms. Draude:  Propose an amendment: 
 

Clause 38 of the printed Bill is amended by deleting the 
words “on proclamation” where they appear in subsection 
(1) thereof and substituting the following words therefor: 
 
“upon consideration and acceptance by the Committee of 
the Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 
regulations proposed pursuant to this Act”. 

 
The division bells rang from 12:13 p.m. until 12:14 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Aldridge McLane Draude 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 

Nays  17 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Anguish 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Renaud Calvert Trew 
Lorje Serby Hamilton 
Murray Kasperski Ward 
Murrell Thomson  
 
Clause 38 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts 
respecting Highways and Vehicles 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be read a 
third time without amendment. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

The Chair:  The department was last before the committee 
on April 22. Before we get started, I’ll invite the minister to 
re-introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right 
we have Don Metz, acting deputy minister. Behind Don is 
Barry Martin, executive director, engineering services division. 
Behind me is Lynn Tulloch, executive director of corporate 
information services division. And Bernie Churko is to my left, 
and Bernie is executive director of logistics planning and 
compliance division, Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, very much. Welcome once again, 
Mr. Minister, and to your officials. 
 
Over the last couple of weeks, Mr. Minister, when we’ve asked 
some questions in the House regarding Highways, you’ve stated 
a number of times about taking money from administration and 
transferring it into other areas within your department. Could 
you explain that for us please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The member will know that the budget, 
the total budget of the Department of Highways, is 
approximately $169 million. Increased dollars to roads this year 
to the capital program is $4.1 million. Increase to preservation 
is 2.2 million, and that was done by streamlining. 
 
Savings were in the engineering services of 1.6 million; 
regional operation streamlining  .8 million; fleet operations 
streamlining  1.2 million; preservation field organization 
streamlining  1.3 million; logistics and planning division 
streamlining  .7 million; and miscellaneous other 
streamlining initiatives  .7 million for the 6.3 million. 
 
As you will note that the 169 million is about $750,000 more 
than in our Highways budget last year. So you can see there 
would have been a reduction in the Highways budget if it were 
not for finding internal efficiencies in administration. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We do have a 
decrease in the budget irregardless of those moves. 
 
In relation of those costs to, I guess, to FTEs (full-time 
equivalents) full-time employees, what numbers of people are 
involved there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay the total of FTEs affected, there 
were 131.1 actual reductions in the department or 84 per cent. 
FTEs transferred to SGI were 24.3 for a total of 155.4 FTEs. 
 
Breakdown by scope: out-of-scope were 42.3 FTEs or 27 per 
cent; in-scope 113.1 for a total of 155.4. 
 
Breakdown by permanent and non-permanent: permanent were 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

80.5 or 52 per cent. Non-permanent were 74.9 or 48 per cent. 
 
Breakdown by location: head office 51.7 FTEs; field 103.7. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you just tell 
us quickly about the in-scope employees and what positions 
they were eliminated from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  You asked about the in-scope positions. 
There were 20 in engineering services. There were 37 in 
preservation and operation. There were 4 in logistics, planning, 
and regulations. There was 1 in human resources branch. There 
were 2 in corporate information services, for a total of 64. 
 
Labour service, there were 12 in engineering; preservation and 
operation, 28; logistics and planning, zero; human resources, 
zero; for a total of 40. And there were 23 transfers to SGI, 
which included both. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Could you tell us the jobs that 
were lost in preservation and maintenance, what those positions 
were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  In preservation and maintenance, 
in-scope positions, there were . . . I believe it’s 37 and 28 for a 
total of 65. Most of those were mechanics, equipment 
operators, and crew supervisors. In the case of Highways, I 
believe there is something like 95 per cent of the employees 
affected that took the early retirement package. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. In your opinion, Mr. Minister, 
how do you think that some of the job losses, in particular the 
ones in engineering and in preservation and maintenance, will 
affect the quality and the safety of the highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, we expect that 
we will have nearly identical maintenance services, in fact in 
some cases even better. What has happened over the last several 
years there has been no reorganization of the Department of 
Highways. It was established many years ago in many, many 
locations in Saskatchewan. Since that time the equipment has 
changed dramatically. 
 
We have now larger graders, larger trucks, new technology in 
the placement of salt on highways, etc. And in some cases, a 
crew would look after a hundred kilometres perhaps. In some 
areas crews would look after 300 kilometres. We’ve balanced 
that workload out. 
 
In the summertime, what we’ll see is larger crews which will be 
more efficient than a lot of small crews. So we believe in some 
cases actually the maintenance will improve, and in all cases we 
suspect the maintenance will be the same. Winter maintenance 
in some areas could be delayed as much as half an hour to an 
hour, and in those cases we will likely have to start the crews 
earlier in order to give the same service that was provided 
before. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. Can you tell us what 
would the average salary per full-time employee be in your 
department? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I would ask the member if he could 
clarify that. Are we talking of out-of-scope or in-scope in the 
case here? 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, maybe we could segregate them 
and do them both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We do not have the average salary, but 
we will certainly get that to you as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I’d appreciate that. Would you 
have the numbers for the ratio of management to staff to out-of-
scope . . . or to in-scope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, the people that have left 
Highways, the out-of-scope were 17 per cent of the 
out-of-scope staff. In-scope, there were 10 per cent of the 
in-scope staff. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving on a bit I 
noticed in the ‘96-97 construction projects that you talked 
about, I notice that you, under the heading of grading, you have 
the bridge at Outlook listed there. I’m just wondering . . . I 
guess I’m a little . . . I would need to know that why you have 
that listed under grading. And I’m just wondering where that 
comes out of in the budget, if that indeed comes out of 
construction or if that is coming out  because of the heading 
 out under preservation and maintenance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The budget item is under capital, and not 
maintenance and preservation. And it will be between 5 and 
$600,000, and it will be the west abutment that we will be 
doing this year. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Okay without going back into our discussion 
that we had earlier in estimates, Mr. Minister, about that bridge 
. . . that appears to be a little different idea in what was going to 
happen with that bridge this year. Have things changed? Is this 
an update as to what you told us the last time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No, it has not changed. It’s the same as 
during last estimates. It’s a two-year project. We’ll be doing the 
technical portion and the abutment this year and the 
construction of the bridge next. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Regarding another bridge and that 
would be the Cumberland House bridge, I’d like a little 
information and history on that bridge if I could, starting with 
when was the construction of that project started? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The drilling and the geotechnical work 
started in the summer of 1994. The preliminary services for 
road work was also done in September 1994; the road right of 
way, winter of ‘94-95. The tenders for the steel supply was 
March 15, 1995; the advertised bridge construction contract, 
April 1, ’95. 
 
We awarded the contract on May 15, ’95; earth work at the 
bridge approaches, May 15 to June 20, 1995; the construction 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

of the new road location, June 20 to September 15, ’95; the 
bridge, pier, and abutment construction, July 4 to December 15, 
’95; structural steel erection, January 15 to March 15, 1996. 
And the bridge hopefully will be completed by September 1 of 
this year. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Total cost of the bridge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We estimate the total cost to be $6 
million, and that was approved under the infrastructure 
program. There was $2 million contributed from the local 
community and the band at Cumberland. There was $2 million 
contributed from the federal government and $2 million from 
the province. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Under an agreement signed sometime ago  
back in about ’89 I believe it was  with the government of the 
day with the group in Cumberland House, in the community 
there, there’s been an ongoing funding mechanism that’s been 
in place with that group funded through SaskPower. 
 
I’m wondering if you were aware of that group, if there were 
discussions that took place with that group. Evidently it appears 
that there were since some of the funding came from that group. 
And it’s my understanding that through this agreement that 
projects such as that bridge would have completely came out of 
that funding package that was provided by the provincial 
government through SaskPower. Is that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I can’t answer where the community got 
their money, but it could very well be. There is a package. I 
believe that SaskPower and the Cumberland House people 
came to some agreement under the previous administration. 
And certainly part of that funds could be used for 
transportation, so it could very well be part of those funds that 
are used in this case. 
 
Mr. McLane:  It appears under the agreement, Mr. Minister, 
that any cost pertaining to such a construction project such as 
the bridge would totally have come out of that fund. Are you 
aware of that, and indeed should that have been the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Probably that question would be better 
put to the people of Cumberland House. But I believe it is the 
case. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So then if the funding should have come 
strictly . . . the funding for the bridge should have come from 
the community using those funds provided in this agreement, 
then I guess why did the province provide additional funding of 
$4 million  two from the province and two from the 
infrastructure from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well it is my understanding that the $13 
million . . . I am thinking that that’s the right figure; I’m not 
even sure of that. But whatever that fund is was in 
compensation from when SaskPower in fact put the dam in, 
near Cumberland House, and it was to be used for economic 
development. It was to be used, if my understanding is correct, 
for transportation needs. 
 

The community will receive that money, and it’s up to them to 
decide on how to spend it. They would get that money 
regardless if there was a bridge constructed or not. If they did 
 and it’s my belief that they are using some of that money for 
this project  that is, I believe, within their rights. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I guess the question is, should not 
the funding for the total cost of that bridge come out of that 
agreement? Should the Cumberland House group not have bore 
the complete $6 million cost? And if that is the case  if they 
should have  then will the agreement signed with the 
government through SaskPower be clawing back $4 million out 
of that agreement of 13? I think that’s an accurate estimate of 
total funding that was going to the Cumberland House group. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As the member will be aware, that the 
Department of Highways has an obligation to provide the 
people of Saskatchewan access. In all likelihood, if they would 
have had to wait for the Department of Highways alone, it 
would have been years yet before that could have been 
completed. 
 
They sought a partnership, and the partnership they sought was 
under the infrastructure program which was a federal program 
where different municipalities could contribute one-third, 
one-third, one-third. The people of Cumberland House 
suggested that a partnership like this may work in this situation. 
We agreed it would mean that those people would finally have 
access to the rest of the province for 12 months of the year. 
Certainly there were several fatalities in crossing the river in 
spring and fall before . . . as the ice was melting and as it was 
freezing. There were some bad times there. Health care needs 
were another issue. 
 
So certainly it was the belief of the Cumberland people that we 
should try and work through this partnership. The federal 
government agreed because, as you know, there was a 
committee under the infrastructure program, a 
federal-provincial committee, and the province also agreed. So 
it was a very good working relationship . . . a good partnership, 
I believe, and I think a very successful conclusion. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Did the provincial government have the final 
say in the allocation of the infrastructure money, the $2 million, 
for that project? Was it your department or you, as the minister, 
that allocate those funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No. The infrastructure funding was . . . 
There was a committee set up, a provincial-federal committee, 
that would approve that. It was not the Department of 
Highways. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Okay I guess I clarify myself again. Through 
the agreement, as I understand it, that the funding for that 
bridge should have come out of the funds that were allocated to 
the Cumberland House group through SaskPower . . . I guess 
I’m asking why then, if that’s the case, why has the province 
committed another 2 million to the project as well as 2 million 
from the infrastructure grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well as I mentioned earlier, the funds 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

. . . And I don’t know much about the agreement. Certainly in 
Crown Corporations, when you have SaskPower there, you can 
certainly ask SaskPower about the agreement. It was an 
agreement that was signed under the previous administration. 
And it's my understanding that those funds could be used for 
several different reasons, but they would receive those funds no 
matter what. 
 
And some of those funds could be used, if decided by the 
people of Cumberland  the Cumberland development 
authority for transportation, that in fact it could be. And this 
was their decision. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I did indeed ask that question in Crown Corps 
to the minister responsible for SaskPower and it appears that 
they were in agreement. We’d have to go back and check the 
actual comments by the minister, that one of the projects that 
would come under that agreement would be to provide service 
to the community. If they wanted to build a bridge then they’d 
use that money to build a bridge. 
 
My question that I’m again going to ask is, if that is the case, 
then why did they receive an extra $4 million and/or is the 
government going to recover that money through the payments 
that they’re still funding toward that group? And I believe there 
will be a 1.8 or 9 or $2 million payment at the end of the year, 
in ’98 or ’99. 
 
Will that money then . . . has some of the money already been 
allotted to cover those costs or are they going to get an 
additional $4 million for the bridge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As I mentioned earlier to the member, 
that normally the whole responsibility would be of the 
Department of Highways to provide access to a community. So 
we believe as a province that this was a good deal for us. 
 
It’s a good deal for Cumberland House as well because they 
have the bridge sooner rather than later. Because if we . . . if 
they would have had to rely on Department of Highways 
funding only for the bridge  and it is the responsibility of the 
Department of Highways  they would have had to wait a lot 
longer, and it would in fact cost the Department of Highways 
the full $6 million. 
 
In this case, we were able to receive some money from the 
community, receive some money from the federal government, 
and cost us a lot less; in fact a savings of really $4 million for 
the Department of Highways. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, thank you. However, my 
understanding of this agreement is that the reason for the 
agreement was to provide funding to that community to do with 
what they wanted. They decided to build a bridge; they had the 
funding to do it. 
 
And so they had already, by the time this bridge started I would 
guess, that they’d already seeked roughly 6 or $7 million 
through the program. 

I’m asking why they received additional funding for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m going to try once more to 
explain to the member opposite that if the Department of 
Highways would have had to do it  and it is their 
responsibility  would have had to spend the full $6 million. 
Cumberland House believed that with a contribution from them, 
with contribution from the federal government in Ottawa, the 
federal Liberal government, and a contribution by 
Saskatchewan, that we could in fact complete the bridge now. 
 
We believe it was a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan, 
in fact a savings of $4 million. It was a good deal for 
Cumberland House because they did receive the bridge sooner 
than they likely would have had to if they would have had to 
wait for funding direct just from the Department of Highways. 
The federal government agreed too that it was important to give 
these people access and participated in the partnership. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, I too am very happy that the federal 
government is pumping in millions and millions of dollars into 
the Saskatchewan economy to help prop up your government’s 
lack of commitment to highways and to agriculture. 
 
My question again would be, Mr. Minister, that . . . I’m not 
disputing the fact that it was a good deal for Cumberland House 
to get their bridge made. What I’m saying is they’d already 
received the money to build the bridge, and now you’ve 
propped it up again with another $4 million, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m sure you might have to check 
your arithmetic. But the federal government put in $2 million, 
the province put in $2 million, and the community of 
Cumberland House put in $2 million, and the bridge was built. 
Do you not think that’s a better deal than the Department of 
Highways putting all $6 million? 
 
Mr. McLane:  The government already paid $6 million for 
the bridge through the agreement through SaskPower with the 
Cumberland House group. They received initial start-up money; 
they received a million dollars a year, plus at the end of this 
term and end of 10 years they receive another 1.9 or whatever 
the figure is. So they’ve already received the money to build the 
bridge. 
 
So it wasn’t a good deal for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
because they’d already received money through SaskPower, 
through an agreement signed back in ‘98 with the previous 
government. So no, it’s not a good deal for the province if 
we’re providing another $4 million for that project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I would ask the member if he would 
check the agreement. And I think if he checks the agreement, 
that the compensation package between the community of 
Cumberland House, the band at Cumberland House, and 
SaskPower was for other reasons than transportation. There 
were economic development considerations and many others. 
 
Certainly the community of Cumberland House has the right to 
spend that money as they wish. In fact maybe they would not 
have had to spend any on the bridge and then it would have 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1996 

been in fact the responsibility of the Department of Highways 
to put a bridge to the community of Cumberland House at some 
point in time. 
 
And we consider this a good partnership. Three levels of 
government involved in doing something that is good for the 
public, good for the safety of the public, good for economic 
development, good for not only the community of Cumberland 
House but people that want to visit there tourists and other 
people. 
 
We believe that it was a good partnership and one that certainly 
made the bridge happen a lot sooner than it would have 
happened in other circumstances. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to change focus a little bit to an area that’s much more 
familiar to you perhaps, Mr. Minister, and that’s right at home. 
 
I would like to ask you first of all in your decision of the 
Highways department in terms of priorizing your capital 
projects, how does the proximity of a major industry in the 
community or on that piece of road figure into the formula? For 
example, I’m thinking particularly of St. Brieux where 
Bourgault Industries is a major contributor to the economic 
development of the whole area. How does that figure into your 
decision or your decision making in terms of 368, for example, 
north and south of St. Brieux? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for the 
question. Certainly 368 has been brought to my attention 
several times. As the member will know, north of St. Brieux to 
Highway 41 is in pretty good condition. South of St. Brieux 
towards Humboldt is not as good and certainly needs some 
work. 
 
Right now, how we decide the priority list for highways is 
based on the capital cost of a particular road, how much it’s 
going to cost us, what are the current maintenance costs on that 
particular piece of road, what are the . . . what is the traffic 
count, what is the accident rate, what is the fatality rate. Those 
are some of the issues that we consider. 
 
At this moment the economic development portion or tourism 
portion is not part of the consideration. We are working with 
Economic Development to attempt to adjust somehow the 
formula to consider economic development and tourism. You 
have to understand that it’s a hard process to put into a formula, 
but hopefully within the next year we’ll have more 
consideration for economic development, job creation, and 
tourism. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister, I think it’s an 
important factor as we have to priorize what we’re doing and 
how important the added job creation, the economic activity is, 
particularly to rural Saskatchewan. I think that that becomes a 
very significant part of the formula that you should be using. 
 
I wonder as well, Mr. Minister, another example that I’ll cite to 
you, which is a little different, is the decision that you’d make 
to move municipal grid roads into the provincial road system. 

And I’m thinking particularly of that piece of road from Star 
City to Brooksby which makes the linkage to a major 
manufacturer, if you like, an exporter of lentils, particularly in 
Walker seeds. And I think that one of the great problems that 
they face very often is the fact that the roads may be not kept up 
to the proper standards for the truck traffic for their major 
industry. And I wondered if the provincial . . . if there’s a 
formula or how it’s decided in terms of removing that grid road 
into the provincial road network. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you for the question. The criteria 
before Highways will consider accepting a municipal road into 
the highway system, the roadway must form a logistical 
extension of the present highway network; two, the road links 
may be considered if traffic volumes are in excess of 250 
vehicles per day; roads with lower volumes have the majority of 
local traffic and therefore should continue to remain under the 
municipal jurisdiction; requested roadways should be at least 25 
kilometres from any existing parallel highway  that’s 15 
miles; special consideration may be given to roads 
accommodating heavy industrial traffic; prior to transfer of a 
roadway jurisdiction, the rural municipality shall construct the 
subgrade to gravelled primary grid road standards; and no 
commitment to improving the roadway to industry standard will 
be made as a consequence of the transfer of jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, a final question on that. Do all of 
those criteria have to be met equally, or are some of them 
weighted more or less than others? Because I think if you had to 
meet all those standards, you probably wouldn’t transfer any. 
But some are very critical. I wonder, again using the example 
 and I know you’re very familiar with the location of the road 
I’m speaking of  how would that apply to that particular road 
between Brooksby and Star City? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  They would have to meet all those 
criteria. The only area that. . . you know, if it was a heavy-haul 
situation, we could look at it. 
 
But I want to tell the member opposite that we do fund rural 
roads. Between 50 and 80 per cent of the cost of a rural road is 
funded by the province of Saskatchewan. So there may not be 
not as much benefit to the municipality as what some 
municipalities think because they are already funded by the 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, we’ve had an opportunity to discuss this highway 
between Archerwill and Greenwater a number of times. The 
construction was initiated about three years ago, I believe, and 
it was on the list for completion. And it has now been bumped 
to the extra list, I think it’s called. 
 
This highway is very important for the park at Greenwater, and 
I’m hoping you can tell the constituents that this one is 
probably going to be on your list for this year and why it wasn’t 
on the list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Highway 349  I’m very familiar with 
that road; in fact we did spend some money a few years ago to 
try and get it into better condition  is on the possible 



May 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

additional projects list. And you would’ve gotten the 
construction projects list from the department. And right at the 
bottom, there are several projects that are listed as possible, 
additional projects for this coming year. Of course that will 
depend on budgets. That will depend on whether all the other 
original projects can be completed. And if there is a delay or 
something happens that one of those projects would not go 
ahead, then we would look at the additional projects list. 
 
We do spend a considerable amount of money on maintenance. 
The cost is about $1.6 million, I believe, for that 11 kilometres, 
and the maintenance cost is quite high at this point in time. And 
that’s why it’s moving up on the list. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker:  It now being 1 o’clock, the House will stand 
adjourned. Before you depart, I wish all members a very 
enjoyable weekend back in your constituencies and with your 
families. This House now stands adjourned until Monday at 
1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1830 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Universities’ Spring Convocation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
 First Place Essay 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Women’s March Against Poverty 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Weyburn Youth Centre’s New Building 
  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Multiple Sclerosis Walkathon 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
 Recognition of the Metis People of Saskatchewan 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
 Big River Trade Show 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
 Local Light Opera Production 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Assinboine Valley Health District Funding 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1826 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1826 
 Rural Health Centre 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1826 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
 St. Joseph’s Hospital Funding 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
 Proposed Health Legislation 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1828 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1828 
 The Service Districts Act 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1828 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1828 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1829 
 911 System Funding 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1829 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1829 
 Investigation of Patient Death 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1830 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1830 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1832 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1833, 1837 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1835 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1836 
 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1839 
 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1840 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1840 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation  Vote 16 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1840 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1840 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1844 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1844 
 


