


















































April 3, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 733 
 April 3, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens in the province of Saskatchewan concerning 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names are from Regina, from Canora, from Moosomin, 
from virtually all small communities of concerned citizens 
across Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And it is signed by numerous people from throughout southern 
Saskatchewan including Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Englefeld, Wadena, Kuroki, Foam Lake, Viscount, and 
numerous places throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present petitions of names from various communities in 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Weyburn, but there are also names from Minton, 
Sedley, Coronach, and Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of concerned citizens regarding the closure of the Plains  

Health Centre. The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition are mostly for the communities of 
McLean, but they’re also Balgonie, Lampman, and also from 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 
names from people throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina  hundreds of them. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition of names from Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the concerned citizens 
from the city here itself, in Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition come predominantly 
from Tribune, Lake Alma; we also have Oungre on here, 
Torquay, as well as the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina, they’re from Frontier, they’re from Claydon, and 
they’re also from Estevan, and Frontier once again. And I’d like 
to present this to the Assembly, please. 
 
  



734  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to present 
petitions on behalf of people all throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are all 
from the Fort Qu’Appelle area. Thank you. I so submit. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have 
been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the government to 
take action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 
rental properties. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Clerk:  Mr. Johnson, Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills, presents the first report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee wishes to report that Mr. Johnson has 
been elected as Chair of the committee. Your committee 
has duly examined the undermentioned petitions for 
private Bills and finds that the provisions of rules 40, 64, 
65, and 68 have been fully complied with. 

 
The petitions are: 
 

Of the St. Paul’s Hospital, Grey Nuns, of Saskatoon 
praying for an Act to amend and consolidate the Act of 
incorporation; 
 
Of the Sisters of Charity, Grey Nuns, in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend and consolidate 
its Act of incorporation; and 
 
Of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
praying for an Act to amend the Act of incorporation; and 
 
Of Luther College in the province of Saskatchewan 
praying for an Act to amend the Act of incorporation. 
 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and to all members of the House, a 
group of fire-fighters who are here from various places in the 
province. They’re here for their annual convention, and they 
will be meeting with MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and are holding a special reception for MLAs 
tonight at the Hotel Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to welcome them here, Mr. Speaker, and I want to ask if 
a couple of them wouldn’t stand as I identify them, please. In 
the group is the president of the provincial fire-fighters’ 
association, Gerry Haget of Regina; president of local 80, Dave 
Rumpel of Saskatoon; president of local 181 of Regina, Dave 
Spooner; president of local 1527, Toosh McBride of Yorkton; 
president of local 510, Ron Mogg of Prince Albert; president of 
local 555, Rob Donley of Moose Jaw; and special guest, 
vice-president of the 6th district, Terry Ritchie from Vancouver. 
 
Would the members please welcome all of these fire-fighters. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition 
may I also add our sincere welcome to these very brave people 
who serve their communities very well in time of people’s 
needs. Thank you very much for being here. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too would like 
to join in welcoming the fire-fighters here today. Certainly we 
are looking forward to the reception that they’re going to hold 
later on today and we look forward to discussing the very 
important job that they do for all of our community and for all 
the people in Saskatchewan. We hope you have a great day and 
enjoy your visit here at the legislature and we welcome you as 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not to belabour this, Mr. Speaker, but I just 
want to extend a special welcome to Terry Ritchie who is an 
international vice-president of the IAFF (International 
Association of Fire Fighters), because it so happens that I once 
had the opportunity to spend some time in Washington, DC 
(District of Columbia) with Mr. Ritchie and enjoyed some 
hospitality at the international headquarters and met the 
international president and I just wanted to extend a very warm 
welcome. It’s good to see him again. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to add one name to 
the list and that is president of local 1318, Dick Yee from Swift 
Current. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Liberal Party Loyalty 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it seems 
that some of our local media has turned from printing fact to 
printing fiction or fantasy. We’ve all read these stories. We’ve 
heard the gossip. We’ve heard the unnamed sources. Now let’s 
look at the reality. I see with me nine other members of the 
opposition caucus. I see five Tories; that’s the reality, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our local media, particularly our local newspaper, seems to 
have missed that reality in the last couple of days. Instead of 
printing news it has seen fit to print gossip and innuendo. I have 
great respect for the media. Having been involved with the 
community newspaper for a couple of years, I know a reporter’s 
job isn’t an easy one. They work hard and for the most part they 
are fair, they are honest, and they are responsible. There is no 
one in our caucus who comes to the defence of the media 
quicker than I do, but the story that appeared yesterday is 
indefensible. It contained not a shred of evidence. Even the 
Leader of the Third Party has denied the story. Yet the 
newspaper fails to recognize reality and make right on its 
mistake. 
 
My only hope is this irresponsible reporting wasn’t prompted 
by the Hollinger corporation’s taste for revenge for my defence 
of the weekly newspaper industry in this House a couple of 
weeks ago. If that’s the case, if that’s the depth journalism has 
sunk to in our province, the people are the poorer ones for it. 
They deserve better than this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly on behalf of 
the Conservative caucus which, I might add, is only four of us 
here today, I would like to extend to the Liberals certainly 
warm wishes these days. I realize the storms of trouble that you 
are going through. The talk of machiavellian plots that are 
going around just simply isn’t the case, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Leader of the Opposition. But indeed something that you might 
want to look at is some macadamia nuts  which is about as 
close to the truth as we can get on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Now let me not disappoint the Leader of the 
Third Party by neglecting to call that an exhibit, and 
unfortunately, to the Leader of the Opposition, I’m going to 
have to ask the pages to remove it from the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Surgical Technique for Strabismus 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, I have a good news health story 
and it has to do with strabismus. Strabismus is a misalignment 
of the eyes, what is commonly called cross-eyed. This condition 
usually begins in childhood but can occur at any age. It affects 
approximately 1 in twenty-five people. The condition can be  

treated by surgery and that is the nature of my report. 
 
I have a constituent, Ms. Joyce Richards of Unity, who is the 
first patient in Saskatchewan to be successfully treated for 
strabismus with a new surgical technique performed at City 
Hospital in Saskatoon. The successful surgery was performed 
by Dr. Jeanette White, who works with Dr. Romanchuk at the 
eye centre. 
 
The success of this surgery is good news. Here’s more. Dr. 
White is a Canadian, trained at the Universities of Western 
Ontario, British Columbia, and at Johns Hopkins University in 
Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A. (United States of America) where 
she learned the new surgical technique. 
 
Her one-year fellowship at Johns Hopkins was supported by the 
Andrews Foundation, a foundation set up to support 
ophthalmology research. And here she is in Saskatchewan, 
bringing her skills and commitment to our province and our 
people. Joyce Richards is glad she is here and so am I  
strabismus is a condition that too often goes untreated. 
 
I welcome Dr. White to Saskatchewan as I’m sure do all 
members of the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Wildlife Week 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize National Wildlife Week, which begins this weekend. 
Every year Wildlife Week is celebrated early in April, which 
would normally coincide with the beginning of spring. It might 
be hard to imagine right now, but soon the green grass and 
leaves will be here and welcoming home the migratory birds. 
 
Living in rural Saskatchewan I’ve been fortunate enough to 
witness a wide variety of Saskatchewan wildlife. I don’t have to 
go any further than my own backyard to see the occasional 
duck, rabbit, geese, and hundreds of deer. Being raised on a 
farm, I’ve learned at an early age that people and wildlife must 
co-exist in this world. The farmers in east-central Saskatchewan 
certainly do not have to look any further than their own fields 
this spring to see how well the deer and the elk population is 
doing. 
 
As time has gone on I, like other landowners, have learned 
more about conservation practices that encourage wildlife to 
flourish. But the relationship between people and wildlife is 
also a fine balancing act. With proper resource management, 
there is no reason why we cannot have a satisfying wildlife 
conservation for all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Shares 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool went public on the 
Toronto Stock Exchange. Farmers who had built up equity in 
the company were offered stocks at $12 each. By noon  
  



736  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

yesterday the stock had risen to $14 and at closing yesterday the 
stock was at fourteen and one-eighth. That’s an 18 per cent 
increase in just one day. 
 
Canadian investors are evidently keen on the Pool. More than 2 
million shares traded hands the first day of trading, making the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, or SWP B, the most active stock on 
the TSE (Toronto Stock Exchange). 
 
Mr. Speaker, before trading, farmers held 53 per cent of 29.6 
million non-voting shares; Pool employees held 2 per cent; 
other Saskatchewan residents held twenty-two and a half per 
cent and residents outside Saskatchewan held twenty-two and a 
half per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, no matter what your opinion of the company 
trading publicly, we in Saskatchewan should be proud of the 
public’s response to a Saskatchewan company. This shows a 
great confidence in Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
agriculture. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Violence in Today’s Society 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before I begin 
my member’s statement, not only does the third party want our 
caucus members but now they want our nuts as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to call attention to a 
very serious and disturbing problem in our society today. 
Almost every day there are more incidents of violence reported 
in the news. One day it’s a cab driver getting robbed and 
beaten. Perhaps it’s the clerks in the convenience stores or gas 
stations being threatened at knife point. 
 
And those are only the incidents reported, Mr. Speaker. We 
often don’t hear of the children hiding their bruises from fellow 
classmates because of the beatings they got last night. 
 
What is most distressing about acts of violence, Mr. Speaker, is 
that every single one of them is preventable. While no thing and 
no one can force another person to commit a violent act, study 
after study shows that crime and violence is more common 
amongst people with lower incomes. 
 
These stats clearly demonstrate more reasons why there is a 
need to stimulate proper social and economic development 
across all levels of society. Both of these elements are required 
to fight the problem. Social and economic development must go 
hand in hand. People need the proper tools to climb out of this 
destructive cycle, Mr. Speaker. And in the meantime, we must 
protect the innocent and incarcerate the guilty. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bed and Breakfasts in Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last summer I walked 
across England from the Irish Sea to the North Sea. Part of the  

pleasure of that trip, before I broke my foot, was stopping along 
the way at the local bed and breakfasts. It was the perfect and 
economical way to see the country, meet the local people, and 
taste the beefsteak-and-kidney pie  mad cow disease, hang 
on. 
 
I mention my trip to remind the Assembly that in Saskatchewan 
we have over 100 bed and breakfasts which provide the same 
service. They are places that give the tourists a good sense of 
the down-home feeling in Saskatchewan, with style, courtesy, 
and economy. 
 
Holiday Inns and McDonald’s are okay, but they’re the same 
anywhere. Bed and breakfasts are special. 
 
Last weekend in Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Country 
Vacation Association held its annual meeting. The association 
represents 45 of the 100 bed and breakfasts, and its members 
can be found in Gull Lake, Carrot River, Cypress Hills, 
Redvers, and in the Saskatoon Southeast constituency. 
 
I want to mention Kathy and Ron Chaplin in my constituency, 
whose place I have visited and found very pleasant and 
picturesque. And I broke no bones during my visit to the 
Chaplin farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year more than 3,500 guests visited the 45 
members of the association. The industry is growing year by 
year and is making valuable contributions to our tourism 
industry. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a moment to reflect upon a very special event that took 
place in this city this morning  the Saskatchewan prayer 
breakfast. And I believe for all members who had the privilege 
of attending, it was an event worthwhile attending. 
 
We were certainly honoured, Mr. Speaker, to have Mr. Kevin 
Jenkins come and speak to over 500 people who attended. I 
think, Mr. Speaker, what Mr. Jenkins offered us was certainly 
some real words to dwell upon, to really think about, regarding 
leadership and our positions of leadership. 
 
And I want to commend the Saskatchewan prayer breakfast 
committee for all their hard work and their efforts in hosting 
such a prayer breakfast. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

New SaskTel President 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, this government moved to a 
new and shameful level of political patronage yesterday when it 
announced the appointment of Don Ching as head of SaskTel. 
This government has continually criticized the former Tory  
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

administration for the obscene level of patronage during their 
years in power. But the Premier and his colleagues have proved 
without a doubt they are one better, or perhaps the term should 
be no better, than their predecessors. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskTel explain why she and her 
government continue to line the trough with political friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we have reached a new 
low in this House today, when a member will use the immunity 
that he enjoys in this House, Mr. Speaker, in a vain, I say vain 
attempt, Mr. Speaker, to denigrate the reputation of a citizen of 
this province who doesn’t have the opportunity to defend 
himself in this House. 
 
Mr. Ching is a respected member of the Saskatchewan bar. He’s 
made exemplary contributions to the business community in 
this province with the Potash Corporation, as the deputy 
minister of Labour, at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), and I say, Mr. Speaker, shame on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps the most shocking aspect of yesterday’s announcement 
involving Mr. Ching was seeing the government members 
applauding his appointment in this House. The people of 
Saskatchewan were ashamed to see the minister applaud the 
appointment of Don Ching when it flies in the face of 
everything that she and every other NDP (New Democratic 
Party) candidate campaigned on in ’91 and ’95. 
 
The ’91 NDP election platform document stated an NDP 
government will, and I quote: “fight to eliminate patronage”. 
The ’95 document indicated, and I quote: “Building good 
government has to start by ending the abuses of the past”. Will 
the minister agree that the appointment of Don Ching further 
demonstrates that these abuses continue under her government? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the 
member opposite should look at his counterparts in Ottawa and 
some of the federal patronage appointments that have been 
made by their party. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from Dale 
Eisler’s column in July 25 of 1995 where he says  upon the 
leaving at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) of Mr. Ching  he said: 
 

He has handled the often difficult financial renegotiation of 
joint venture government investments inherited from the 
previous Grant Devine government. 

 
This man has saved the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
millions and millions of dollars in renegotiating those foul 
deals. And you . . . we owe a debt of gratitude to this man, Mr. 
Speaker, and the members opposite should be ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not questioning the  

credibility of Mr. Ching. It’s the government opposite that I’m 
questioning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may interest this House to know that Don 
Ching, when initially appointed as the head of the Crown 
Investments Corporation in ’91, was hired at an annual salary of 
$150,000 annually. Shortly before his departure at the head of 
CIC, his wage jumped to $160,000 a year. Now we find in his 
new role at SaskTel, that Mr. Ching has been rewarded with a 
salary of $167,000, along with a new car, plus bonuses. 
 
Will the minister explain how she and her government can 
justify paying Don Ching such an enormous wage, and in fact a 
substantial wage increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, this salary level that was 
announced, and of all the details which will be available subject 
to The Crown Employment Contracts Act after he is engaged, 
this will be public knowledge. Every detail will be tabled for all 
to see. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, we are very lucky to get a man 
of this quality for a job like this. Calgary, Telus’s chief pay 
topped $490,000 in 1995. AGT (Alberta Government 
Telephones), a pale shadow of a company the size of SaskTel, 
$298,000. In today’s Star-Phoenix, Chuck Childers, $1.8 
million annually; Michel, $1.064 million annually. We are so 
fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have a man the calibre of Don Ching 
for $167,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  It’s amazing to me, Mr. Speaker, when 
we’re asking everybody else in this province to do with less that 
we give one of our own a lot more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the appointment of Don Ching is just the latest in 
a long list of patronage appointments. He joins many others 
who are feeding from the public trough because of the NDP 
ties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated yesterday that the 
appointment of Don Ching means he waives the right to a 
$600,000 severance package. Will the minister confirm that all 
facets of this package have been nullified? And if so, will the 
minister explain if this is the very reason that Don Ching was 
hired, so that he would not have to be paid the exorbitant 
severance package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad to have 
the opportunity to answer that question. First of all, let me say 
that Mr. Ching never . . . it appeared in the press. This should be 
a lesson not to always believe what you read, especially in the 
newspaper. The press reported that he was asking for $600,000. 
He never made a demand. SaskTel never made him an offer. 
There was no demand for that amount. They’re two entirely 
separate events. 
  



738  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

Mr. Ching will be engaged on April 15 according to the terms 
of his letter of engagement at the salary we previously 
mentioned. There will be no compensation whatsoever of any 
sort between his separation of CIC and his engagement on April 
15. And Mr. Ching has signed a waiver of any claim to any 
amount for that period of time. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, in the private sector and in 
commercial terms and even morally, that it is wrong. But he has 
agreed because that’s a measure of the man, the measure of his 
integrity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
has taken care of party faithful, and do the names like David 
Dombowsky, Jack Messer, Ron Clark, Zach Douglas ring a 
bell? They should because these men all sit atop Crowns or 
government agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fred Van Parys was removed as the head of 
SaskTel over the fiasco involving the re-engineering of the 
Crown. Will the minister explain now what obligation the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan have to Mr. Van Parys, and why has 
he been retained when SaskTel now has a president? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it is a very normal 
practice in the telecommunications industry to engage 
consultants at the national and international level. 
 
Mr. Van Parys’s experience during his three-year tenure at 
SaskTel provided very important links with the Stentor alliance 
which is critical to the success of Canadian telecommunication 
companies. He’s engaged as a continuing consultant in that role. 
And it’s a valuable role. 
 
Mr. Ching will be the CEO (chief executive officer) of SaskTel. 
He doesn’t need any help in that role as president. But certainly 
the aid of a consultant is of value, and we are acting in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan people and our telephone company, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Polling 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, your latest round of polling shows that 
Saskatchewan people are not very happy with the way you’re 
running things. In fact 70 per cent of respondents disapprove of 
how your government is handling issues that concern them 
most. As always, job creation is the most important issue, and 
75 per cent of those polled disapprove of your government’s 
efforts in that area — to create jobs. 
 
Mr. Premier, every quarter you and your government does this 
kind of polling. But seems like nothing ever changes. We still 
have high taxes and over-regulation, and we’re still losing jobs. 
Mr. Premier, why do you do this kind of polling if you aren’t  

going to listen to it? When are you going to start making the 
changes Saskatchewan people are demanding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate being 
able to respond to the question because the polling that is done 
by the provincial government obviously is very important. Not 
that it sets the policy for the government, but it’s part of the 
consultation process. It’s one of the tools that we use, as well as 
the process the Premier went through before this session of 
going out and meeting with thousands of Saskatchewan people, 
asking their opinions. And what it shows is that the 
government, I think, is doing credibly well. 
 
Obviously when you refer to jobs and job creation and 
economic development, this is one of the themes that every 
government in this country is struggling with. And if you look 
at some of the national polls, when you look at some of the 
national polls . . . and there are a number of them available 
which show that on the issue of economic development and job 
creation, Saskatchewan places third in Canada. 
 
Now obviously being in the top half in Canada, we want to do 
better. And that’s why the work that is being done at the present 
time, the issuing of Partnership for Growth which is a 
document that business people were included in, that all of us 
 business people, working people, governments . . . are 
optimistic in creating jobs. The only ones who are gloom and 
doom . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many people look 
at that government’s quarterly report as a report card. Having 
spent some 20 years as an educator, I have some idea what 
reports cards say and this is about the worst one that I’ve seen 
in a long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, basically anything under 50 per cent is considered 
an F. So let’s just have a chat about the Premier’s report card 
and see how incredibly well things are going. Job creation gets 
an F. Taxation gets an F. Provincial finances gets an F. Health 
care gets an F. Education gets an F. Crown corporations gets an 
F. Social Service, gambling  all get an F. Policing gets an F 
 and the school teachers over there should be listening 
because they may have some work to do here  and speaking 
up for the provinces, 63 per cent. So I guess that’s a C, straight 
C. 
 
Nine F’s and one C. In many homes, the following line would 
follow: this is completely unacceptable, young man. Go to your 
room. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop making excuses and 
start applying yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I think what counts 
here is if you look at the progress we have made in a number of 
different areas . . . what the member isn’t being honest with is 
that in many areas in government there is an improvement. 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is the only real result that 
counts is the F the members opposite got last June. We all know 
about . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whitespruce Treatment Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, for two 
years there have been rumours of your government’s closing the 
Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre in Yorkton. And for two 
years, your NDP members have denied it. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that officials from your 
department are flying to Yorkton as we speak and that the 
purpose of the meeting at 2 o’clock with the Whitespruce staff 
is to inform them of Whitespruce’s closure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. I can confirm that what 
the member says is accurate. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. I don’t 
know about you, but I really don’t think that the way your 
department has handled this situation has been fair to 
Whitespruce employees at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Economic Development 
said there had been consultations going on. Last Friday, one day 
after your budget, the executive director received a memo from 
your department, stating that no decision has been made yet 
about Whitespruce’s future and that everyone could expect to 
hear something within the next few months, which would 
indicate to us that there really haven’t been those discussions 
going on. 
 
Then a Health official phoned Whitespruce this morning and 
told everyone to be at a 2 o’clock meeting today. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you honestly think it is fair that Whitespruce 
employees, even the executive director of the facility, have had 
to hear about their futures on the radio, on television, and in the 
papers, rather than from your department, especially when you 
had to know about this closure long ago? Do you really think 
this is fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member that 
it would have been better if the employees would not have 
heard about this closure through speculation in the media, and if 
they’d been advised directly. 
 
But I want to say to the member in the House that the 
commitment the government has is to enhance treatment for 
young people who have drug or alcohol problems. And I 
believe that the decision that has been made is the correct 
decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve had two facilities, each operating at less than full 
capacity. And the professionals have advised that a 
consolidation has many advantages, including sharing of staff 
resources and expertise at the Calder Centre, and also allied  

health community people outside of Calder and Whitespruce, 
such as specialized adolescent psychiatric services in 
Saskatoon, community-based resources and recreation 
education, and greater access to psychological consultation. 
 
We have two facilities that are under-utilized, Mr. Speaker. I 
think this will lead to enhanced protection and treatment for 
young people in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget Meeting Invitation 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, yet another example of this 
NDP government misusing its power appeared in an ad in 
Saskatoon’s Star-Phoenix. This ad invites the public to attend a 
budget discussion with the Finance minister at a cost of $15 per 
person. However, it’s the bottom of the ad which drew my 
attention and I’m sure members of the public as well. And I 
quote, “Cheques should be made payable to Saskatoon Idylwyld 
NDP.” 
 
Will the Minister of Finance attempt to justify how she can use 
her position within government to raise party funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, first of all when you 
get a question from the Liberals, you have to straighten out the 
facts. It’s a lunch, downtown Saskatoon, my riding, sponsored 
by my riding association. 
 
But I’ll tell the members opposite, it’s obviously quite a deal. 
Because I notice here the Liberals, Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition, in Melville, in the Fort Qu’Appelle Times, 40 
bucks. And the difference being that they say in one of their ads 
that a tax credit is available. 
 
I’ll tell you, no taxpayers’ money is being used for my event. 
I’d ask the members opposite why they expect taxpayers to foot 
part of the bill for their event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, no one bought the minister’s 
performance last week and I think she’s really tempting fate by 
trying to charge for a repeat performance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the minister and her colleagues obviously 
feel they are above approach . . . or reproach. First we have the 
perogy pusher, the member from Regina Northeast, doing deals 
from his cabinet office in an NDP fund-raising effort, and now 
the Finance minister is using her office to raise party funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, elected members represent constituents of all 
political stripes and these people should not have to pay the 
New Democratic Party to join in on a budget discussion. If the 
minister feels this is appropriate, I’d ask her then to make a 
commitment today to hold a budget discussion meeting with the 
members of my local Liberal association. 
 
  



740  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to make two points. The first point is, when the Liberals hold 
their political events they actually expect taxpayers to foot part 
of the cost. They put right in their ad: tax credits available. 
 
But the other point I would like to make is about the quality of 
the opposition. Mr. Speaker, this opposition, these Liberals, are 
getting a reputation for personal, trite, petty, vindictive 
comments and remarks. I ask the members opposite to look in 
the mirror and I ask them to ask themselves another question. 
When the member from Greystone was the leader of that party, 
she would never have tolerated this kind of behaviour. I think 
when she left she took her code of ethical conduct with her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recovery of Government Funds 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier and perhaps the Premier . . . and 
given our fiscal problems that we have, I wonder if the Premier 
could clarify for us on this side of the House his government’s 
position in trying to recover some of the monies illegally 
obtained by former members of this House. 
 
A couple of weeks ago I asked the Justice minister whether or 
not he was interested in trying to recover the money, which is 
over $800,000, that’s still out there. The minister’s answer left 
me a little bit uncertain, Mr. Speaker, over the government’s 
position on this. So I’ll ask the Premier, is the government 
interested at all in trying to recover some of these monies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a member 
of the Board of Internal Economy, I’ll just say that this matter is 
before the courts and there is litigation in process and we really 
can’t comment on it here. 
 

Northern College System 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education and Skills. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the Tories’ mismanagement of 
northern Saskatchewan has continued to haunt the people of this 
province through the NDP administration. The PC’s 
(Progressive Conservative) choice to amalgamate all regional 
colleges of the North and locate it in one central area, La 
Ronge, has done nothing but weaken the training potential to 
the people of the North. 
 
A few years ago the Westside Community College was 
amalgamated into a large northern college system, forming the 
Northlands College. Instead of saving money, not only does the 
centralized system cost more, but it also takes actual training 
dollars away from the Westside Community College budget. 
 
Will the minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education tell  

the House today how much money has been taken from the 
Westside College and been dumped into the central college 
system in La Ronge? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
that question, which I consider to be a very good question. 
Unfortunately, I don’t have the answer, and so I’m going to 
have to take notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, as the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education, you should be fully 
aware. The decision to amalgamate all northern colleges into 
one has done nothing but stifle the desperately needed training 
centres in northern Saskatchewan in all regions. 
 
In light of the already meagre adult education dollars allocated 
for the North, will the minister admit that fair regional 
distribution of training dollars is desperately needed in the 
North and that he will look into it and will reverse the Tory 
decision of the 1980s to centralize training and programs in the 
North into Northlands College and to work with the people of 
the North to establish the Westside Community College system 
in Buffalo Narrows? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very much 
aware of the great need for training that exists in northern 
Saskatchewan. That’s true in all of Saskatchewan, but it is 
particularly the case in northern Saskatchewan. There are, as the 
member will know, various efforts under way to provide 
training in respect of jobs which are now available or coming 
available in the northern mines. And we are happy to participate 
in that plan, that process, for providing training for northern 
people. 
 
As to the details of the member’s question, again, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll have to take notice. 
 

Economic Development Funding 
 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Economic Development. In 1992-93, the NDP government 
spent roughly $27 million on economic development. In ‘95-96 
they budgeted for just over 38 million. 
 
What astounds and saddens me is since they came to power in 
’91 we’ve seen nearly 2,300 businesses go bankrupt. In 
Manitoba in the same time, there was 1,400. 
 
We’re spending $11 million more on economic development 
today than we were four years ago. And what has been the 
result? Four thousand lost jobs between February ’95 and 
February ’96, and extremely high levels of bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister: what are you doing 
with the extra funding besides killing jobs and businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is well aware that the information she brings to the House, that 
there are fewer jobs in Saskatchewan, is misinformation. And if 
you’re not careful, you’re going to get the reputation as Miss 
Information, because it’s not correct. Since 1992, there are 
10,000 more people working in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you can make an argument, you can make an argument — 
these are StatsCan’s statistics, not mine — you can make an 
argument that there could be more or should be more, but be 
honest and be correct in the numbers; that since 1992, when 
Partnership for Renewal was released, there are 10,000 more 
people working in the province. 
 
I have here the latest numbers on the population statistics, and 
in the first quarter of 1996 there are now 1.018 million people 
living in Saskatchewan, which is nine consecutive quarters of 
growth in the population of Saskatchewan. The only place that 
there is gloom and doom and lack of expectation on the 
performance of the economy is in the members of the Liberal 
caucus. And maybe if you would pick up on the mood of 
optimism in the province, you’d do a little better in keeping 
your caucus together in a solidified way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I guess the minister and I will 
have to figure out where he gets his numbers from, and I get 
mine from his sources  the Sask Trends magazine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the minister is aware that Credit Union 
Central moved their payment clearing branch to Alberta and we 
lost 85 jobs as a result. This is indicative of how destructive this 
government can be when they set their minds on things like job 
cremation. I echo the dismay people had with the budget last 
week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic Development 
explain how his government decides who will receive hand-outs 
and tax breaks, and who will be made to suffer under the taxes 
that his government has imposed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to 
the member opposite that her numbers on bankruptcies in the 
province of Saskatchewan are absolutely inaccurate. In fact we 
have, last year in 1995, the lowest number of bankruptcies since 
1987. The other thing is, we are now at the highest point of 
incorporations in Saskatchewan. 
 
So what you’re saying about businesses not doing well in 
Saskatchewan are simply inaccurate. And I’ve offered you a 
number of times to come to the office and look at the stats and 
get them straight because obviously you don’t have them. 
 
But what I wanted to say as well, that a letter in the Leader-Post 
of March 30, which is titled: “Outflow of jobs: time for action”, 
clearly indicates that part of the problem Regina is having is the 
drain from Regina with federal civil servants to the city of 
Winnipeg, based on the political  

manœuvring of Mr. Axworthy versus your MP (Member of 
Parliament) here in Regina, Mr. Goodale. And I would urge you 
to get on the phone today and urge your federal counterparts to 
end this siphoning off of jobs from Regina to the city of 
Winnipeg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and through you, a renowned constituent of mine, Roy 
Atkinson. As you know, Roy Atkinson has been a farm leader 
in Saskatchewan and an advocate of the rights of people in 
circumstances that much of society avoids, all his life. And I’m 
honoured to have him as a constituent, and honoured to 
introduce him through you to other members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m indeed privileged to rise today in support of the provincial 
budget for the 1996-97 fiscal year in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But before I do that I want to personally congratulate you for 
being elected in the first election I guess, true election, to sit as 
the Speaker of this Legislative Assembly. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
having worked with you since 1986, that you bring integrity and 
honesty to your duties. And I know that you have the faith of all 
members of this legislature to make independent, logical, and 
rational decisions on behalf of all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge the presence of my 
father, Roy Atkinson, who is in the gallery today. I think this is 
the first time since I was elected in 1986 that my dad has had 
the pleasure to listen to his daughter that was born some 43 
years ago. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Not that long ago. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, not that long ago. 
  



742  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

There’s lots of things that I’ve learned from my father since 
becoming his child 43 years ago. And one of the things that I’ve 
learned from him . . . And I was being teased by one of the 
members about my father and what did my father have to say 
about the Wheat Pool shares. 
 
One of the things I’ve learned from him, Mr. Speaker, is that 
it’s important to serve people of this province with integrity and 
honesty, and that if you approach your tasks with integrity and 
honesty, the people may not like what you have to say all the 
time but they will respect your right and respect you for having 
the courage to say it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  So I want to tell my dad today that I 
have not let him down in any sense of the imagination  I 
haven’t let my mother down  that I continue to show strong 
commitment to the people of this province, and I think I bring 
honesty and integrity to this position. And I think all of us bring 
honesty and integrity to this position at a time when politicians, 
the word “politician”, is suspect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also, for the first time since being elected in June 
of 1995, want to once again thank the constituents of the 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana for honouring me with this 
privilege to be an elected member of the Legislative Assembly. 
It’s a privilege that so few of us in this province ever get to 
experience. 
 
It’s one of those jobs that can be wonderful; it’s one of those 
jobs that can take you to your all-time low. There are ups and 
downs associated with this privilege that we’re honoured with. 
But I can assure the constituents of Saskatoon Nutana that I 
continue to advocate on their behalf, I continue to speak up on 
their behalf, and I will do that until I’m no longer a member of 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now to speak about budget, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to be a 
member of this NDP government that has once again shown a 
strong commitment to sustaining the quality of education for 
which Saskatchewan has become famous, Mr. Speaker. The 
budget presented by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, 
recognizes the critical role that education plays in our province 
and the critical role that education means to the future growth 
and prosperity of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is good news in this budget for education 
and Saskatchewan people. There are increases in the operating 
grants to school divisions in each of the next two years. We’re 
advancing our key policy objectives, and those key objectives 
include sustaining the quality of rural education, Mr. Speaker, 
something that I and my government feel strongly about. 
 
Another objective is improving opportunities for young people. 
And the third objective, Mr. Speaker, is supporting children at 
risk. Modest changes have been made to the foundation 
operating grant to strengthen its basic principles and help meet 
these policy objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to protecting school divisions from  

any operating fund reductions for two years, this budget 
provides to school divisions the time and the context for their 
planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a high priority has been placed on education. 
Some difficult decisions have been taken in order to support our 
system. Education is a clear priority of our government. 
Education, Mr. Speaker, is also a clear priority of the people of 
our province, as we were told during our extensive public 
consultations prior to the Finance minister bringing her budget 
into this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget advances equity and improves the use 
of our existing education resources. There’s ongoing support 
here for the most vulnerable people in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget contains $2.35 million in enhanced 
funding for community schools and the Indian and Metis 
educational development programs. This budget also targets 
another $1 million in enhanced support for students with special 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all part of our continuing contribution to 
the very successful integrated approach to meeting need 
holistically known as Saskatchewan’s action plan for children, 
an action plan that I am personally very proud of. 
 
In spite of the severe financial pressures imposed upon us by 
the federal government cut-backs, we’ve prevailed. This budget 
has a human face, and real human beings and their real 
priorities are the focal point of this budget. Saskatchewan 
continues our honourable tradition of compassionate, 
responsible fiscal management. 
 
All provinces, Mr. Speaker, are facing the reality of sharply 
reduced federal transfer payments beginning in the new fiscal 
year. For Saskatchewan that means a federal cash transfer 
reduction of more than $250 million per year at end of 
1999-2000. The federal government is cutting federal transfer 
payments by more than $100 million this fiscal year, and more 
than $200 million annually thereafter. These are deep cuts, Mr. 
Speaker, that continue year after year after year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us remember who’s put Saskatchewan in this 
terrible position. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been put 
behind the fiscal eight ball by a Liberal government in Ottawa. 
Mr. Speaker, it is the Liberal government in Ottawa that has 
chosen to attack Canada’s social programs as its best way to 
deal with the federal deficit. 
 
It is the Liberal government in Ottawa that unilaterally did 
away with the Crow rate benefit to our Saskatchewan farmers 
 and not a peep from the rural Liberal members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the Liberal government, it is the Liberal 
government that is systematically destroying the fundamental 
culture and infrastructure of the people of this province. The 
Liberals were elected to do away with the NAFTA (North 
American Free Trade Agreement) agreement. Did they do it? 
No. No, they continued the role of international capital in this 
country, and they support the role of international capital in this 
country. 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

(1430) 
 
The Liberal government’s highest priority appears to be 
slashing social programs in this country to fundamentally 
change the nature of this country so that we become like our 
sisters and brothers south of the border. That is what these 
Liberals are about in this House, and that is what the Liberals in 
Ottawa are about, Mr. Speaker. And I think in the next federal 
election the people of this country should rally and dislodge the 
Liberal government and expose them for what they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ottawa and the Liberals have misplaced priorities, 
and Saskatchewan people are now bearing the brunt of their 
failure to make social programs, to make people, Mr. Speaker, 
their priority. The Liberal government in Ottawa is making the 
wrong choices for Canada. They are making the wrong choices. 
They’re undermining our social programs and they’re 
threatening the quality of education which Saskatchewan people 
place the highest priority on. 
 
I’d invite, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal administration in Ottawa to 
follow the leadership of this NDP government. We’ve led all of 
Canada in managing our deficit, eliminating our deficit, and 
we’re dealing with our debt successfully. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
most important thing, we’re dealing with our deficit 
compassionately. 
 
And let’s never forget who bankrupted this province in the first 
place. Mr. Speaker, it was the Saskatchewan Tories who 
bankrupted this province. The Tories should be ashamed to 
show their faces in this Assembly during the budget debate. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I notice that they have. 
 
We’ve literally pulled the province out of the fiscal abyss only 
to have the federal Liberals now undercut our economic 
recovery. We will not let wrong-headed federal policies and 
practices drag this province down ever again. And as our 
Premier said in his public address following our recent public 
consultations, we will manage the federal cuts and we will 
overcome them, Mr. Speaker, like we have overcome all kinds 
of obstacles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have courage. It is 
fundamental to who we are. This government has courage, I 
have courage, and we will overcome whatever hand we are 
dealt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, we’ve delivered on this 
promise. And, Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t easy. This budget 
underscores our belief in a compassionate, caring agenda. This 
budget says unequivocally that we will not allow the 
excellence, the fundamental excellence, of our education 
system, which is outstanding, to be compromised. 
 
Consider for a moment, Mr. Speaker, the reality of the 
excellence in education that we’re so proud of. During 
Education Week in Saskatchewan this year, which we 
celebrated last month, I was again amazed at the remarkable 
things that so many remarkable people do in education.  

Saskatchewan has the best teachers in the world and the best 
school system in the country. That’s something worth 
protecting and saving and enhancing, and that’s exactly what 
this budget does. 
 
Teachers like Leo Carteri from Fillmore. His science students 
have taken home honours every year at the Canada-wide 
science fair. Mr. Carteri is the winner of the 1995 Prime 
Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence in Science, 
Technology, and Mathematics. His students at 33 Central 
School in Fillmore are getting invaluable experience through 
these competitions, and introduction to the business world at the 
same time. 
 
Or consider the work of Linda Helmke, a grade 6 teacher at 
Pre-Cam School in La Ronge. She’s been chosen as the winner 
of the Kirkpatrick Travel Award for 1995 by the University of 
Saskatchewan for her creative work with both native and 
non-native students. Ms. Helmke will travel to the NASA 
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration) in Florida. 
 
She is preparing her students for career choices in science by 
capturing their imagination and exciting them about the 
universe. She has the motto in her classroom which reads, and I 
quote: “Shoot for the moon; if you miss, you will still be among 
the stars.” This motto could well describe the excellence of 
education in Saskatchewan generally. By shooting for the 
moon, the many talented teachers like Linda Helmke and Leo 
Carteri in fine schools like the ones in La Ronge and Fillmore 
are shaping the lives of students and illuminating our whole 
future as a province. 
 
During Education Week, we saw this kind of energy, creativity, 
and quality in education in scores of communities across 
Saskatchewan. This is the reality of education in our province. 
These are the real people behind the numbers in the budget. 
They are why this strong support for education is so important 
to every one of us. These are the real leaders and role models 
that can be found in every single community across 
Saskatchewan, and I say congratulations and thank you to these 
people. Our budget supports these people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, on budget day The Globe 
and Mail newspaper described the anticipated Saskatchewan 
budget as common sense and in a tradition of common sense. 
The budget fulfils that anticipation, and it confirms our sensible 
path of four more balanced budgets to come. Common sense is, 
Mr. Speaker, not so common, especially when it comes to 
governments. It is an attribute of our government which makes 
us proud. Common sense also is characteristic of Saskatchewan 
people generally. 
 
Think of what we can do with a little common sense and 
ingenuity. For instance during Education Week in 
Saskatchewan, the minister responsible for SaskTel and myself 
were able to call to the attention of this Assembly the donation 
of 1,000 computers to our schools by the provincial government 
and Crown corporations. These computers are good machines 
that our school children need badly  a good  
  



744  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

example of Saskatchewan government common sense in action. 
The Computers for Schools program is something to which both 
our public and private sectors could contribute, something that 
can make a real difference for Saskatchewan young people. 
 
We in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are protecting the most 
vulnerable and managing our resources in a fair and 
compassionate way as fundamental principles and values of this 
province. That is the Saskatchewan way, and that’s our way. 
 
This is a provincial government which stays . . . provincial 
budget, pardon me, which stays the course. Our budget 
planning took place in the context of government-wide 
priorities and consultation. And by adopting an integrated 
approach and a long-term plan, the series of our budgets since 
1992 have literally brought us out of the hole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us compare our province to some of the rest of 
the country. Our common sense budgets and fiscal leadership 
clearly distinguish Saskatchewan among all other provinces. 
What really sets us apart is excellence, shooting for the moon, 
and the way that we do things in education. We do it the 
Saskatchewan way. The Saskatchewan way, which is 
fundamental to who we are as citizens in this province, is 
cooperation, consultation, compromise, and negotiation. 
 
For example New Brunswick is in the process of making 
everybody involved in the education system, a provincial 
government employee. Every teacher, every director of 
education, every administrator, every janitor, every school 
secretary  everybody. And they’re abolishing all elected 
school boards, and this is coming from a Liberal government in 
New Brunswick. 
 
Now let’s look at Alberta, Conservative Alberta. For many 
families there, government-imposed solutions are the realities 
of public education. Or look towards Manitoba where radical 
changes to the way that teachers are treated have been imposed 
with little input from teachers in their communities. 
 
And of course let’s consider good old Ontario. There seems to 
be an all-out assault on the public education system. Slashing 
funding is one of Ontario’s answers to everything, with no 
regard to the devastating impact on the quality of education and 
to the real needs of hundreds of thousands of children. Not 
much common sense in Ontario these days it would appear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the curriculum development 
process in this process. The way we do things, the way we 
developed Saskatchewan core curriculum is the envy of others 
across the country. And our curriculum is the product of 
cooperation, of involving teachers and trustees and parents in a 
meaningful way from the very beginning. And that cooperative 
process continues. 
 
And if we look at British Columbia, we see that they have had 
to start the curriculum development plan all over again. And as 
governments change in Ontario, so apparently does the mandate 
around curriculum. In Manitoba, the rush to conclude the 
process may compromise it entirely. 
 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in stark contrast, we discussed, 
collaborated, persevered, stuck to our principles, and succeeded. 
We can justifiably be proud of what we’ve accomplished in 
education here. We can especially be proud of the way in which 
we have done it and the way we will continue to do it together, 
cooperatively, with the utmost respect for democratic processes 
and broad citizen participation and involvement. Mr. Speaker, I 
repeat, what really sets us apart from the rest of the country is 
excellence mixed in with a healthy dose of common sense. 
 
In developing our provincial budget, we had to take into 
account three key challenges. First, the new fiscal reality caused 
by the federal Liberals’ transfer payment cuts; second, our 
government’s long-term commitment to sustain balanced 
budgets; and third, our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to education 
and to other priority programs. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud today to 
say that this budget meets all of these challenges. 
 
And let me say a word about our commitment to sustainable 
balanced budgets. Two years ago our government set a course 
for balancing the provincial budget. Last year, for the first time 
in over a decade, this goal was reached. It marked a turning 
point in our province and I want to assure the Assembly and the 
people of this province that this government’s focus on 
balanced budgets is not an end in itself, but a means to an end. 
We want to have the financial freedom, Mr. Speaker, to create 
opportunities for future growth and prosperity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the financial freedom and independence allows us 
to do what is really important, and that’s to create hope. The 
less we have to spend on annual interest rates, interest charges, 
the more we can allocate to programs for people, little kids, 
young people, children, education programs for our people. 
 
Our policy of sustained budgets means hope, Mr. Speaker. 
There is hope in this budget for sustaining a quality rural 
education system. There is hope in supporting children at risk. 
There is hope in making better use of technology for our 
people. There is hope when we support our community schools. 
And there is hope, Mr. Speaker, in successful education 
partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we sought to shield operating grants to 
schools from any reductions over the next two years. This 
budget does that. We sought to provide solid information about 
future years to assist school boards and other third parties in 
planning. And this budget does that. And we sought to defer as 
far into the future as possible any funding reductions that will 
be necessary because of the increasingly negative impacts of the 
federal transfer payment cuts. And this budget says that as well. 
 
Despite the reductions in federal transfer payments which have 
put significant fiscal pressure on our province and our 
government, there will be an increase in operating grants for 
schools for each of the next two years. And for the coming year, 
operating grants to school divisions will increase by $2 million. 
And next year, there will be a further increase of $900,000. 
 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

The increases to our budget over the next two years 
demonstrate our province’s, our government’s commitment to 
sustaining quality education in the province. The decisions were 
made with principle, Mr. Speaker, principle in mind. The 
principle of equity will be protected and strengthened in order 
that there be fairness between richer and poorer school 
divisions. That is a principle that is fundamental to who we are 
as a party. 
 
The funding goes to rural school divisions, is being protected. 
We are protecting rural education, a system that I know 
something about, having been a young child in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the proportion of the total grant that is 
unconditional will remain constant. 
 
Now look at where we’re spending more. Look at our priorities. 
These are good choices for our people. These are good choices 
for education. Our expectation is for savings; system 
improvements that will improve services to our young people in 
our classrooms. These are choices that reflect what 
Saskatchewan people have been saying to us. 
 
And in recognition of the higher costs associated with operating 
small rural and isolated schools, modest adjustments were made 
to the foundation operating grants to target funding for those 
schools. A $3 million new technology factor has been 
developed to provide a range of programs and services which 
support rural students’ transition from high school to the world 
beyond. For example, rural school divisions might use the funds 
to provide work transition programs delivered electronically, or 
other technological enhancements to aid in learning. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, distance education has an important role to play in 
providing equitable and affordable access to education from 
every corner of this province. And because of the success at 
meeting the learning needs of students with special needs, 
current programs which target specific groups of children are 
being expanded. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, we have community schools in this 
province that have helped young people who are in difficulty. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re adding another $2.35 million for more 
community school development and more development for 
programs for Indian and Metis people. And I am proud of that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I am proud of it because 
our community schools program which was implemented by a 
distinguished Minister of Education, the Hon. Doug McArthur, 
in the early 1980s provide a holistic approach to help students 
who are facing difficulties caused primarily by urban poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Indian and Metis development program 
promotes shared responsibility and culturally responsive 
approaches to education. Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of Indian and 
Metis kids don’t complete high school. We have to do  

everything that we can to ensure that Indian and Metis people 
do not have systemic barriers to being successful educationally. 
And I think this enhancement begins to move away some of the 
barriers so that Indian and Metis people can participate in our 
province in a genuine, real way where we partner with them to 
advance the cause of all of the people of this province. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a million dollar enhancement of 
the targeted behavioural program. Mr. Speaker, I know 
something about this. I used to work with young street kids in 
the city of Saskatoon  kids that were in trouble with the law, 
kids that got into difficulty because of their personal 
circumstances. Mr. Speaker, last year we introduced a new 
initiative to expand funding or to implement funding for kids 
with behaviour difficulties and this year we’re announcing 
another $1 million to ensure that kids that have some problems 
can be successful in school so that they can be honest, 
contributing members of our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve added a 
million dollars to our designated disabled people program. And 
these increases, Mr. Speaker, are in recognition of the real costs 
associated with school divisions in the provision of appropriate 
education for these students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard from educators of the citizens of this 
province that we need to support in providing quality education 
for Saskatchewan students. Our government, when the Minister 
of Finance delivered her budget, ensured that we provided 
increased support to those areas requiring special consideration. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of that fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, funding for capital projects remains very tight. 
We’ll target the most urgent capital priorities to deal with 
enrolment pressures and repairs and renovations. Emphasis will 
continue to be placed on the cost-efficient sharing of facilities 
and on the provision of safe, well-equipped schools for 
Saskatchewan students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our department needs to be congratulated. They 
went through their administrative costs with a fine-toothed 
comb and again, Mr. Speaker, admin costs have been reduced 
by more than $400,000 in this fiscal year. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that is a tribute to the dedication and public 
commitment of the staff in the Department of Education. And I 
want to thank them for their efforts today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I want to invite all members of 
the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan to consider the 
following facts when forming their judgement on this budget. 
The budget addresses the fiscal reality of significantly reduced 
federal transfer payments. The budget shields school divisions 
from any operating grant’s reductions for the next two years. In 
fact the budget increases operating grants in each of the next 
two years. It provides us with an opportunity to further our key 
educational policy objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about hope, and this budget is about 
confidence in our province’s future  a future which will be  
  



746  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

shaped, Mr. Speaker, by our government’s strong support for 
sustaining a high quality education system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget which I call upon all members of 
this Legislative Assembly to support. It’s a budget for the next 
century, and it’s a budget about our young people, our 
children’s future, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you. I will be voting 
for this budget, and I would invite all members of this House to 
join the government in supporting a budget that takes us into the 
next century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
find this budget is just another example of broken promises and 
poor choices. This government insists more money is being 
spent on health care than ever before, and yet they’ve closed 52 
hospitals and many more acute care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where was and where is the plan? A former 
minister of Health said we would have input into setting up 
health districts. But before the process was finished, she came 
along and did what she had pre-planned anyway. Now that we 
have elected and appointed health boards, although we have 
some appointments that were not really arrived at by the 
original format set out by the Health department, these boards 
are now being blamed for the huge deficits. They are becoming 
the scapegoats for this government’s mismanagement. Health 
care history of the last four years in Saskatchewan shows there 
was no plan and is no plan, Mr. Speaker, just hack and slash to 
be able to say the budget was balanced in time for ’95 election. 
 
Now we come to municipal government. The Minister of 
Municipal Government and the Premier have said there is no 
plan to amalgamate municipalities. Well now we have a $28 
million cut to Municipal Government, 20 million of that next 
year. Municipalities have been downloaded on for the last seven 
or eight years, Mr. Speaker, drastically in the last four. Many 
RMs (rural municipality) are receiving close to 40 per cent less 
in revenue from this government now as they did when the 
government came into power in ’91. Now after these cuts, 
another $28 million less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities are now being told they have to 
become more efficient by sharing services. What on earth, Mr. 
Speaker, does this government think that these people have 
been doing? They’ve been taking all these cuts and only raising 
their mill rate on an average of 10.8 per cent in this same time 
period. They have been becoming very efficient. Part of this has 
been done by sharing services such as offices, fire protection, 
rec facilities, garbage collection, machinery, road building and 
maintenance equipment. They’re already sharing services. 
 
This government would do better taking the lead of municipal 
government instead of forcing something on them that they 
don’t want or need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these municipalities were also promised 10 per 
cent of the VLT (video lottery terminal) money. And guess 
what? Another broken promise. No money is coming. 
 

What I see with municipal amalgamation is many things 
resembling the health care fiasco. The urban members can sit in 
here and say what a wonderful health care system we have. But 
ask anyone in rural Saskatchewan and you get a much different 
picture painted. This government by slashing funding, feel they 
can force the county system upon municipalities of all sizes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no study has been done, no cost analysis done, 
nothing to show where the big dollars will be saved. The studies 
that have been done and experienced by other municipalities in 
other provinces have actually proved to be more expensive per 
capita. 
 
Next on the chopping block, education. Mr. Speaker, 2 per cent 
was promised, which would have been what  $7 million? But 
instead we get now a $2 million increase, which isn’t even new 
money. They have pushed the protocol agreement aside, dealt 
with teachers, and the $2 million won’t even come close to 
cover the wage increase, let alone the other increasing costs. 
 
This government is saying to trustees, you aren’t part of the 
negotiating process, but you will be responsible to come up 
with the extra money to fund schools, without school closures 
and teacher lay-offs. Then the government, as usual, will blame 
the school divisions when closures and teacher lay-offs happen. 
 
This government has become masters at blaming everyone else 
for their lack of vision and lack of a master plan. But after every 
utility rate hike possible, highest income tax rate in the country, 
they are front and centre when they are taking credit for a 
balanced budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan balanced the budget; not the members opposite. 
 
What is so astounding is that in the election campaign, the 
Saskatchewan public was told the budget is balanced, so the 
cutting is over. This government did this knowing full well how 
much the federal cut-backs were going to be at that time. 
 
We have seen the government break contracts with farmers, 
costing Saskatchewan farmers millions, sending federal money 
back to Ottawa and then whining about the federal funding cuts. 
We have seen this government break campaign promises to no 
end since the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP was ousted from power in 1982 for being 
arrogant and out of touch with the Saskatchewan people. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Blakeney’s government look like mice 
compared to the fat cats we see in government now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, has been wrote 
off by this government  breaking contracts with farmers, 
program funding cuts, crop insurance cut-backs, and now 
another 50 million in cut-backs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest the members opposite should take a 
drive in rural Saskatchewan and they should do it quick while 
the highways are still somewhat passable. They will see the 
inventiveness of the farmers in rural Saskatchewan; people who 
have been hit hard, as hard or harder than anyone else in this  
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

province and they’re still trying to their full capacity to survive 
in agriculture. And they are the ones planning for the 21st 
century despite the choices being made by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a government to lay off highway maintenance 
people when our highways are in the worst condition in the 
history of this province shows that this province is being run by 
a calculator and not a well oiled plan for the good of all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management to lay off 125 people can only be explained in one 
of two ways. Either they were overstaffed by more than 100 
people, which is another example of mismanagement by this 
government; or the government’s priority of the environment is 
at an all-time low and again being dictated by the calculator, not 
the well-being of the Saskatchewan public and future 
generations. 
 
Another subject and another broken promise by the minister 
from Yorkton on Whitespruce. When the election was on he 
said, there is nothing to the rumour Whitespruce will close. 
Well here we go again  more broken promises. 
 
Since 1991 we have heard only two consistencies out of the 
NDP Party. The first four years they did nothing but blame 
Grant Devine and the Conservatives. Mr. Speaker, for two or 
three years this had a lot of credibility to it. Now since the 
election, they have switched to blaming the Premier’s good 
friend, the Prime Minister. Will they ever get to the point that 
this government will take the responsibility for their own 
mistakes in the choices they are making? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, in closing, I must say I feel 
this budget may also be responsible for the cold weather 
because of the chilly reception it’s getting in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many members opposite have continually talked 
about change in the 21st century. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
suggest three more budgets like this one and the people of 
Saskatchewan will make the change; they will change the 
government in 1999 to make the Allan Blakeney ousting in ’82 
look like child’s play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you’ve probably guessed, I cannot support this 
budget. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great pleasure 
that I rise to add my voice to this budget debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is perhaps fortunate that I rise today because 
I’ve just returned from a short trip to the western edge of this 
great province of ours. It is a part of the province that will 
always hold a warm place in my heart because that’s where I 
was born. But, Mr. Speaker, more than a trip down memory 
lane, the last couple of days have been an eye-opener for me  
an eye-opener because I’ve seen firsthand the devastating 
impact this government’s policies are having, particularly in  

western Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you move closer and closer to the 
Saskatchewan-Alberta border, you can see the detrimental 
effects of this government’s oppressive taxation policies. Out 
there, people don’t have to think twice about taking a short trip 
across the border to buy some of their larger items and perhaps 
do most of their spending. The taxation policy of this 
government is forcing large businesses in that area right out of 
business  the very people that create employment activity and 
opportunity. They simply cannot complete against the zero sales 
tax rate in Alberta. 
 
Now I realize, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not in a position to 
get rid of the sales tax. And frankly, people realize that, and 
they were willing to take that into account. When the tax was 5 
per cent, people for the most part were willing to keep their 
money in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
When the Conservatives raised the tax to 7 per cent, the 
problem of cross-border shopping took an upturn and did begin 
gnawing away at the business sector in Saskatchewan. And then 
the first thing this government did when assuming office was to 
raise the tax to 9 per cent  9 per cent. 
 
This move served as a death knell to business people near the 
Alberta border. Money began to flow over the border at a faster 
and faster rate, a trend that continues until this very day. 
Probably the most upsetting part about all this is this 
government’s and this Finance minister’s stubborn refusal to 
accept this very basic fact. 
 
People are overburdened by taxation. The economy is 
stagnating because people have no disposable income to spend 
in Saskatchewan. Once they pay their taxes, they have to pay 
higher and higher utility bills, higher service fees, higher 
everything. This government cannot tax enough; it just keeps 
going and going and going. 
 
The Minister of Finance, her blinders firmly in place, says 
people in Saskatchewan like to pay high taxes. It’s what makes 
our province so great, she says. Well I only say to her, take a 
trip to the West and ask the business owners that are managing 
to survive what they think of high taxation. In fact travel 
anywhere in Saskatchewan  you’ll find the same story. 
 
But wait a minute, the Finance minister says in her budget, I did 
say lower taxes. Yes, Mr. Speaker, a very few Saskatchewan 
residents will enjoy relief because of this budget. Yes, a few of 
our citizens will get the greatest benefit of an extra $12.50 a 
month. Wow! I’m overwhelmed and I’m sure all the people in 
this province are overwhelmed. That’s just about enough to pay 
off the higher power bills this government has imposed. I think 
the Finance minister will excuse the people of Saskatchewan for 
failing to do many handsprings in the streets over $12.50. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this government took over in 1991, it has 
raised personal taxes by 33 per cent and that doesn’t include the 
outrageous utility rate hikes but, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t  
  



748  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

enough. They have seen fit to drain a further $100 million out 
of the economy through its VLT program  $100 million. This 
government is now taking in more money from the people of 
Saskatchewan than ever before. But that’s not enough for this 
government to feel compelled to keep its promises. 
 
Of the $100 million the government is now siphoning out of our 
communities each and every year, last year it promised to return 
a paltry 10 per cent to communities devastated by the loss of 
this money out of the local economy. Clearly 10 per cent wasn’t 
enough, but at least it was something. But as soon as the votes 
were counted and cast in the last election, even this very small 
promise became too much for this arrogant and untrustworthy 
government to honour  another broken promise. 
 
This is the same government that promised our beleaguered 
education system a raise of 2 per cent this year. Of course that 
was before the election. Around 8:01 p.m. on election night, 
this pledge to the schools, to our students, also became null and 
void. Another broken promise. 
 
And then there was the promise to not send farmers GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) bills. That seemed fair since 
this is a government that stole $188 million from farmers to 
balance last year’s budget in time for the election. Of course 
after the election, the Minister of Agriculture practically 
sprinted to the mailbox to get those same bills in the mail. Yes, 
Mr. Speaker, another broken promise. 
 
The list goes on and on and on. This is a government that 
promised to rid our public service of patronage in the 1991 
campaign. Then what did it do? Well Mr. Messer was made 
president of SaskPower as a political reward. Unfortunately 
he’s but one sorry example. In the last few days, Mr. Ching has 
been named president of SaskTel. I guess being the Premier’s 
room-mate does have its privileges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the Saskatchewan public to put up with the pain they have, 
pain inflicted by this government, to have to sit and watch the 
Premier reward his political friends in this way is absolutely 
wrong. It’s wrong. For this government to break promise after 
promise after promise is also wrong. We know that. The 
Saskatchewan public knows that. Good grief, even the third 
party might even know that. The only ones who don’t know that 
are the members opposite consumed by their own arrogance and 
disregard for the public. 
 
This absolute disregard for the citizens of this province was 
made even more evident in the political charade they pulled in 
the days and weeks leading up to the presentation of this 
budget. They put the fear of God into everyone in this province. 
Cuts, cuts, cuts, they said. Brace yourself. Those nasty feds are 
forcing us into making tough decisions they said. Of course the 
people of Saskatchewan were scared to death. And for what? So 
this government could play a cynical political game. 
 
The Finance minister knew full well the province could absorb 
the cuts from Ottawa, given the record revenue we’re 
experiencing due to strong resource and farm sectors and of 
course the mind-boggling taxation regime imposed by this  

government. But the Finance minister wanted to look like a 
hero riding in to save the day. 
 
Madam Minister, don’t expect congratulations for doing your 
job. You’re paid quite well. Get on with it and stop the political 
nonsense. The people of this province deserve better than this 
government playing politics with their lives, which is exactly 
what they’ve been doing since being re-elected in 1991. The 
election campaign is over; get on with the job you were elected 
to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that reminds me of a great 
magician. There is plenty of smoke and mirrors, plenty of 
magic and illusion, but precious little, if any of it, is real. It’s all 
trickery on the part of this government, with whom politics 
always, always takes precedence over sound policy. But remove 
the smoke and mirrors and the house of cards collapses. 
 
Trickery is what we saw in the lead-up to the budget  the 
cupboard is empty, we can’t live up to our election 
commitments. Give me a break. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan might very well think the only thing in short 
supply with this government is honesty. They may very well 
think there’s a shortage of integrity and trust. They may very 
well think that, but I couldn’t possibly comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister proudly stood on the floor of 
this House and stated, with a straight face I might add, that 
there would be no new taxes as a result of this budget  no 
new taxes. Another sham, I’m afraid, more smoke, more 
mirrors. At the same time the minister was making that bold 
promise, she was busily offloading once again onto local 
governments. This time they’re going to lose 25 per cent of 
their funding. Where does the minister think they can make up 
that kind of revenue? 
 
This is not the provincial government we’re talking about. 
There just isn’t that much waste at the local level. Like our 
schools and our health care, local government have been cut to 
the bone over the last four years. They can’t take any more, but 
this government keeps piling it on, harder and harder and 
harder. And at the same time, they decry offloading by the 
federal government. 
 
What hypocrites, Mr. Speaker. It’s unbelievable. The members 
opposite are either in a serious case of denial or they are 
consumed by their own arrogance. They actually believe the 
nonsense they are spouting. 
 
And what about these cuts to municipalities, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Municipal Government has promised over and over 
this government will not force municipalities to amalgamate 
against their will. Well if chopping their funding by a full 
quarter isn’t forced amalgamation, I don’t know what is. 
 
Clearly this is another cynical act by this cynical government  
more dishonesty, more of the same, I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what about this government cutting some of its own waste? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they did cut. They have reduced the 
provincial civil service. But which jobs were trimmed? The  
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

front-line employees that are so very vital. The paper-pushers 
here in Regina are safe, but the people who actually do the work 
 the ones who actually repair our highways, the ones who 
serve our citizens, the ones who actually are needed  are the 
first to go. 
 
This is a government which can have two ministers of 
Education but can’t afford to hire teachers or fund schools. This 
is a government that feels it necessary to have two ministers of 
gambling but closes hospitals. It’s all a matter of choices, Mr. 
Speaker. And this government has made the wrong choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have said, this budget is nothing 
more than a blaming budget, an abdication of leadership by this 
government. This is a government which is either unwilling or 
unable to take responsibility for its own actions. They take 
credit for the good, but what about the bad? That’s never their 
fault. 
 
Not these members, who seem to walk on water, at least in their 
own minds. I just ask the members opposite, what colour is the 
sky in your world? They live in a world of fantasy, Mr. 
Speaker. The cabinet is out of touch with the people. And the 
back-benchers, who might still have contact with the public, are 
muzzled. It’s truly distressing, Mr. Speaker. And it’s truly sad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I knew when I got into politics I would have to 
suffer a few slings and arrows. That goes with the territory, and 
I can take it. But what I cannot take is this government’s 
attitude towards the people of Saskatchewan. It’s reprehensible 
and it’s wrong. 
 
No, this budget is not going to cause the sky to fall. It won’t be 
the ruination of our province. The sun will, in fact, rise 
tomorrow, and I hope it brings with it some warmth. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that being said, it does not set us on the right course  
a course for prosperity, a course for opportunity, a course for 
hope. 
 
The government says it’s moving towards the new century. 
Unfortunately, it appears the new century in this government’s 
view is one where few if any jobs will be created in 
Saskatchewan. It’s a future where our best and our brightest 
unfortunately will continue to flee Saskatchewan for 
opportunities elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the future this opposition caucus wants 
to see and it’s not the future the people of Saskatchewan want 
to see. I’m pleading with this government to begin listening to 
the people, and I don’t mean through expensive PR (public 
relations) campaigns  really listen to them. Talk to them  
don’t talk at them. There is so much wisdom out there waiting 
to be plucked, but the NDP has failed to do that and doesn’t 
appear willing to do so in the future. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this budget is nothing but politics pure and 
simple. The problems of Saskatchewan are ignored by a 
government that appears to be in a constant election mode. The 
time for campaigning is over. The time for real action is now. 
But we’re not getting the action from the members opposite. 
 

(1515) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do not care to listen to 
what is actual and factual and continue to ignore the very thing 
that the people of Saskatchewan, the citizens, want them to hear 
and listen to. They, through their arrogance and utter disdain for 
the people in Saskatchewan, continue to refuse to listen. 
 
And for all the reasons I have cited, Mr. Speaker, I proudly 
stand with my colleagues in the official opposition and am 
prepared to vote against this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
have but a few words to say today, because of course I don’t 
want to upstage the budget any more than it was easy to upstage 
the throne speech. But there are a few points I want to step 
through today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Firstly, I’m going to start with the Minister of Agriculture, 
because I was in the House last night, unlike the third party, Mr. 
Speaker, and in fact I was listening to the Minister of 
Agriculture the best I could. And I notice that there were some 
errors, I guess, in some of the things that he had been speaking 
of, and I think I just want to clarify right now what perhaps he 
should have been saying compared to what he did say. 
 
He was talking about the Liberals being the ones that were 
trying to close hospitals and schools and not build roads. You 
know, what he was getting at in fact was that . . . And the 
Finance minister also yesterday was pointing out to some of our 
members that in fact the member from Wood River here wanted 
to spend more money on hospitals, and our Highways critic 
wanted more money for highways, and our Education critic 
wanted more money for education. And they went around the 
room here trying to make the point, I think, that we wanted to 
spend more money. 
 
But in fact they were making the point for us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that what we do want is more money where the people 
of this province want it spent, more wisely. 
 
What they don’t want, what they don’t want at all is to have 
Jack Messer at $183,000 a year; Carole Bryant at $154,000; 
Don Ching, an announcement that  in fact, I hear the heckling 
from the member from Elphinstone right now  a good friend 
of his and law partner of the Premier, Mr. Don Ching, at what, 
170, 180,000? And they didn’t include the perks on that; I’m 
sure you’ve included perks. You wouldn’t hardly give Jack 
$23,000 worth of perks and not give it to Don Ching also. So 
we expect this could be 200,000, $220,000. 
 
And so yes, the Minister of Agriculture, if you want to make 
this note, yes, I do wish there would be more money for 
hospitals. And if I had to choose between Jack Messer, Don 
Ching, Carole Bryant, Zach Douglas, Reg Gross, the whole list 
of friends of the member from Elphinstone, I’d say yes, let’s 
keep the Plains open. 
 
And I bet you, Mr. Speaker, the numbers . . . the people that  
  



750  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

I’ve just mentioned, I think the money that they cost us  and 
you add Dave Dombowsky and some of the other members that 
were mentioned in the House today  you know, those 
members would keep the Plains open. 
 
And if you were to put the question to the people of the 
province, what would you rather have? Hey, bar none, I know 
that they would go with us, each and every time, that in fact 
yes, the schools, the hospitals, the highways. 
 
Also, and I’m not really sure what the point was that the 
Minister of Agriculture was making last night. He was talking 
about spinning records backwards. I’d love to take my seat if he 
would just stand up and explain that one more time, because we 
had some calls and people weren’t just quite putting it together. 
And we’re not sure, you know, the days of Woodstock, when 
they were spinning those Beatles records around, maybe if that 
isn’t still hanging around. But you could maybe, I don’t know, 
do some press later on that, Mr. Member, if you could do that. 
 
You know when I look at the budget though, the way that you 
get a good indication of what this budget’s all about is to look at 
a few of the past budgets and what’s happened. And I’ll be very 
brief, very brief. Because when I look at what they’ve done in 
the past and where this is going in the future, it’s pretty . . . I 
mean, there’s a direction. There’s a clear direction set here. 
 
Since getting into power, they’ve cut back on rural 
Saskatchewan. The first announcement I recall, I think back in 
early ’92 when the member from Rosetown at that time 
announced that he was going to gravel the highways. And of 
course he had an amount of pressure from all around the 
province. And I recall a number of calls that not only did he get 
from my area, but I’ll have to admit I encouraged them to phone 
that member up and try and see if they couldn’t shake that 
gravel up in the member himself a little bit and get him to think 
clearly about what he’s doing with announcements such as 
gravelling the highways. 
 
Especially in an area of the province . . . they were going to do 
about a hundred miles of gravelling in the south-west corner. 
This is an area of the province that in fact they don’t have a lot 
of road problems. They don’t bust up like in other areas of the 
province. And I guess luckily enough . . . or thankful to the 
people in the Department of Highways that actually sat the 
minister down and explained to him, like there’s not a cost here; 
there’s no savings to be had. In fact there’s more of a cost if 
you’re going to gravel the highways. I say, if they’ve got extra 
gravel, why not, why not save some of that money for the RMs 
because they’ve been cutting back those grants where in fact we 
could use gravel on some of the grid roads. And maybe that 
would be a better way for them to go. 
 
And that Minister of Agriculture also, I would just remind him 
that it was his government, his government that in fact took the 
$188 million out of farm programs to balance the books of last 
year. 
 
Now the member from Arm River has made a point time and 
time again in this House about the promises made last spring by  

the former minister of Agriculture and the Premier. We looked 
it up in Hansard and the questions were put to the Premier: in 
fact, would he guarantee the farmers would not get the bills. 
And of course, he says, no problem; they are not getting bills. 
And they said that in the House many occasions. They talked 
about it in the election campaign. 
 
And do you know that $188 million which helped them balance 
the books the last year, only 6 per cent of that money  6 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, is all it would take to fulfil that promise and 
not send those bills out. 
 
So just for the Minister of Agriculture’s information, you 
wouldn’t have had to have been held in such poor esteem by the 
farmers of this province, had you just fulfilled that promise and 
really for such a small amount of money; 6 per cent is less than 
half of what you gave to the ministerial assistants in an increase 
only a year and a half ago, two years ago. 
 
We look at the taxation, the input costs. I know yesterday he 
spoke about how they would like to do something on the input 
costs. Well don’t look at us and ask us. I mean they’re in 
government. If you want to deal with input costs, then you 
would have to  I don’t know  visit the Premier and ask 
him, can’t we do something on the taxation on fuel? 
 
You know actually even if it were meaning to stop the 
gravelling of highways, then take the other half of that fuel tax 
and actually put it towards the highways. Maybe they could 
have matched the 85 million that the federal government, who 
they continuously blame . . . they could have matched that 85 
million. That way you’re getting highways done at 50 cent 
dollars. Get some people out in rural Saskatchewan buying gas, 
in fact, while they’re building roads and staying in motels and 
. . . but when I look at past budgets I think, you know, of 
prescription drug plan changes. We now have a prescription 
drug plan with a cost of $1,700 a year . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Seniors can’t afford it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Right. Seniors can’t afford it, that’s right. 
And they’re proud of that. You know they talk about past 
budgets and they all clap and you know, well they’re trained. 
That’s what they are, Mr. Speaker, they’re very well trained. I’ll 
give them that. 
 
We also look at all the hospitals that they’ve closed  and they 
are proud of this. One of the members, do you remember which 
member it was? I think it was the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview was it? Sat in here the other day and she stood in her 
place and was actually proud of the fact that they closed 52 
rural hospitals. 
 
I would ask that some of those members  I know you’re from 
large urban centres and maybe you’re out of touch with, you 
know, if you go beyond the Lewvan or the Ring Road, 8th 
Street, or wherever their parameters are and wherever they live 
 just to get out there and see in fact what you’re doing to the 
people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Those 52 hospitals  take a look at the fight put up against the  
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

rural people. And it didn’t matter which party they were from. 
People from all parties, in fact, who knows better than you the 
number of people that you lost in your own party because of 
some of the actions. I mean it was dramatic. 
 
But we take a look at these 52 hospitals and, Mr. Speaker, you 
recall the rural health care coalition, first of all put up quite a 
fight. And then we had communities such as Climax threatening 
legal action. Communities such as Ponteix that actually went to 
court and you recall the judgement from the justice in fact 
stating he couldn’t even rule on it because the government 
controlled the funding, yet they claim that district boards have 
all that power. 
 
So they go ahead and they close the small hospitals and now of 
course we’re having calls from the regional hospitals. They’re 
not getting funding and they’re going to cut back and they close 
the Plains. With all due respect you know, I have no idea why 
this government refused on two occasions to debate the Plains 
closure. Given the information that we have brought forward on 
several occasions in this House, the kind of monies that have 
been spent on consultants . . . consultants that go out to the 
district boards with letters, you know, basically threatening and 
forcing the board into making decisions on closure . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Sure. That’s what it’s all about. 
 
Do you recall last budget when we had $980,000 taken out of 
cancer research so that we could have $976,000 put into 
elections? It’s all about priorities. I mean I really do enjoy 
looking at some of your own documents where you hold them 
up and you say, oh it’s all about making choices. You bet it is. 
You bet it is. 
 
And when I see the choices that are being made, Mr. Speaker, 
by this government, and especially by the Finance minister, 
when she stands in the House . . . Do you know, I got more 
calls, Mr. Speaker, from people saying, I watched this on TV 
and I couldn’t believe it  how insincere the Finance minister 
appeared to be . . .  
 
I mean when she’s giving a speech and she’s really and truly 
letting on she cares about children and poverty and hungry kids. 
Hey, where’s the bus? Is she funding it? No. No, they aren’t. 
They’re spending money elsewhere. They, I don’t think, have 
any concern about hungry kids. 
 
But I will give them this. They know to campaign. That sounds 
good at election time and that’s their story and they’re sticking 
to it. 
 
However, when we look at, you know, those past budgets, the 
kind of cuts that have happened in rural Saskatchewan, 
supposedly they’re proud of it and they’re going to continue to 
pay. They paid a price in the last election in rural Saskatchewan 
and they’ll continue to pay that price. One more term, Mr. 
Speaker. One more term. 
 
And I think even in the urban centres, they’re going to pay the 
ultimate price. And hopefully they’ll go the way of the third 
party. I’m not . . . Yes, I guess I can call them Conservatives in 
here, can’t I? Yes, Conservatives, the third party. I mean Lord  

knows, they’re not going to be back for years. 
 
You know, I don’t know, a lot of people that I trust their 
political judgement say 50 to 60 years. I don’t know. We can 
only hope, I guess, as people of the province, that that is the 
case. No less than 40 though. 
 
But now let’s take a look at actually what’s happening in this 
budget document. And I’ll be brief because it’s only a few 
things that just, you know, jump right off the page. And they 
make no sense at all when you look at the Finance minister’s 
own documents. And I turn to page 16 of the Estimates. 
 
Now the Finance minister said there’s no new taxes. You know, 
and on the surface people would like to take her word for it. I 
mean let’s not . . . she’s the Finance minister and, you know, we 
should be holding our elected officials in high esteem. But no 
new taxes, and yet in their own statement of revenue, page 16, it 
shows $100 million more in taxes  their own document. It 
isn’t jibing with the speech. She’s got a few minutes to maybe 
explain herself because, you know, I know she doesn’t write the 
speech, and I know she doesn’t do the book, the Estimates 
book. But at least her officials should make her aware that 
things that she’s saying don’t jibe with things that they’re 
printing. 
 
Also transfers from the federal government, that was an 
interesting one, Mr. Speaker, because, in one of the pages in the 
speech, they talked about transfers getting cut back. Oh, it was a 
dramatic amount. I think if you added it up, it was . . . Here we 
go. Page 9 of the speech. Now on page 9, they’re talking about 
a $114 million cut in federal funding for essential service in 
Saskatchewan, and this is broken down: 47 million, Social 
Services; 52 million, Post-Secondary Education . . . oh, that’s 
15 million for Education. Oh, the first one was Health at 47 
million. Well it adds up to 114 million. 
 
(1530) 
 
We look at the Estimates, and it shows here in Estimates, 
transfers from the Government of Canada for Canada Health 
and Social Transfer and equalization payments and all other 
sources combined amounts to $43 million. 
 
Well she’ll have her shot at explaining why in fact her speech 
doesn’t jibe with this. Maybe they are not informing the speech 
writer; I mean that could be. That could be. That happened to 
the Premier. Remember SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention when the Premier stood up 
and in his speech said that 46 per cent of the funds spent by 
rural governments is on administration. And I dare say if they 
didn’t fire that speech writer . . . well I just bet they did. And I 
think you think they did too. But that is one of the cases. 
 
Also page 16, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
You know their estimate, Mr. Speaker, last year was  where 
are we here?  $242 million they estimated. But they actually 
brought in just about 440 million  twice as much. They’re out 
$200 million. Okay, hey that’s a windfall right? And wherever 
it came from, it must be obvious . . . let’s just accept it as a 
windfall. We’ll use it for operating the province. 
  



752  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

An Hon. Member:  Education, eh? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well sure, education, health care, roads, 
okay. Yet in this year’s estimate, they’re back down to 231 
million. That means somehow they found $200 million they 
didn’t know about, but now they’re going to lose it again. I 
suspect, and probably rightfully so, that this smells of a slush 
fund. There is $200 million sitting somewhere. Either they 
fooled us last year, or they’re going to fool us this year. But 
we’re going to be fooled  no other way that they can explain 
this one away. 
 
I’m going to stay with the estimates just for a moment. When I 
take a look at the . . . Here’s the first one up, is the Department 
of Agriculture and Food. Page 3 of the speech, from the Finance 
minister’s own speech. Well it says she’s pleased to announce 
that they’re going to invest up to 238 million over the next four 
years to diversify and strengthen agriculture and do all the 
things that that government claims that they’ll do for rural 
Saskatchewan. Yet I look on page 29 of the Estimates; what we 
actually see is $60 million less in funding. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, if I could have your attention, this is 
probably a good time for you to explain, it’s probably a good 
time for you to explain how it is you’re cutting back 60 million 
a year but in fact going to invest this $238 million of extra 
money. 
 
You see the problem is that you don’t have the farmers to help 
you get through a balanced budget this year as you did with the 
188 million of last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could just get them to stop heckling, I’d be 
able to carry on with the speech. 
 
Now unless the minister is in fact going to try and save enough 
by closing other offices . . . now I know that’s one thing that’s 
being offered up, closing Crop Insurance offices and rural 
service centres. But there again I don’t think she’s done her 
calculations because that doesn’t add up to $240 million either. 
So you’ll have to have a look at that. 
 
I’m just going to quickly go through just a few more of these 
estimates, Mr. Speaker. In fact I see Executive Council 
estimates in here. Now if you, as a government, want to save a 
few dollars, this is usually a pretty good place that you can save 
it because you and I both know this is where they’re, you know, 
getting the political hacks and the speech writers. And there’s a 
fair amount that could be cut back here. 
 
On the surface, it does appear that they’re cutting back. And yet 
you know I saw an order in council come through; I think it was 
yesterday, day before yesterday. I saw an order in council come 
through. I think it’s paying about $70,000 a year for a former 
talk show host, Lorne Harasen. He’s now working in Executive 
Council. And I don’t know how many talk shows you’re doing. 
I don’t know how many you’re doing. It’s not like . . . you’re no 
Dick Assman; I’ll tell you that. But obviously they’re doing 
some talk shows because otherwise why would they pay 
somebody $70,000? And this is only to counsel them. 

And I would agree, you know, they need counselling, but I 
don’t think it’s in talk shows. So there you had an option to cut 
back. I see administration is up in this department. Nothing was 
done about that though. 
 
In health care  and I think this also happened in education, 
didn’t it?  where the money was flat. Now this supposedly is 
something they want to take credit for. We were able to  
what’s the buzz word they’re using today?  back-fill. They’re 
able to back-fill from where the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Landfill. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Yes, it’s more like a landfill site coming 
from them. But they’re able to back-fill, I guess, supposedly 
from the federal government, which they can’t make those 
figures work out. 
 
But in fact when you have money that’s flat, what that is saying 
to the people out there that are sitting on health district boards, 
Mr. Speaker, and running deficits . . . And you recall not too 
many days ago I raised in this House some $500,000 that the 
Swift Current Health District Board is short. And they’ve had a 
public meeting, and their options really are like a lot of other 
board’s options. And that would be to lay off more staff, lay off 
nurses, close beds. This also happened in the East Central 
Health District where they’re having a three and a half . . . $3.6 
million deficit. 
 
So it’s not bad enough that we’re saying the money’s flat, but 
let’s take a look at what that really means. That means that they 
have to make up for last year’s or the year before’s deficit, but 
last year for sure. Plus that means they can’t have that sort of a 
deficit going into the next year. So it’s not that they have to 
make up 500,000 or 3.6 million; they actually have to have that 
for the following year also and for all the years following that. 
 
So what does that mean? When you go out to Yorkton and ask 
them what’s going to happen to their regional hospital, they’re 
saying, well it’s nurses; it’s beds. I think it was Foam Lake; 
they said the Foam Lake hospital would have to be perhaps cut 
way back or shut down. That’s what it means. 
 
And while you’re doing that, we have tabled and we have 
presented in this House lists of highly paid consultants, people 
making 80, $85,000 a year. These are the health care 
consultants. And surprisingly enough, I suspect they’re all 
donating quite heavily to that party as well. 
 
In the Highways estimates there was another problem, you 
know. And I see on page 4, I read on page 4 of the speech, Mr. 
Speaker. This is one other thing that the Minister of Finance 
could perhaps explain. Is she’s saying that there is a further 
$125 million to upgrade and maintain highway routes in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Well initially I thought, well I mean that’s going to help at least 
in my part of the province. We definitely need some highways. 
But you know what really bothered me is in the Estimates, 
when I expected to go and find where this extra money was 
being spent, well I see that it isn’t there. They aren’t spending  
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

any more money in highways. 
 
In fact what they did in the budget  and I went back through, 
and I looked at a lot of these estimates  what appeared to be 
an announcement of new funding is in fact just saying what is 
in the budget, in any budget of any given year. There’s nothing 
new about it. It’s like me going through here and saying, well in 
Labour they’re going to spend . . . oh, what a huge amount of 
money. Probably in Labour they are . . . you know, $10 million. 
But it’s not new money; it’s money that they spend every year. 
 
So the people out there that thought they were going to get 
some highway projects, I mean they were really fooled. But it 
all came home to roost on them here not too many days ago 
when in fact we start getting calls from the workers that are 
actually out there in those depots, rural depots. They’re saying, 
listen, we’re being told we’re losing our jobs. That’s what this 
amounts to. I mean you can have a real fluffy speech, but you 
know at the end of the day when people are losing their jobs 
and not getting their highways, that’s when it all comes home to 
hurt. Not the people of Saskatchewan, but it’s going to hurt the 
government as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter which section I go through. And 
I’ve got several here we could go through. It’s just the same 
stuff. Many of the things that I noticed in the speech referred to 
last year or years previous to that. I’ll give some credit to the 
speech writer because initially you would think that there’s a, 
you know, a lot of money being spent. But all it is, is 
announcing budgets of previous years. There’s nothing in here 
that the people can actually say I can take this to the bank. 
There’s none of that. 
 
But you know you had options. You had options to provide 
more money for those children living in poverty, which you 
promised in the first term that you would take care of, and you 
didn’t. Madam Minister, you didn’t. You stood up in this House 
the other day pretending to be so sincere. Nobody’s buying it. 
Nobody is buying it at all because you’re not sincere; otherwise 
you would have dealt with that problem. You would have dealt 
with that problem before you hired the 42 political staff at two 
and a half million dollars. 
 
What did you spend on hungry kids? I noticed it was announced 
one or two budgets ago  $500,000? That’s nonsense. That’s 
being shameful. That’s, you know, an insult to the people that 
are in need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I won’t hold this up much longer, Mr. Speaker, only to say that 
one of the actions also was mentioned in this House today. And 
that is in regards to the former Devine government. There again 
we have a government that has been in the news more than any 
other political party, but it’s not for doing things in a positive 
way for the province. It’s because half of them are either on 
their way to court or just been to court or talking about the day 
when they have to be in court. That amounts to a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker  a little over a million, wasn’t it?  a 
little over a million dollars. 
 
Now if the government was really sincere, they’re chasing . . . I 
mean look at how they’re chasing the farmers around on the  

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) bills. Why don’t they 
go after that money? They went after the 125,000 that the 
member of the Conservative Party, you know, admitted to 
owing. They didn’t go after any interest, but they’re going after 
the interest of all the people that owe ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) loans or student loans. 
 
Why is it so unfair that you can have a political party stand up 
and grandstand day after day after day about how they’re 
overpaid, and you know what? I think most of the other 
members in the House  and I know the people in the province 
do agree  they are overpaid. If you’re only going to sit in here 
for 25 minutes a day and do nothing more than bring in Bills to 
show the disrespect of this House, they’re overpaid. You bet 
they are. 
 
But you know, that member, the Leader of the Third Party, and 
his cohort there  I guess he’s a whip  why don’t they give 
their money back, not their MLA pay but their extra funds? He 
gets something like  what did they say?  $20,000 extra pay 
to the Leader of the Third Party to come in here for 25 minutes 
a day and do nothing but be a rabble-rouser . . . and the fellow 
that sits right beside him getting $4,000. 
 
Well, Mr. Member, I told you the other night. Why don’t you 
do the honourable thing? When I was third party whip, I gave 
up my $4,000. Why doesn’t he? Do you want to stand up in the 
House right now and do it? Do you want to stand up and do it? 
No. But if you really and truly are as moral as you claim to be, 
why doesn’t he do it? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can see that of course the members 
opposite are getting somewhat riled. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re difficult. 
There wasn’t a ruling, Mr. Speaker. I can tell when . . . you 
know it’s like when you throw a rock out in the dark and you 
hear a dog bark; you hit the dog. And I can hear a lot of barking 
over there. 
 
So I just want to show you, you know, maybe for other years 
there are some options. Hey, give us a call. We could probably 
set you straight because we’re a little more in touch with the 
people of Saskatchewan than you folks are. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. It is my duty to warn the 
Assembly that the Minister of Finance is about to exercise her 
right to close debate, and afterwards all members will be 
precluded from speaking to this question. Therefore if any 
member wishes to speak, let that member do so now. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to 
close the debate on the 1996-97 provincial budget. There’s been 
a lot of talk in the budget debate about the best. Saskatchewan 
is the best province in which to live. Canada is the best country 
in which to live. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude the debate 
today by adding another best. Mr. Speaker, this is the best  
  



754  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

caucus that I have ever had the honour to be associated with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, when many members 
of this caucus were elected in 1991, they had to face the harsh 
reality that they had to clean up the mess left to them by the 
Tories. What they did, Mr. Speaker, was they rolled up their 
sleeves, and they went to work. They gave us their advice. They 
gave us their input. They helped us make choices, and then they 
went out and defended those choices to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995, when the current caucus was elected, we 
faced a new problem, a new fiscal problem handed to us by the 
Liberals in Ottawa. Once again the members of this caucus 
rolled up their sleeves, and they went to work. They helped us 
organize one of the most extensive consultations ever in the 
history of this province. They helped us make the choices. And 
now, Mr. Speaker, in their speeches in this Assembly and 
outside, they’re defending those choices and telling the people 
of Saskatchewan why this budget is preparing this province for 
the 21st century. 
 
So I’d like to begin by thanking the government caucus 
members for their support during this budget process and 
through every other budget process. This, Mr. Speaker, is a 
wonderful caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I’d also like to thank my cabinet 
colleagues and most particularly the Premier who has set the 
tone for this government, a tone of fiscal integrity while at the 
same time ensuring that we protect our social programs. 
 
I particularly want to thank the cabinet members who have sat 
on the Treasury Board: the Minister of the Environment, the 
Minister of Economic Development, the Minister responsible 
for CIC, the Minister of Social Services, and particularly the 
Provincial Secretary. These were people who spent hours of 
their time combing through departmental budgets, looking for 
savings so that we can use those savings to protect our health, 
education, and social programs. So, Mr. Speaker, this budget is 
a team effort. 
 
It’s also a budget which reflects the values and priorities of the 
people of this province, values like changing to meet the new 
realities of the 21st century while preserving the enduring 
values of our past: compassion, cooperation, and community. 
Priorities like creating jobs  10,000 new jobs created since 
1992; another 20,000 to be created in the next four years. 
Priorities like fiscal integrity  a four-year plan with balanced 
budgets, reduced debt, and declining interest payments. 
Priorities like protecting our social programs. 
 
As I travelled around this province and consulted with people, 
they spoke loud and clear about the need to protect our social 
programs. One resident wrote to me to say, and I quote: health,  

education, and social safety nets are a must if our people and 
our way of life is to survive. Another Saskatchewan person 
asked us to focus on the resources that matter most. She said 
most important to each of us is good health, education, 
protecting the homeless and the poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a defining moment in 
Saskatchewan’s history because what this budget reflects is the 
fact that Liberals, Liberals in Ottawa, are prepared to present a 
budget to the people of Canada in which three-quarters of the 
cuts are to health, education, and social programs. And Liberals 
opposite are prepared to tacitly support that kind of budget. It’s 
also a process in which Tory governments across Canada are 
prepared to use the federal cuts as their justification for slashing 
money for social programs. 
 
This government reflects the priorities of the people of this 
province: our commitment to protect health, education, and 
social programs from federal cuts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what does this budget mean to the average 
person? It means the average person can look toward the new 
century with a sense of confidence and security. Confidence 
because their future promises more jobs, balanced budgets, 
lower taxes, and less public debt. Security because the 
cornerstones of our quality of life  our health, education and 
social programs  will be here for us, our children, and our 
grandchildren. 
 
This budget prepares us for the 21st century in which 
Saskatchewan will continue to be the best province in the best 
country in which to live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:50 p.m. until 4 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  34 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen Mitchell 
Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Atkinson Johnson 
Upshall Kowalsky Crofford 
Renaud Calvert Pringle 
Koenker Trew Bradley 
Lorje Teichrob Nilson 
Cline Serby Stanger 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Jess Flavel Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Nays  12 
 
Osika McLane Draude 
McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 
Julé Krawetz Boyd 
D’Autremont Toth Haverstock 
 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance, and would she introduce her officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much. First of all 
I’d like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $339.045 million be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1997. 

 
And I’d like to also take this opportunity to introduce the 
officials I have here today. On my left is Bill Jones, the deputy 
minister of Finance. Next to Bill is Bruce Gray, senior fiscal 
policy analyst  economic, fiscal and policy branch. On my 
right is Brian Smith, executive director, Public Employees 
Benefits Agency. Behind Mr. Jones is Kirk McGregor, 
executive director, taxation and intergovernmental affairs 
branch. And behind me is Larry Spannier, executive director, 
Treasury Board branch. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
I’m pleased to welcome the officials from the Department of 
Finance. I see a person across who I had the pleasure of 
working with many years ago, and I’m glad to work with 
him. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Good friend. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, what I’d like to see is a list of 
the expenditures that you’re requesting in terms of the entire 
expenditure. Could you provide us with that list first and a little 
explanation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chair, I will send across three 
copies, one for the Liberal Party, one for the third party, and 
one for the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
in the second two columns you indicate that you have your first 
interim supply, and you have a one-twelfth calculation in one 
column, and then you have a provided column which is 
identical. Could you explain what those two columns mean? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The first column tells you what 
one-twelfth is, and the second column tells you what we’re 
asking for. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  So by your response, I take it then that you 
are asking for one-twelfth of the budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, yes, that’s 
right. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Is . . . and I haven’t done the 
calculations, but when I see the listing for each of the 
departments, am I to assume that it is accurate across the board, 
a one-twelfth calculation of each of the departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It’s a straight one-twelfth to be  

voted. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, the one-twelfth that you were just referring to, is that 
right across the board, or are you looking at more monies in one 
department versus another? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, it’s a 
straight one-twelfth. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right. Madam Minister, now that the 
. . . I just want to have a look in your Estimates because you’re 
asking for a significant amount of money. And yet your own 
Estimates booklet does not . . . well, it leaves a lot to be desired. 
 
When I was in the House the other day listening to you give a 
speech, you talked about some hundreds of millions, and the 
Premier has used that on more than one occasion. I think . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well, Premier, I think you’ve been 
up as high as three, four hundred million dollars of federal cuts, 
and it just is not jiving. 
 
Madam Minister, page 16  we look at transfers from the 
federal government both in Canada Health and Social Transfers 
and equalization. And it shows from last year to this year, 
there’s only a difference of $43 million. In your speech the 
other day, you used $114 million figure, and as I said, the 
Premier’s been using three, four hundred million. 
 
Well, Premier, going into the election, you were using figures, 
you were making promises, you were making promises which 
in fact were completely outrageous. So what we have . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member:  What promise is outrageous that I made? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  What promises? Well, you made promises 
. . . In fact, that’s a good point, Mr. Chair. And I guess I’m 
going to have to respond to the Premier somewhat too, in this 
debate with the Finance minister. Because what in fact 
happened last spring, what in fact happened last spring, it was 
the Premier making promises to the teachers’ federation that 
there would be a wage increase. 
 
You made that promise and you’re hanging dollars onto the 
shoulders and the backs of the people throughout Saskatchewan 
trying to fund education. So we’re trying to get some indication 
whether or not . . . or how much of this one-twelfth will in fact 
be going to deal with the promises that the  in education 
alone  that the Premier made last spring just before the 
election. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite. What I 
would refer him to is money coming from the federal 
government for the Canada Health and Social Transfer, 
1995-96, $621 million; 1996-97, $508 million  decline of 
approximately $114 million. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Madam Minister, I see you have selective 
reading because on page 16 . . . Now you’ve been telling the 
people of this province that there’s these huge cuts from the  
  



756  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

federal government. And in fact, you know, the people of the 
province are somewhat surprised because the Premier has for a 
few years been telling people all throughout Saskatchewan what 
a great friendship he has with the Prime Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member:  No I haven’t at all. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well of course you have. You’re always 
bragging about this great friendship you have with the Prime 
Minister. And yet as soon as he’s, you know, hundreds and 
hundreds of miles away . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. I would advise the member to 
direct his questions to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, the 
Premier has claimed on many occasions, Madam Minister, that 
in fact he has this great friendship, and yet in your selective 
reading you’re dealing only with Canada Health and Social 
Transfer. You’re ignoring, I guess for sake of your political 
argument, the fact that in total the combined amount change 
that you get from the federal government, is only 43 million. 
 
Now I don’t want to be the one to stand in the House and say 
that you’ve been less than truthful to the people of the province. 
But in fact your own figures, your own figures  I’m just 
going to work them out here right now  your own figures 
show that the total difference between what your Estimates and 
your actual is $43 million. 
 
It’s not fair. It’s not fair of you to take any one line in your 
Estimates and say, you know, this is a bigger picture, because 
that’s what you’re trying to do. You’re trying to let on you’re 
dealing with a big picture when in fact you’re dealing with $43 
million. You’re not being truthful. So now what we have to 
wonder about, if we can’t believe the figures that you’re giving 
to us on page 16 of your own Estimates document, Madam 
Minister, then how do we even have, you know, any idea that 
the document you sent over to the member of Canora-Pelly is in 
fact truthful. 
 
(1615) 
 
I mean this is the problem we’re going to have. If we’re looking 
. . . you’re asking for one-twelfth of some amounts of money 
and right into the beginning of your own Estimates you’re 
completely off base. Are you also off base on these figures that 
you’re using? 
 
So, Madam Minister, will you at least recognize if not for the 
Premier who claims this great friendship, but for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan that in fact the difference in 
monies from the federal government  because we’re all 
federal taxpayers also  that it’s only $43 million. 
 
And really what . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll answer that. 
I think that you should have to stand in your place today and 
explain to the people of this province why it is that you’re not 
being truthful about the federal monies. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chair, to the member opposite  

whose expertise in finance is well renowned, last year the 
federal government said they would give to the province of 
Saskatchewan, in transfers for 1995-96, $1.384 million. This 
year they’re saying they’re going to give to the province of 
Saskatchewan $921.9 million. The difference is $463 million 
less. 
 
So I will tell . . . I will say to the member. . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Where? Where? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Member, take 1.384 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Show him what page. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Page 16. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Make sure he’s reading in the right book 
though too. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, this book. Let me read it to 
you: 1.384 . . . four thousand . . . is what the federal government 
said they were going to give to the people of Saskatchewan last 
year. This year they’re saying they’re going to give us 921. The 
difference between those is about $463 million less. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, no matter how many times he 
and his federal counterparts say, take these numbers and flip 
them upside down and look at them this way, and they’re going 
to not be the kind of reduction that we’re talking about, there’s 
one number that the members opposite simply cannot escape. 
And it’s the number that three-quarters of the cuts in the recent 
federal budget were to health, education, and social programs. 
And the members opposite have supported that. 
 
And we will continue to remind the people of Saskatchewan 
that you’re willing to tolerate and accept and support a budget 
in which three-quarters of the cuts are to health, education, and 
social programs. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, you are being 
more than cute with the figures because in your own document, 
on page 16, what you’re looking at . . . what you’re trying to get 
the people of the province to believe is that in fact the province 
is actually operating on estimate to estimate when in fact it 
isn’t, because you juggle the estimates. Let’s be serious. You 
can put any figure you want in any estimate column. 
 
But the middle column is the one that brings it all home and 
puts it on your shoulders, Madam Minister. That’s the one that 
tells whether or not you’re being up front with the people of the 
province. 
 
In your Estimates you’ve got the 1.384 but in your actual it was 
964. You see . . . and where it really comes to be a problem for 
you is when I look down the page, and I see in transfers from 
Crown entities, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, 
your estimate was $242 million, but your actual was just about 
double that. Like, there’s $200 million that you’re not 
accounting for. 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

Now let’s take for granted that, I don’t know, because of the 
government’s addiction to gaming that in fact, you know, 
you’ve come up with a $200 million windfall. But if you had it 
last year, wouldn’t you have it in the upcoming year? This 
year? Next year? But I see in your estimate, in your estimate for 
this year you’ve dropped it back down to 231 million. 
 
So I’m sure when you’re on your feet, you’ll either tell us that 
you’ve, you know, a serious miscalculation, or in fact a slush 
fund. And that showed up here, what, a year ago? A year and a 
half ago? You had a few . . . $150 million in retained earnings 
in Liquor and Gaming. See the kind of games you play here 
with the estimates? People don’t buy into that though. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s not the . . . what is it?  the 1.384, it’s 
the 964. And then your estimate is 921. So it’s 43 million. And 
you’ve got to stop trying to fool the people of the province that 
in fact they’ve got a federal government that is treating you so 
unfairly, Madam Minister, because it’s you. It was your 
decision. 
 
It was the decision of the Finance department to close hospitals. 
You and the former Minister of Health, supported by all of the 
members that surround you, and your cabinet. That’s who’s 
closing hospitals and schools, and not taking care of the roads 
or the children living in poverty. That’s what the problem is. 
 
And, Madam Minister, so you come to the House today and you 
think well, you know, you’re going to get one-twelfth of the 
money. In fact up until yesterday you thought you were going 
to get two-twelfths of the money. 
 
You think that you can go around spending like a drunken sailor 
and never having to answer for it. Now if you want to spend 
this kind of money, Madam Minister, you better start coming 
clean to the people of this province on why the figures don’t 
jive, firstly; and when it is that you’re going to stop playing the 
kind of games you are with the numbers. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chair, I don’t know what the 
derogatory comment was about sailors, but I’m sure sailors 
would be interested in finding out what the member was trying 
to convey. 
 
The proper way to look at estimates is estimate to estimate. 
What did the federal government say they were going to give us 
last year? What are they saying they’re going to give us this 
year? The difference is 400-and-some million dollars less. 
When we get in the real numbers for ‘96-97, we will compare 
them to the real numbers for ‘95-96. 
 
But you know really, I wish the members opposite would stop 
painting themselves as nothing but apologists for the federal 
government. Every province in Canada, every social group in 
Canada, every health board in this province knows that the 
federal government dramatically cut funding for health, 
education, social programs. 
 
I wish for once the members opposite would stand up and 
represent people of Saskatchewan instead of just being an 
apologist for the federal Liberals. 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I’d like to continue on that same topic just to clarify for myself, 
okay. When you talk about the second column, in your 
Estimates, the second column is a forecasted budget to the day, 
last Sunday, March 31, just ended. And I would take it that 
these numbers are fairly close, fairly accurate. And that you are 
saying that your expense column is totalling $5,217,400,000. 
And I refer to page 17. 
 
The middle column on page 16 is the revenue side. I see $5.218 
billion. And as my colleague pointed out, the amount of money 
that you received, the expenditures that you have had for the 
year ‘95-96 have I think, if my math is correct, you will have a 
surplus of approximately $600,000 based on those projections. 
 
I’ll stop there and ask if so far I have read this correctly. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, the surplus for 1995-96 will be $600,000. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much. Yes, I’m glad that I 
read that correctly. 
 
Now I know what you’re saying in terms of estimates for next 
year, and estimates may vary. But I will not put in, if I am doing 
an estimate of my business, I will not put in in the line of 
estimates that I will win the 6/49 and I will put down $2 million 
as an estimate for my business, and likely you have not done the 
same. Therefore I think your estimates should be taken to be 
fairly accurate. 
 
So again, if I look at the revenue side first, I see a forecast of 
$5,345,400,000. And I see an expense side of approximately 
$4,987,602,000. Taking those two numbers, and I see . . . my 
first question then is, are you suggesting by the revenue versus 
expenditure that the sale of the Cameco shares, which is a 
revenue item as I read it, revenue of approximately $350 
million  I think you’re calling it a special dividend. The first 
question I would have for you, is that the sale of Cameco 
shares, or I should say, half the revenue of the sale of Cameco 
shares? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The 350 million is from the sale of 
Cameco shares. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If I read the report on the sale of Cameco 
shares, then the second portion, is it 350 million? And when 
will that revenue source be available to the Government of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, as you would know 
from the press release, the payment is going to be made in 
instalments. So part of it will be paid now and part of it will be 
paid later. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Is later in the fiscal year 1996-97? Or is it 
later than that? What I’m asking for, Madam Minister, is will 
you be adjusting the estimates by another 350 million because 
that revenue source will come into your hands  pick a day  
March 1 of next year? And I’m just throwing that as an 
example. 
  



758  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we will be making 
no adjustments to the estimates. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, thank you. I take it then that it is 
money that will be received after March 31, 1997. 
 
Okay, if that’s true and I look at your revenue then, you are 
stating that your anticipated revenue from the sale of Cameco, 
which is 350 million for the fiscal year we are in right now, will 
be received. And we hope then that that amount of money will 
be available at the end of the fiscal year ‘96-97 as a surplus so 
that then, if I read your document correctly on page 14, we can 
now create a debt reduction account that will then place that 
surplus money into a debt reduction account. Have I read that 
correctly? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what the government 
has said is all of the money from Cameco will be used to reduce 
debt. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. If the estimates of expenditures, 
your suggested estimate of 4.987 billion, is suddenly 
dramatically out  dramatically out for whatever reasons, 
Madam Minister, so therefore you have suddenly spent an 
additional $200 million during the course of this year  will 
that mean then that the 350 million from Cameco shares are no 
longer . . . that money then will no longer be available to put 
against debt? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, first of all, it’s highly unusual that this government is 
out by that amount in its estimates unless the federal 
government does as it’s done in the past and dramatically 
reduce, with virtually no notice, our equalization payments. 
 
And our practice has been if, for some reason or other, there is 
some extra expense, we look for savings across government. So 
we would take that approach. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for the response. Am I then to 
take your response to say that your estimate of revenue, which 
includes the monies from the Government of Canada, are fairly 
accurate, based on past history? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I would say that the estimates of 
revenue are accurate, and I would say they’re also cautious, 
based on past history. If you look at the past history of this 
government in recent years, what’s happened is our revenues 
have usually come in over what we estimate. And there’s a 
reason for that; we’re cautious in estimating revenue. It’s called 
growth in the economy. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, thank you; appreciate that response. If 
I then take a look at the revenue of Canada, money that will 
come to the province, I see a figure of 921 million. Based on 
what you’ve just told me, in that your forecast for ‘95-96 is 
accurate, is accurate, and there is $964 million worth of revenue 
that you have received from the federal government up to 
March 31, your projections, your estimates, which you tell me 
are fairly accurate, we will get $922 million approximately 
from the federal government. 

Madam Minister, to me, that’s a difference of about 43 million. 
Is that not so? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t so. What I 
said to the member opposite is, I said our revenue estimates are 
accurate except for the revenue estimates from the federal 
government. And what you have to take into account is, in its 
last budget, February 1995, the federal government said to the 
province of Saskatchewan, we’re going to give you $650 
million in equalization, give or take a few dollars. By October 
they said oops, sorry, we made a mistake in our estimates  
which is fine, it happens  and we’re giving you $400 million 
less, more than $400 million less. 
 
So the only accurate comparison, Mr. Speaker, the only 
accurate comparison when it comes to federal transfers is what 
they say they’re going to give this year relative to what they 
said they’re going to give last year, but because it is so 
absolutely volatile, it is not accurate to compare a forecast with 
anything but a forecast. 
 
So the reality is, last year they said they were going to give us 
1.3 billion; this year they say they’re going to give us 921 
million. The difference is about $400 million less, and that’s the 
accurate comparison. And I made it clear in my first response to 
you, our revenue estimates were accurate except for transfers 
from the federal government which have historically not been 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. What I’m 
hearing you say then though, is that as far as the revenue 
column, the 5.165 billion in the estimated column for ‘95-96, 
you’re telling me that that number was the same number that 
you used a year ago. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying is that 
our estimate was that we would get . . . our estimate last year 
was that the revenue would be $5.1 billion. What I’m saying to 
the member opposite is the unreliable part of the estimate is 
federal transfers, because we are vulnerable to massive shifts, 
particularly in equalization. This year alone $400 million less 
than they promised us. February they said, the province of 
Saskatchewan, we promise to give you $650 million for 
equalization. April, a very similar number. October  they 
come back and say, whoops, sorry; we’re going to be giving 
you more than $400 million less than we promised to give you, 
than we committed to give you. And so those numbers are very 
volatile. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I appreciate that. Now, Madam Minister, 
though, I did see  I think it was from your department  a 
description of how complicated the formula is between the 
province of Saskatchewan and the federal government 
regarding how we determine the equalization payments. 
 
And I know you can’t explain that entire, complicated formula, 
but I’d ask you if you could, for my clarity, tell me, were the 
equalization payments known to you before, in terms of the 
formula, and were they adjusted because the province has done  
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

financially better? And therefore, because of revenue that you 
have received, we’ve had an adjusted equalization payment. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I’d like to review this again for the 
member opposite. In its February budget, the federal 
government said, we will be giving to the province of 
Saskatchewan about $650 million in equalization. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Answer his question. If you know . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I wish the member from Wood 
River would learn to listen. It would be very helpful to the 
House. They said, in the 1995 federal budget, they said, we’ll 
give the province of Saskatchewan $650 million in equalization. 
In April, they do another estimate. They confirm the fact that 
they would be giving us about that amount. 
 
In October, the federal government alerted us to the fact that the 
money for equalization would be cut dramatically. By January, 
that money had been cut to the tune of over $400 million. Why 
are we getting less? Partly because Saskatchewan is doing very 
well, but also partly because other economies, like Ontario, did 
not do as well as anticipated. 
 
So it’s partly because we are doing well, but another major part 
of the decline in equalization is economies like Ontario did not 
do as well as anticipated. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll rephrase the 
question a little bit because I’m not sure that I can accurately 
answer it by what you’ve told me.  
 
Has there been an adjustment in the equalization formula, i.e., 
was there another agreement signed with the federal 
government so that it has changed that formula? And if that is 
not true, if the same formula is in place, then you would have 
known that there would have been adjustment. It would not 
have come as a surprise to you because that formula has not 
changed. And if that formula is in existence, for how long have 
we been operating on that formula? And what is the projections 
into the future? Is this a two-year agreement? Is this five-year 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, the formula is the 
same. The calculation is made by the federal government. It’s 
the federal government that hands out the estimates to the 
province. What we can know in Saskatchewan is how well we 
are doing. What we cannot know in Saskatchewan is how well 
Ontario is doing. Ontario doesn’t funnel its numbers to us; 
Ontario funnels its numbers to Ottawa. 
 
So it’s the federal government that does the estimates. It’s the 
federal government that changes its estimates, and it’s the 
federal government that’s changed its estimates in October. In 
fact as I recall, if you look at the December 1995 Finance 
ministers meeting in Ottawa, the federal government was still 
using their old equalization number. They hadn’t even adjusted 
their own numbers until December. And we had to point out to 
them the fact that their initial estimates were that we were going 
to be getting less. 

So it is the federal government that is in a position to look at 
what all the provinces are doing and say, oops, Ontario has not 
done as well as people anticipated so Saskatchewan’s 
equalization will be declining. So it is something that is very 
difficult for the federal government to anticipate, but it is their 
responsibility to do the final compilation of all these statistics. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Yes, while I understand that the 
financial affairs of one province may change dramatically over 
the course of a period of 12 months, January to December, and 
that is an unknown thing, it is also unknown for the province of 
Saskatchewan. We may have a terrible drought this summer. 
We don’t know that, so therefore our revenues are unknown, 
and I appreciate what the minister has said in terms of the 
estimates coming from each province in through the federal 
system and then being adjusted accordingly. My question still 
is: what is the formula, what is the term of the agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, equalization is a five-year agreement. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  When did this current five-year agreement 
begin and when will it end and have there been any changes 
from day one to present day? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the agreement was 
renewed in 1994-95. Once it’s renewed, it can’t be changed 
unless everybody agrees to a change. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, if I may, I’m just going to now change to specifically 
some education-related questions, please, if I could. And I’d 
refer you to the section on Education which is on page 42 and 
43. 
 
For clarification, Madam Minister, you have indicated that there 
is a slight increase in school capital and you have italicized it by 
the number 1, and I see at the bottom that there’s reference to 
interest payments. Could you indicate what the estimate for 
’95-96 and the ‘96-97 ones, what those 22 million and 24 
million really mean to projects in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I should take a 
moment to clarify with the member opposite what the process is 
here. The process is the year has ended March 31; the budget 
has not been completely passed  that is we have not gone 
through, the departmental estimates. 
 
There are third parties out there who require funding. Groups 
like schools, health boards, people on social assistance, require 
funding. And so therefore the government has to come to the 
legislature and get interim supply, enough money to fund these 
vital services for a month. 
 
This is not the process in which we look at detailed estimates of 
particular departments. There is another process, which the 
members can move on to as quickly as they would like, in 
which the Department of Education people will be here. 
 
I really don’t know why the member from Wood River has to 
continue talking. Perhaps listening would help every so often. 
  



760  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1996 

There’s another process in which the Department of Education 
officials will be here. We’ll give them all the detailed 
information they require about the Department of Education. 
We do not have that information here for you today. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I 
appreciate that that’s a specific question to Education. 
 
My concern is though that you’re looking at one-twelfth 
allocation right up front, one-twelfth, which will be one-twelfth 
of the expenditure of $24 million. And therefore we will be 
moving ahead, I think, and you’re rightly so, that there are 
projects being submitted. 
 
So has there been any directive to the facilities department 
within Education that the one-twelfth is necessary to begin 
some capital projects? Are we moving ahead or will there be a 
stalemate until this budget is processed? 
 
The Chair: — Order. I want to bring to the attention of the 
members that the purpose of interim supply is to grant money 
for the operation of government departments and programs on 
an interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 
right to complete detailed reviews in estimates at a later time. 
 
So if you’re going to get into questions on specifics within a 
department of the estimates, I would ask the members to leave 
that to estimates at a later time. Interim supply is not for that 
purpose. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Point of order, Mr. Chair. What we’re 
trying to establish here is in fact how much monies firstly . . . 
the member from Canora-Pelly was trying to establish firstly 
how much money is actually coming from the federal 
government. And Madam Minister has not addressed any of 
those questions. Like she’s asking for a substantial . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. Order. The member was not asking. It 
was in a Department of Education, from the estimates of the 
Department of Education. And I will say the members must 
realize that this is not the appropriate place for individual 
departments. Interim supply is not that, and I would ask for 
generalities on the interim supply. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I didn’t realize that we 
have to be general and non-specific. 
 
But when we see that there is a one-twelfth request, and the 
sheet that was presented to me says very specifically that there 
is a one-twelfth request for Education, it is an expenditure of 
$45 million. Is that . . . and I’m not going to relate it to 
Education only then. When we talk about all the departments, 
all of the $337 million then, will the revenue that is being 
requested, will it enable the normal workings of each 
department to continue? Or will we be waiting for the entire 
budget then to be passed to look at all of the departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, what the 
one-twelfth will do will allow the government departments to 
continue with necessary expenditures. And so it will mean . . . 
generally you asked a general question about Education capital.  

It’ll allow the projects under way to continue to be financed. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We see that the 
interim supply is an interim supply of money for expenditures. 
Is there ever any calculation of the income that the government 
is getting to offset, or is it straight one-twelfth of the entire 
expenditure? Or do we look at income taxes, you know, PST 
(provincial sales tax) and the like? Are they offset by any of the 
revenue of government? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. They’re obviously offset by revenue in the sense that 
you keep on getting revenue in from sales tax, income tax, other 
government revenue sources. But they’re not listed here 
because the list that is before you is to get enough money so 
that the government can continue to fund vital public services 
— health boards, schools, these sorts of organizations. And 
that’s really the purpose of interim supply. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I see specifics, 
and again I guess I won’t refer to a specific department because 
I can’t, but in general, because this is, I take it, expenditures for 
the month of April for boards, school divisions, and 
municipalities to operate; we’re getting into the spring season 
and we’re hearing all about the possibilities of massive flooding 
and if I look at television reports of the flooding down in the 
States last year, etc., is there any provision then, necessary for 
sort of an emergency expenditure of government from some. . . 
that is not budgeted? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chair, to the member opposite. 
This would be one-twelfth of the regular spending of 
government. Anything that was unusual would not be taken into 
account here. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  How would we handle that unusual 
expenditure by mid-April? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Departments, Mr. Chairman, would 
manage within the one-twelfth, and if they needed more for 
some reason they’d have to come back and ask for more. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, your one-twelfth supply is 
exactly one-twelfth of your estimate which is $337 million. In 
terms of the allocations to boards, to municipalities, etc., are 
these payments made by the same process, that is, they will get 
a one-twelfth share for the month of April? I’m not clear on that 
process. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the process will vary from department to department 
depending on what third party is involved. But the purpose of 
interim supply is to allow the departments to make payments 
that have to be made before the budget is finally passed. And 
how that works its way through the system will vary from 
department to department. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
  



April 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Watrous: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, this Assembly 
shall, on Thursday, April 4, 1996, meet at 10 a.m. until 
10:30 p.m. and that it do recess from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. and 
from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 p.m. 
 
 
 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 733 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 733 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 734 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 734 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 734 
Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 734 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 734 
Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 
Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Liberal Party Loyalty  

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 735 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 735 

New Surgical Technique for Strabismus  
Murrell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 735 

National Wildlife Week  
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Shares  
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 

Violence in Today’s Society  
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 736 

Bed and Breakfasts in Saskatchewan  
Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 736 

Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast  
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 736 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
New SaskTel President  

Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 736 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 737 

Government Polling  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 738 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 738 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 738 

Whitespruce Treatment Centre Closure 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 739 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 739 

Budget Meeting Invitation  
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 739 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 739 

Recovery of Government Funds  
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 740 
Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 740 

Northern College System  
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 740 
Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 740 

 
 



 

Economic Development Funding  
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 740 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 741 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
SPECIAL ORDER  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE)  

Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 746 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 747 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 749 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 753 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................... 754 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 755 
  Krawetz ............................................................................................................................................................................... 755, 757 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 755 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 761 
 


