













































June 7, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2271 

 June 7, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A petition once again 

on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to 

the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures are from Indian Head, Balcarres, Redvers, White 

City, Vibank, Lebret, Pilot Butte, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

two communities  Swift Current and Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

present petitions of names regarding closure of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The communities of the people that have signed the petition are 

from Yorkton, Regina, and Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Abernethy, 

Dysart, Balcarres, Lestock, Whitewood, Cupar, and the city of 

Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 

Wadena, and Yorkton. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise again today to present a petition of concerned citizens 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the residents of Arm 

River, in particular from the community of Bethune. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the communities of Mossbank, Moose Jaw, and also the city of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today and the people of Saskatchewan in their efforts 

to save the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Cupar, Swift 

Current, Holdfast, and many from Regina, especially some of 

the constituencies on the south end of Regina such as Albert 

South. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order petitions regarding the closure of 

the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and pursuant to 

rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the Minister of Justice, provide explanations why the 

following Criminal Code charges were stayed: (1) charge 

no. 1692225 regarding Steve Connelly; (2) charge no. 

1753412 regarding Tim Zareski; (3) charge no. 1753413 

regarding Tim Zareski. I so present. 

  



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 

morning to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly, some folks from my constituency, namely the 

grade 7’s and 8’s from Bethune. Accompanying them today, the 

31 of them, are their teachers, Marlene Belliveau and Deanna 

Seidlitz  I hope I’m pronouncing these names right; they’re 

tough so early in the earning  as well as chaperon, Debbie 

Wisniewski, is with them this morning. 

 

The interesting thing about the school that they’re here 

representing is that last fall these students were part of a group 

that helped their school reach their emerald status, Mr. Speaker, 

completing their 500th environmental project. And I’d ask all 

members this morning in . . . help me welcome them and 

congratulate them on their efforts at their school. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me great pleasure this morning to introduce through you and to 

you to the other members of the Legislative Assembly, 22 grade 

10 students that are seated in your gallery from the Robert 

Southey School in Southey, Saskatchewan. They are attended 

today by Mrs. Diana Ritter, that brings quite a few groups to us 

and we certainly appreciate her bringing them in too, along with 

Mrs. Valerie Dolha and the bus driver, Mrs. Reid. 

 

I see they have just arrived and they will be taking a tour later 

and we will be getting together to share some drinks and some 

conversation. And hopefully if the questions get too tough I will 

come and get your assistance. But I hope they won’t. 

 

I hope they enjoy their day in Regina and in the legislature, and 

that all members are on their best behaviour so the good word 

goes back to rural Saskatchewan that we actually do accomplish 

something in here. 

 

So I ask all members to please join with me in welcoming the 

Robert Southey School to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on 

behalf of my colleague from Regina Dewdney to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, 7 students and 3 staff members from F. W. Johnson 

Collegiate, an interesting grade  it’s the TLC (Transitional 

Learning Centre) class. 

 

We’re very pleased to have them here this morning. They’re 

going to be going on a tour, view some of the proceedings 

during the question period, and I’d be delighted to meet with 

them in the Speaker’s boardroom for refreshments and for 

questions about the proceedings. 

 

I’m sure they’ll find their morning very interesting. I ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming the 7 students who are 

seated in your gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Tabling of Liberal Party Contributions 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just yesterday the 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education stood in this House and 

stated that if his party was guilty of violating The Election Act 

so is the Liberal Party. I want to make it perfectly clear that that 

statement is not correct. All donations to the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Party that are $100 or more are disclosed. All the 

donations are disclosed, not just some. The Saskatchewan 

Liberal Party has no secret trusts, no secret bank accounts, and 

no secret safety deposit boxes. The only secret funds we might 

have is change stuck in the chesterfield, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like to clarify that I’ve had no desire to meet with 

the Minister of Post-Secondary Education to discuss loopholes 

in The Election Act, but I am interested in discussion centred 

around ensuring that the laws that already exist are properly 

enforced. Right now I have a list of all contributions received 

by myself and my nine colleagues, and I would like to table 

them. I would hope that all other members in this Assembly 

could also confidently do the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Favourable Statistics for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the members 

opposite are busy navel gazing at their own party financing, I 

want to talk about some of the good news that’s happening in 

the social and economic life of our province. 

 

Hope and optimism abounds in our province and there’s good 

reason. The crops are nearly in, housing sales and starts are up, 

business starts are up, and today the stats for the labour force 

and employment record of our province is now available. 

 

These statistics say the Saskatchewan people are working, and 

indeed working in increasing numbers. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in the country 

at 6.6 per cent. Alberta is next at 7.4. Of course the 

Conservative members will say everything is better in Alberta 

except the prospects of having a job. 

 

Sector by sector in Saskatchewan the numbers are up. 

Agriculture is up. Construction is up. Transportation is up. In 

total, all sectors see an increase of May over April of 7,000 

more people working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would boast just slightly for my city of Regina 

which has the lowest unemployment rate in the country at 5.8 

per cent  better than Calgary, better than Edmonton, better 

than Toronto. Saskatchewan and Regina are doing quite nicely, 

as the stats suggest. The numbers are good, the economy is 

buoyant, people are working, and housing sales are booming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just conclude by saying that with the 

housing sales being so strong in the city of Regina, perhaps the  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

member for Thunder Creek would like to consider putting his 

house on the market and moving into the rural area of Thunder 

Creek that he claims to represent. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wet Seeding Conditions at Kamsack 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to call attention to the potentially disastrous conditions 

facing farmers in the Kamsack area. The unusually wet 

conditions this spring kept many of these farmers out of the 

fields until just recently. Now heavy rain and hail is washing 

away and has washed away many of the seeded crops. 

 

People in the Kamsack area are also forced to attempt travel on 

many flooded or horribly rutted roads because of the excessive 

water. As a farmer, I can appreciate the frustration that they are 

going through. After struggling through many years with 

pitifully low grain prices, every farmer deserves a chance to 

reap the benefits of this year’s higher market prices. 

 

To make matters worse, many of them have told me that they 

feel that the current crop insurance programs are badly lacking 

and they want the government to sincerely consider their plight 

when redesigning the crop insurance program this year. I hope 

the ministers of Agriculture and the Minister of Municipal 

Government will carefully monitor the flooded conditions in the 

Kamsack area, and if conditions keep deteriorating, will 

consider ways to assist these people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Launch of Regina Dragon Boat Race Festival 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday morning 

I was happy to join with the president of a wonderful event, 

Dawn Redmond Bradley, during Tourism Awareness Week in 

Saskatchewan to represent the government at the official launch 

of the 5th Dragon Boat Race Festival. The race is to be held on 

Labour Day weekend, August 30 and 31. 

 

This a very colourful and spectacular festival and it’s known as 

Regina’s fastest growing community event. The festival not 

only includes the waking of the dragon ceremony, the exciting 

boat races for which there will be at least 65 teams this year, but 

also offers multicultural performers and foods from around the 

world. 

 

Yesterday’s launch included an opening ceremony with a 

dragon constructed and manned by Henry Braun School 

students. The team, Dragon Ladies, from Crown Life shared 

their award-winning cheer. Crown Life is also a presenting 

sponsor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that this community event is but five years 

old and it has already become a popular event has at least a 

couple of lessons for us. First of course it shows once again the 

incredible spirit of cooperation that exists between individual  

volunteers, volunteer organizations, corporate sponsors, and 

government, and I congratulate all who donate their time and 

energy to its success. 

 

But also the Dragon Boat Festival, the largest per capita festival 

in the world, is one more reminder of the increasing importance 

to our economy of the cultural life of the Pacific Rim. 

Congratulations. The single paddle represents harmony, 

friendship, and peace, among the world’s people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Two-year University Classes for 

Northern Saskatchewan Students 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, historically a major barrier to 

many Saskatchewan students receiving a university education is 

simply the distance between their homes and the two 

universities. This is particularly true for northern first nations 

students who wish to attend the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College here in Regina. 

 

I’m happy to report to the Assembly that a program announced 

yesterday in Meadow Lake will go a long way towards 

removing this barrier to university education. The Meadow 

Lake Education Consortium, through the initiative of the 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council, will begin this September to 

offer university classes which will take students through their 

first two years. 

 

These classes will be offered at the Woodland Institute campus 

of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) in Meadow Lake and additional classes will be 

offered by the North West Regional College, one of the partners 

in the consortium. 

 

These classes are taught by the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College and accredited by the University of Regina. They will 

lead to a four-year general arts and science degree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as was said yesterday, this historic step is the 

result of the cooperation and vision of our education and 

community representatives who are committed to expanding 

their training opportunities which support the economic and 

social development of our northern region. I suppose this is 

Saskatchewan’s version of bringing the mountain to 

Mohammed. 

 

I congratulate all the members of the Meadow Lake Education 

Consortium, and I wish the first 50 students who are beginning 

their studies this fall all the very best. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

4-H Achievement Days 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to congratulate the many 4-H clubs across this province 

and certainly those in my constituency, the constituency of  

  



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

Moosomin, that are holding their annual 4-H Achievement 

Days. 

 

In the Moosomin constituency, there are 4-H youth involved in 

beef, riding, and home craft clubs, which teach solid, practical 

skills that will benefit our young people later in life. Mr. 

Speaker, the 4-H motto is, “learn to do by doing.” It is a 

straightforward message that works. Through 4-H, young 

people learn to work together, to support one another, and to be 

responsible members of our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend my congratulations to 

the Wawota 4-H Beef Club which are celebrating their 50th 

anniversary this year. I would also like to thank all the 4-H 

leaders and parents that have taken the time to support this 

program throughout the years. Our children, our communities, 

and our province, have greatly benefited because of their 

efforts. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Destination Saskatchewan and the Regina Airport 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Did you know that 

over one million people visit the Regina airport each year? 

Tourism Saskatchewan is aware of that fact and has decided to 

take some positive action. 

 

Earlier this week, Tourism Saskatchewan, with the help of the 

Economic Development minister, announced its plans to 

transform the Regina Airport into a tourism theme park under a 

new initiative called Destination Saskatchewan. The timing is 

perfect because this is Tourism Awareness Week. 

 

Destination Saskatchewan offers businesses and organizations 

the opportunity to sponsor one or more of a number of 

tourism-related displays throughout the airport. The Regina 

airport has licensed Tourism Saskatchewan to seek corporate 

sponsorship for its tourism-related exhibits and displays. 

Megamunch, the animated Tyrannosaurus rex, is Destination 

Saskatchewan’s premier showpiece. It was moved to the Regina 

airport with the support of the Royal Saskatchewan Museum 

and the Eastend Tourism Authority. Destination Saskatchewan 

will also be extended to the Saskatoon airport. At the unveiling 

ceremony for Destination Saskatchewan and in recognition of 

Tourism Awareness Week, Tourism Saskatchewan presented 

the Economic Development minister with a cheque for $1.1 

billion, representing tourism’s contribution to the economy. 

 

With positive initiatives like this one, it’s no wonder that 

tourism is one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy. 

Thank you. 

 

Quality Physical Education Award at George Lee School 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday I had 

the pleasure of representing the Hon. Minister of Education at 

George Lee School, which is my neighbourhood school where 

my three children went and attended grades 1 through 7. 

 

George Lee School was presented with a Quality Physical  

Education Award, an award that originates with the 

Saskatchewan Physical Education Association, and it 

recognizes the time of physical activity for students, the 

participation that is encouraged by all students. And it has a 

wellness component that encourages students into ongoing 

physical education and physical activities. 

 

The chairman of the Curriculum Advisory Committee for 

Regina School Division No. 4 is Greg Harding. He is also the 

George Lee push, if you like, spearheading the physical 

education excellence that is going on at George Lee. Mr. 

Harding does so with the full support and encouragement of the 

principal, Vern Unrau. So to Greg Harding, Vern Unrau, all the 

staff and students at George Lee School, take a bow. You 

deserve our gratitude for the terrific work that you’re doing 

together in the area of physical education and wellness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Political Contributions 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, just moments ago the Liberal 

opposition tabled documents in this House which detail 

contributions to our members in this House. We refuse to be 

tarnished with the same brush as government members or those 

in the third party. 

 

Will the minister ensure to undertake that all members table 

similar disclosures either with this House or the Chief Electoral 

Officer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many 

times I have to repeat that, but we have taken all the advice we 

can get on this matter and our advice is that we’re in full 

compliance with the law. 

 

The problem seems to be the bizarre interpretation that the 

official opposition and their advisers have placed upon the 

existing Election Act  obviously they don’t understand it. 

What I have been trying to do for the last several days, and 

which I think I’ve been successful in doing this morning, is to 

agree on a time when we can sit down together and look at the 

Bill that’s in front of this legislature to ensure that we can spell 

out the provisions clearly enough so that we can all understand 

them, so that we don’t come up with any more of these bizarre 

interpretations. 

 

According to the bizarre interpretation that the official 

opposition has placed upon sections of the Act, they have not 

been in compliance with the Act. That’s the fact of the matter. 

They don’t get in compliance with the Act through tabling in 

this House. They get it through the mechanisms provided in The 

Election Act. 

 

Let’s meet on Monday, as you have finally agreed to do, and 

let’s see if we can come up with very clear rules that we can all 

understand. 

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education questions why I would not meet with 

him to discuss the issue behind closed doors. My response is 

that the matter should and must be dealt with in the Legislative 

Assembly. No more back-room politics about this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister made a number of comments 

yesterday to the media suggesting that, and I quote: “We should 

clarify what the law is and if we want to change, let’s change it 

now.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact remains there is nothing wrong with the 

law. This is the same law that the Premier lauded as the attorney 

general in the former Blakeney government. The specifics of 

The Election Act are black and white. 

 

Will the minister admit that the only problem here now is the 

fact that his party refuses to follow the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  My previous answer indicated that I 

certainly do not agree with that  I do not agree with that. The 

advisers of the official opposition and them  and the official 

opposition themselves  have consistently interpreted the Act 

in a way in which the words just don’t bear it, the words just 

don’t bear it out. We have a disagreement here obviously about 

the correct interpretation of the Act. 

 

My invitation has not been to somehow meet behind closed 

doors but to continue a process of consultation with respect to 

the contents of The Elections Act which has been going on for 

months. We’ve been talking about what should be in that Act; 

let’s talk about this issue too and ensure that what is in the Act 

is so clear and simple that even the official opposition can 

understand it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As relating back to my 

comments yesterday, I guess that’s the reason why we have 

defence counsel, we have prosecution, and there are differing 

views on how certain sections of the law are interpreted, and it 

appears we have one here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated the nature of his discussions 

with the third party on this issue have revolved around whether 

the obligation to report on contributions should be tightened. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the New Democrats and Conservatives 

are willing to look at the changes, they must feel that there are 

problems with the current legislation. And if indeed the minister 

believes there needs to be a change to the Act to tighten up 

loopholes that might exist, will the minister table documents in 

this Assembly today indicating exactly what these loopholes are 

and what amendments he intends to propose to close them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Now, Mr. Speaker, with all respect, the 

member’s got it all wrong. We’re in no doubt as to what the Act 

says  no doubt at all. The people who seem to have some 

trouble understanding what the provisions of the Act actually 

mean is the official opposition. 

 

I propose that we simply get together, the three parties in this 

House, and spell it out in terms that are clear and unequivocal 

so that even the official opposition can understand what those 

provisions mean. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, this is an 

issue that should be debated in this legislature, where The 

Elections Act was first introduced by the Premier of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister insists that now is the time to 

introduce amendments to the Act because the legislation is 

before the House. Well he has indicated that he would be in 

favour of making changes to tighten up loopholes. If this is the 

case, will the minister explain, why did his party choose to 

abuse the Act rather than close up these apparent loopholes 

earlier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, let me repeat this again. 

We don’t believe there is any doubt as to the correct 

interpretation of the Act. We don’t think there’s any loopholes 

there. You apparently do. You’ve come up with a bizarre 

interpretation of the Act that has never been applied before  

an interpretation of the Act with which you have not complied 

with before. 

 

If your interpretation should happen by some miracle to be 

correct, you are not in compliance with the Act. You have had 

. . . by media reports, your party has received  their party, Mr. 

Speaker — has received almost $2.8 million since 1978 where 

contributions have not been reported to the Chief Electoral 

Office. No names have been provided about who gave the 

money. Now if your interpretation is correct  and I don’t 

think it is  then you’re not in compliance either. 

 

Let’s change the Act and spell out clearly what are the 

requirements, so that even you can understand them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Now I’m going to ask for cooperation of 

members of the House. I was having a great deal of difficulty 

being able to hear the words that the minister was saying in the 

conclusion of his response. And I will ask for cooperation of all 

members of the House to allow the question to be put and the 

answer to be provided in a way that all members of the House 

are able to hear them. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, since there appears to be some way 

that we can’t get total clarification on this from the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education, my next question is to the Premier. 

  



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

Mr. Premier, in 1978 you, as attorney general, presented to this 

Assembly amendments to The Election Act, and in so doing 

stated, and I quote from page 2625 of Hansard, May 10, 1978: 

 

. . . (all political contributions) all contributions to and 

payments on behalf of political parties and candidates must 

be handled through registered agents or the business 

manager. 

 

The other day the Minister of Post-Secondary Education 

publicly stated that he approved of anonymous political 

donations, and contends that such anonymous donations are 

permitted by the legislation you introduced. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you clearly state to this Assembly whether or 

not you too approve of anonymous political donations, or do 

you stand by the statements you made in this Assembly in 

1978? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This Act that we have before the 

legislature now, The Election Act, was last amended in the 

1970s, and my memory is that it is the now Premier who carried 

that Act through this legislature. Obviously that Act reflects his 

thinking at the time, reflects his thinking up to now. But we on 

. . . the government, in consultation with both opposition 

parties, have considered amendments to that Act. That’s the fact 

of the matter. 

 

We have in Canada been wrestling with this question about the 

disclosure of names of political donors for a long time. And we 

have a law in Saskatchewan which is consistent with the laws 

across the country, which reflects the current thinking. Now if it 

is time. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Speaker is having 

difficulty being able to hear the answer being provided, and 

there has been persistent interruption, including shouting across 

the floor, from the opposition. And I will ask all hon. members 

to allow the question period to proceed with both the questions 

and the answers being provided in a way that the House can 

hear. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, if it is time to introduce 

into The Election Act, provisions requiring all donations to be 

reported in any circumstances or some donations to be reported 

or whatever, I have offered, the government has offered over 

the last three days, to meet with the opposition parties and 

discuss this and put it into the Acts, put it into the Act. Now we 

have had these discussions, Mr. Speaker, for months and they 

had an opportunity to say section 207 was deficient and should 

be improved; section 219 is deficient and should be improved. 

Nothing like that was ever brought to our attention, but we are 

prepared to discuss it. 

 

You have finally agreed to meet with me next Monday. We can 

begin those discussions and hopefully come to a conclusion 

where we can all be satisfied that the provisions in this province 

are appropriate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Plains Health Centre Closure 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, on 

many occasions your government has promised there would be 

no . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now the Speaker is 

having a great deal of difficulty once again being able to hear 

the hon. member from Moosomin put his question. And the 

interruptions are coming from both sides of the House, and I 

will ask for all members of the House to provide for the 

questions to be put and the answers to be provided in a way that 

all members can hear. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the Minister of 

Health. Mr. Minister, on many occasions your government has 

promised there would be no overall job loss as a result of the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. According to a leaked 

cabinet document reported in today’s Leader-Post significant 

job loss is expected as a result of the Plains closure. 

 

Mr. Minister, the truth is now out. Closure of the Plains is going 

to result in significant job losses. Mr. Minister, how many jobs 

are going to be lost and why have you been telling workers that 

no jobs would be lost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as I stated in this House 

previously in response to a question from the official 

opposition, my understanding is that the Regina Health District 

has said to the employees of the Plains Health Centre that 

employees employed there as of April 1, 1993, I believe, have 

been guaranteed that they will be employed in the new 

configuration of the Regina District Health Board. 

 

I’ve also indicated that employees who have been employed at 

the Plains Health Centre subsequent to April 1, 1993 have been 

advised that while the board will try to find them employment, 

that is not guaranteed. That has been the understanding between 

the Regina Health District and its unions, I believe. That is what 

I have indicated in the House before; that’s what I indicate in 

the House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Further question to the 

minister. Mr. Minister, your leaked cabinet document 

anticipates significant job loss as a result of the Plains closure. 

You have said that jobs lost at the Plains would be absorbed at 

the other two hospitals, and I believe you just made that 

comment again. 

 

It is now clear that you knew all along that was not the truth. 

What else aren’t you telling us about the closure of the Plains? 

You have said there would be no significant reduction in 

services. Is that the truth? How are we supposed to believe 

anything you say about this issue when it’s clear you didn’t tell  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

us the real story about the job loss. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I just gave a very clear 

answer to the member. I don’t know if the member listened to 

the answer or not, but the answer I gave is very clear. The 

answer is consistent with what I have said in the House before. 

The answer is consistent with what the Regina Health Board 

says. 

 

So I don’t know how I can answer that specific question any 

more specifically than I have, because I have answered it for the 

member. The member can get up and repeat the question again, 

but the answer will be the same as I’ve given before and as I 

give today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last question to the 

minister. Mr. Minister, if you’d take the time as I have in the 

last number of months just to stop at the Plains Health Centre to 

visit patients, you would see the fine job that has been done. 

You would also see the heavy workload and some of the 

excessive running that the staffing have had to do just to try and 

keep up because of the reduction in jobs and services that are 

available. 

 

Mr. Minister, you really haven’t been telling us the truth. While 

you say you have, at the same time people outside of this 

Assembly do not really believe they’ve been receiving the truth. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you put the decision to close the Plains on 

hold until there is an independent review of your decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well as the member knows, Mr. Speaker, 

there have been three boards now of the Plains Health Centre 

that have decided that the best thing to do is to consolidate the 

services. But the problem that the member has, which is the 

same problem that the official opposition has, is they cannot 

accept the fact that sometimes there is change in the health 

system that we have to plan to accommodate. One of the 

changes is, surgery is done in a different way today than it used 

to be done before. Instead of ripping people open all the time, 

we have laparoscopic surgery, we have orthoscopic surgery. 

Hospital stays are much shorter than they used to be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is many changes have been made in the 

health care system. Today the health care system also 

emphasizes caring for people in the home, in the community; 

sometimes it’s much more cost effective. It also keeps them, I 

think, healthier, happier, and more independent, which in the 

long run leads to a healthier population. The problem the 

members have is that they cannot accept change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Political Contributions 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, the minister  

responsible for The Election Act. Mr. Minister, since 1980 the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) have failed to report $2 million 

in loans received by the party, even though this is a clear 

requirement of The Election Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, when questions were raised about our party’s 

reporting practices, we asked the electoral officer to examine 

them. Mr. Minister, as minister responsible for The Election 

Act, don’t you think the NDP should be doing the same thing? 

Shouldn’t the NDP take the first step by asking the electoral 

officer to review the reporting practices of the NDP with regard 

to Tommy Douglas House and these unreported loans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I read the 

newspaper reports on this subject this morning and it seems to 

me that that in effect has already been done. Mr. Proctor 

indicated that he was willing to open the books to the Chief 

Electoral Officer, and I quote from the news report: “If Mr. 

Kuziak wants to take a look at it or wants to talk to our auditors 

about that, of course we would comply with that.” 

 

And certainly that’s the case. We’ve got nothing to hide in this 

thing. Our practice is, I think, the same as everybody else’s. 

Everybody knows how these things are done and we’re quite 

prepared to cooperate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister, a supplementary question. Mr. Minister, will you 

voluntarily turn over those records to the returning officer . . . to 

the Chief Electoral Officer without him having to ask for them 

in the first place, as has been done by our party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think we’re just in a question of 

semantics here. I mean the . . . as a result of the news report, the 

issue is out there. The question is out there. 

 

We’re satisfied that we have complied with The Election Act in 

respect of this matter as well as the other matters that have been 

raised, and our books are wide open. I don’t know how the 

thing will play out, who will phone who or who will write who. 

But in whatever way it works, in whatever way it works, if the 

Chief Electoral Officer thinks they’re anything in the allegation 

made by the media, then no doubt it will be followed up, and 

we’ll cooperate fully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Drunk Driving Accidents 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

month of June holds tragic memories for some Saskatchewan 

parents. These are parents who are still coping with the loss of 

their children killed in alcohol-related graduation accidents. 

 

Most of us have personal experiences involving the agony of 

losing family members or friends, and these losses affect entire 

communities. Statistics show that almost half of the drinking 

drivers in Saskatchewan involved in accidents last year were 

between the ages of 16 and 24. 

  



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, we supported the new legislation that will lower 

the legal blood alcohol limit for drivers to .04, but it will only 

come into force upon proclamation. Mr. Speaker, now the 

Minister of Justice has a tool to save young lives. Will he 

proclaim the Act before another senseless tragedy occurs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m pleased to answer the question this morning to the hon. 

member. Certainly recently in the legislature, we have debated 

and worked through the Bill that the member relates to and 

speaks of. And certainly we supported that legislation by 

passing it. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the member 

opposite had introduced an amendment to reduce the .04 to zero 

tolerance. 

 

But I’ve indicated to the member previously and say to the 

member again that we will be examining that legislation over 

the next couple of years and will be certainly promoting her 

position if that becomes a requirement in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, as the minister said, we did ask 

the government to go one step further to protect our young 

people. We proposed the amendment that would have seen 

16- to 18-year-olds automatically lose their licence if they were 

caught driving with any alcohol in their blood system. We 

believe a zero tolerance policy for teen drivers would be a 

strong deterrent against drinking and driving during graduation 

celebrations. 

 

For the record, will the minister explain why they have chosen 

not to support the amendment at this time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 

when we addressed the Bill and spoke to it at some length, I’d 

indicated to the member that the work of the committee across 

the province recommended two specific positions on it. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, is that they would certainly recognize the 

need for zero tolerance, but at this point in time the all-party 

committee suggested and highly recommended  of which 

there was Liberal representation on that party  that it would 

be discriminating against new drivers, Mr. Speaker. It would be 

a discrimination against new drivers if we were to indicate only 

that the age group from 16 to 18 would be singled out, which 

was the key point. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the consultations that we had with 

young people across the province indicated to us that .04 would 

be the toughest legislation that we would have anywhere in the 

country, and a result of that, would like to see .04 as being the 

benchmark today, which would be reduced in the future based 

on examinations that we would make of that particular 

legislation over the next period of time. 

 

And the Act will be proclaimed, Mr. Speaker, we’re  

anticipating by the first part of August. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Casino Tours 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, we all remember last fall when this 

government cut Saskatchewan tour operators out of the Casino 

Regina action when it came to out-of-province tours, instead 

awarding an exclusive, untendered contract to a Manitoba 

company. Now it appears local operators will get a crack at the 

in-province market. However, one of their major competitors 

will be Regina casino itself, which will begin advertising its 

own tours as early as tomorrow. 

 

Can the minister of Gaming explain why the government is 

going into competition with private operators for in-province 

casino tours? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a 

pilot project that will be occurring involving Saskatoon only, 

due to the market-driven demand. We’ve done consultations on 

it. 

 

I guess what I would wonder is why the member would get up 

. . . as my understanding is, the only other, major other tour 

operator within the province that does this kind of thing is 

largely taking people out of the province. So our goal would be 

to work with operators who are operating tour buses for the 

purpose of keeping people in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, if this government would give 

local enterprise . . . if they give Saskatchewan entrepreneurs the 

opportunity, they could very well compete with those people 

that they’re giving contracts to outside the province. According 

to tour operators we’ve talked to, they were given no guarantees 

as to when or if Casino Regina would get out of the tour 

business and leave it up to Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. 

Furthermore, in order to carry out casino tours, private 

operators must abide by a long set of conditions set out by the 

casino and this government, who are now in competition for the 

market. 

 

Casino Regina plans to charge $34.95 a person for these tours 

from Saskatoon  a cut-rate. Private tour operators say they 

can’t compete. Dean Smith of Jackpot Tours says even if his 

private company runs their buses at full price, the best they can 

hope for is to make $18 per bus  hardly worth their effort, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can the minister explain why her government continues to 

thumb its nose at private Saskatchewan companies when it 

comes to Regina casino? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This was an RFP (request for proposal)  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

process, Mr. Speaker. There was a successful bidder. The 

successful bidder is a P.A. (Prince Albert) bus company. And 

again I would emphasize that his goal is to tour people within 

the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Treaty Land Entitlements 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Tuesday I asked the Minister of Environment what he was 

doing to ensure third parties were represented if the Okanese 

First Nations Band bought 10,000 acres of land in the area of 

Round Lake. He assured the House that when third-party 

interests could not be satisfied, the claims would not go 

through. 

 

Nancy Cherney, from Environment and Resource Management, 

has stated that the 90-day review is too short to involve 

intensive public input so the decision will be made internally, 

based on the application. 

 

Will the minister tell the public how they can be assured 

third-party interests will be addressed if there is no time for 

public consultation, and in some cases when people aren’t even 

aware of the application process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. 

member for the question. Certainly this is a very important issue 

and we are committed to settling third-party interests. We may 

involve mediation to achieve this goal, but certainly if it takes 

more than 90 days, we are going to do this right. And we are 

committed to working with the Indian bands in settling the 

TLEs (treaty land entitlement) and also addressing the concerns 

expressed by other people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I wish to table the 

annual report on operations for the year ended March 31, 1996 

as per section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act and provided by 

the Provincial Auditor. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to rise and conclude the remarks that I had talked 

about yesterday. I also wish that I would have the opportunity 

to carry on and speak about the issues of our greatest resource, 

 our people in this province. However, I think that what I want 

to do is conclude and summarize the point that we were 

making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve said all along that we’re not opposed to 

longer hours and more work as official opposition, but we are 

fundamentally opposed to the government’s attempt to stretch 

out the hours beyond what’s reasonably able for people to put 

up with and to make sure that the debate is fully and properly 

carried out, and that we as a legislature do not make the 

mistakes of hastening our decisions beyond a reasonable 

amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve said all along that what we need is an 

opportunity and a gesture of good faith and a signal of good 

faith from the government. And, Mr. Speaker, I am optimistic 

that that signal of good faith will be forthcoming. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks by 

saying that I really trust and believe that this legislature will 

take the proper time and due diligence to represent the issues 

before the people of this province properly. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 118  An Act to amend 

The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Trust and Loan Corporations Amendment Act, 

1996. 

 

The amendments in this Bill deal with two matters relating to 

the regulation of loan companies in Saskatchewan. First is the 

standardization of the regulations of all . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, with just a question regarding the 

clarification of what the term “on division” . . . Is it signifying 

all opposition? My understanding was the term came from the 

official opposition. I just want a clarification of that term. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member, if I’m 

understanding him correctly, asks on a point of order whether it 

is correct that the motion was recorded on division. In calling 

for the vote, the Speaker clearly heard some opposition to the 

motion, and therefore it was in order for any member to call that 

it be recorded on division, and it was. 

 

If members want to record by name, opposition to or support 

for a motion, then they have a means available to do that. But 

the term “on division” does not mean the it was supported 

unanimously by either side of the House . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well the Liberals are the ones who voted  

  



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

against this. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today again to move 

second reading of The Trust and Loan Corporations 

Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now why is the member 

on her feet? 

 

Order. Now I’m asking for cooperation of the members of the 

House. I recognized the Minister of Justice and was unable to 

hear his debate, and I’ll ask for all members to provide 

cooperation so the Minister of Justice can be heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. I rise again for the third 

time to move the second reading of The Trust and Loan 

Corporations Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

The amendments in this Bill deal with two matters relating to 

the regulation of loan companies in Saskatchewan. First is the 

standardizing of the regulation of all Saskatchewan-based loan 

companies who accept money from the public. Second is 

preparing Saskatchewan for future developments in the 

financial services market-place. 

 

The existing Act sets out the regulatory framework for loan 

companies doing business in Saskatchewan. Under the Act, 

companies are regulated as either part (ii) which accept money 

from the public, or part (iii)  all others. 

 

Provisions in this new Act will standardize the regulation of 

Saskatchewan companies that accept money from the public. 

Currently part (ii) companies which lend for mortgage purposes 

or which have the word, mortgage, in the name are governed by 

special rules and regulations. 

 

These rules and regulations are designed to monitor the 

solvency of Saskatchewan-based institutions. Unfortunately 

they do not apply to other Saskatchewan companies that accept 

money from the public. This Act will establish a standardized 

regulatory structure that applies to any Saskatchewan-based 

loan company accepting money from the public. 

 

The second issue addressed by these amendments concerns the 

regulatory responsibilities of the Superintendent of Insurance. 

Presently the superintendent can be appointed by the Minister 

of Justice to administer a part (ii) loan company where: the 

company has not paid its bills; it is not complying with the Act; 

the interests of creditors or shareholders are at risk; and/or 

concerns are expressed about the asset position of the company. 

 

Currently this authority does not extend to Saskatchewan 

companies that provide revolving credit. We believe that 

existing and future revolving credit granters such as credit card 

companies will be at the forefront of changes in the financial 

services market-place. As such, these companies should be 

monitored in a similar fashion as others that lend money. 

 

Today’s changes will allow the superintendent to be in a  

position to assess a company’s affairs and act in a timely and 

effective manner. The changes will also result in the consistent 

application of rules to all companies offering these lending and 

credit services to the public. As I have said, the superintendent 

already exercises this authority with respect to part (ii) loan 

companies. Today’s amendments will now add revolving credit 

companies. 

 

To summarize, Mr. Speaker, these amendments provide for the 

consistent regulation of loan corporations accepting money 

from the public by expanding the definition of a loan 

corporation to include all companies engaged in lending or 

credit granting, and the appointment of the Superintendent of 

Insurance as the administrator of Saskatchewan-based loan 

companies which provide revolving credit in certain 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Trust and Loan Corporations Act. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I know there are many members 

who would be more than happy to get out of the House here 

quickly. And I admit that it would be nice to finish up. But at 

the same time though, it would be terribly unfair to the people 

of this province to short-change discussion on any Bill that 

comes before the House at this point. The fact is that legislation 

we pass in this House will have an effect on Saskatchewan 

people, so it deserves to be discussed thoughtfully. This having 

been said, I would like to say just a few brief words about The 

Trust and Loan Corporations Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from my reading of this Bill, the changes will 

stem from the change in definition of a loan corporation. The 

current definition pretty much outlines loan corporations as 

companies which take mortgages on real estate. With the 

passage of Bill 118 the rules regarding loan corporations will 

encompass far more companies than are presently under 

scrutiny. 

 

This means that a loan company which secures its loans on 

things like cars and trucks and stereos or vending machines or 

boats will now be subject to all these rules. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, companies which grant revolving credit as their 

primary business will also be subject to The Trust And Loan 

Corporations Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that you know as well, revolving credit 

describes an arrangement where the debtor can borrow money, 

then pay some off, then borrow some more. Credit cards are a 

real good example of that, and of course some of us are a little 

better about handling the revolving credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it a little curious that the government wants 

to extend The Trust and Loan Corporations Act. I find it 

particularly odd that those companies that offer revolving credit 

are only bound to follow the rules set out in part (2) if they are 

incorporated in Saskatchewan and have a head office here. 

 

Similarly the Bill says these loan corporations are only subject 

to sections 9 to 26 if they receive money from the public. Mr. 

Speaker, these sections involve a complex set of rules. I would  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

be curious to find out from the minister what his reasons are for 

wording the Bill this way and how it will affect companies in 

this province, and how those regulations will affect companies 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do have some detailed questions we would like 

to ask about this Bill. For example, why did the government 

find it so necessary to bring it in this late in the session? Does it 

have specific implications for something that is happening now 

or did the members opposite just decide to throw another piece 

of legislation on the table? 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made it clear in this House that we are 

concerned about all legislation that comes before this 

Assembly. However, we have also made it clear that we want to 

spend the last few weeks of the session debating Bills that will 

have long-term, serious consequences for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I see no point in further holding up this 

Bill. The questions that we have should be adequately answered 

in the Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Legislation 

Vote 21 

 

The Chair:  Will we start by having the minister introduce 

his official, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 

Darcy McGovern from the Department of Justice. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, sir. 

And your official, Mr. Minister, I welcome him as well; nice to 

see you again. 

 

I wonder if we might just start off by having you tell us, Mr. 

Minister, just briefly the mandate and the vision of the Freedom 

of Information and Privacy Commissioner just for some 

clarification in broad terms. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m very pleased to answer your 

question. The Privacy Commissioner reviews government 

decisions under The Freedom of Information and Protection of 

Privacy Act to ensure that all applicants have access to records 

held or controlled by the government. 

 

Now The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 

Act was passed in 1991 and proclaimed April 1, 1992. The Act 

applies to all departments, secretariats, and similar agencies of 

the executive Government of Saskatchewan. The regulations  

extend that coverage to a broad range of Crown corporations, 

boards, commissions, and other bodies with government 

appointments. 

 

The Act is really two Acts in one. First, the Act provides a right 

of access to records in the possession or control of provincial 

government institutions. Secondly, the Act establishes rules for 

how the government collects and deals with personal 

information. The Act applies to records in all formats; for 

example, written, photographed, audio-visual, computer 

generated, etc. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I thank you very much for that, Mr. Minister. 

Who are these people accountable to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Privacy Commissioner is an 

independent officer who reports directly to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. And I note there‘s been rather a 

substantial cut-back in the total for the Freedom of Information 

and Privacy Commissioner. Can you just explain why that cut, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. The services of the Privacy 

Commissioner are provided on a contractual basis and there was 

a cushion involved in here that the Privacy Commissioner 

indicated in the budgeting process this year that the actual 

amount that is his salary was $30,000, and so this is the actual 

amount set out without a cushion for extra expenses if in fact 

that should happen. 

 

So practically, he was being paid $30,000 with the budget 

having some extra money there in case there were some 

extraordinary circumstances. 

 

Mr. Osika: .Thank you. Mr. Minister, do you believe that 

The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act is in 

fact allowing the applicants adequate access to our government 

records? Is it in fact open enough? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that answer. Does the minister 

see any changes or improvements to the Act that would allow 

for better access perhaps to government records? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Like all legislation and like how our 

government practises, we’re always willing to take suggestions 

as to how legislation may be improved. It’s always under 

review if there are problems or issues that arise. At the present 

time it appears to be working well, but we’re happy to receive 

any suggestions that you may have. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That ends my 

questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Item 7 

 

The Chair:  I’ll start by inviting the minister to introduce his  

  



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

new official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today 

Murray Knoll from the Ombudsman’s office. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

welcome to the officials, and Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 

wondering if you see the mandate of this office actually 

changing or shifting somewhat in the next few years. The 

reason I’m asking this is we’ve been talking to the Ombudsman 

and I understand that there’s actually some concern that maybe 

there should be a three-party commission that it’s answerable 

to. I’m wondering if you could give me your thoughts on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think this actually was discussed 

when we were talking about Justice estimates previously. The 

government is willing to look at other options here, and we’ve 

considered and looked at the report this year from the 

Ombudsman. And I guess that’s all I really can say, is that it’s 

an ongoing discussion. There are many things that have been 

working very well with the system the way we have it now, so 

we have to be persuaded that it makes sense to change it 

dramatically; but once again we’re willing to look at 

suggestions and see if there are some possibilities for change. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. You talk about being persuaded. 

Can you give us an idea of what we can do to help in this 

persuasion, as opposition, as actually . . . (inaudible) . . . Is there 

some time . . . is there an allowance for meeting and actually 

putting forward the discussions and the opposition they have to 

the way that it’s actually being handled at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If you have any suggestions, we’d be 

more than happy to talk with you about that and we can just 

arrange a time when we’re out of the session, and we’ll be 

happy to sit down and talk about it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you explain to 

me why the finances for the Children’s Advocate and the 

Ombudsman are lumped together in estimates when they are 

actually two separate offices that are very much independent 

from one another? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s a simple answer to that. They 

operate under the same legislation and under the same subvote 

in the budget. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The budget for the Office of the Ombudsman 

has been cut by about $49,000 from last year. Can you tell me 

why these cuts are being made and from what areas the funds 

will be taken from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  As with all departments in government, 

they have been asked to look at administrative efficiencies, and 

there are some administrative efficiencies. I think the bulk of 

the reduction though relates to the fact that in last year’s budget 

they had capital costs in renovating the Saskatoon office, which 

are completed, and they didn’t have those costs this year. 

 

(1115) 

 

Otherwise, the reductions are a little bit less for computer 

support, a little bit less for use of central vehicle authority cars, 

a little bit less in travel, a little bit less in staff training, and 

some of those kinds of things. That’s so . . . so practically, it’s 

sort of administrative efficiencies, but the biggest reason for the 

reduction is the fact that there’s not a capital expenditure this 

year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, in speaking with the 

Ombudsman’s office, and keeping in mind that we understand 

that we’ve been asking for government cut-backs and that it’s 

important that we keep our finances restricted, but being an 

independent office and a group that has to look for or take to the 

forefront issues from many different people, they feel . . . I 

understand they feel that they’re insufficiently funded to 

actually be able to carry out their mandate and their vision. 

 

Have you had contact from this office that leads you to believe 

that they would, in order to operate efficiently, they actually 

would require more funding so that they could make sure they 

are actually representing people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that practically, all areas of 

government have had to be very careful in how they spend 

money, and the Ombudsman’s office, I’m sure, would say yes, 

we could use more money and we would do more things, we 

could maybe do more advertising  things like that. 

 

But with the present situation, they are doing, I think, a very 

good job with the amount of money that they have. They are 

working with everybody in government to make sure that the 

dollars go as far as they can, and we commend them for that. 

We think that they’re also doing a very good job in the role that 

they have. 

 

Ms. Draude:  We actually commend them as well. We 

understand they do do a good job, but my concern is that there 

are complaints from just about every department that actually 

can end up in the Office of the Ombudsman, and I’m sure from 

your own department as well. 

 

Our concern is that maybe because of the funding, they aren’t 

actually able to handle all of the complaints. Are you aware that 

there is a backlog? Is there less work that they can do because 

of the funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that it’s acknowledged there’s a 

backlog but it’s stable; it’s sort of the same backlog that’s been 

there for a number of years. But practically, it’s a situation 

where the office is doing a good job keeping up with the work 

with the amount of money that they have. And like all parts of 

government, they would appreciate having more money and 

more staff but that’s just not possible in these times. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And please don’t 

misunderstand me, I definitely believe they’re doing a good job 

as well. But I understand that they have a lot of work and a lot 

of responsibility and with cut-backs, it’s quite often that there 

isn’t the time or finances in one department, it’s easy to shuffle 

it off to another department. And I’m hoping that, as you 

suggested, we’ll have the opportunity to chat and make sure  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

that we all believe that they have the right amount of funding to 

actually be able to help the public. I appreciate that suggestion 

as well. 

 

I have a question: of the $942,000 allocated to salaries for the 

Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate, how much of it is 

allocated to the Office of the Ombudsman? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, the salaries in the Ombudsman’s 

office are $672,000, and the salaries at the Children’s Advocate 

office are $272,000. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if this office will 

actually be given more latitude to investigate complaints about 

the actual workings of government. I think that’s one area of 

concern right now where people, they end up going to the 

government, you know, had they had a complaint, and yet if it’s 

about the government . . . I know of cases where they feel that 

they aren’t actually getting the opportunity to complain about 

government. That’s why we were suggesting that it be funded 

or be looked at by all three parties. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is 

really in the legislation where section 12 of The Ombudsman 

and Children’s Advocate Act sets out the duty of the 

Ombudsman and it reads like this: 

 

It is the duty of the Ombudsman and he (or she) has power 

to investigate any decision or recommendation made, 

including any recommendation made to a minister, or any 

act done or omitted, relating to a matter of administration 

and affecting any person or body of persons in his or its 

personal capacity, in or by a department or agency of the 

government or by any officer, employee or member thereof 

in the exercise of any power, duty or function conferred or 

imposed on him by any Act whereby any person is or may 

be aggrieved. 

 

And then if you go to the definition under section 2 of agency 

of government, and it’s quite expansive and it says that it: 

 

. . . means any board, commission, association or other 

body of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, 

all the members of which or all the members of the board 

of management or board of directors of which: 

 

(i) are appointed by an Act or by an order of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council; or 

 

(ii) if not so appointed, in the discharge of their duties are 

public officers or servants of the Crown, or for the proper 

discharge of their duties are, directly or indirectly, 

responsible to the Crown; 

 

So I would think that that covers everything that you could 

think of. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, when your party was in 

opposition, they actually took the position that . . . to support an 

all-party committee to oversee the Ombudsman as part of a 

larger package of democratic reform. 

For the record, can you just tell me what your position on this is 

at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think as I stated previously, we’re 

willing to consider any suggestions or recommendations that 

are made about this and willing to be involved in discussions 

about that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How far-reaching is the Ombudsman’s 

jurisdiction with regards to investigation and recommendation 

on the administrative acts on the part of government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s set out in section 12 as I read 

to you. That would be . . . it’s very broad. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I 

have no further questions on this. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to state 

on record that I know personally how hard the investigators 

from the Ombudsman’s office work, and they should be 

commended for the job that they do under the constraints that 

they have. 

 

That’s I guess a little bit of a concern about numbers of people 

in the Ombudsman’s office and again getting back to the fact 

that money is tight, no question about it. But there are some 

areas that again . . . that’s a department, it’s a service to the 

public, to ensure that the public not only sees or perceives that 

they are being justly dealt with by government departments, but 

they are in fact. 

 

And again I want to underline the fact that an office such as the 

Ombudsman and the calibre and quality of the people that serve 

in that office are essential to ensuring public confidence in that 

process, not just a department that gives lip-service to the public 

to keep them calmed down about concerns they have about not 

having been properly dealt with. 

 

And I’m not sure  I’m sorry if the question was asked  

what are the number of investigators that are currently 

employed in the Ombudsman’s office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In the Ombudsman’s office there are five 

full-time investigators, and the assistant ombudsman in 

Saskatoon has a half case-load, so effectively five and a half 

people working as investigation officers. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Is this a number that’s been static 

over the years or has it increased, decreased, and how does it 

compare now to what it was five years ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s been stable. It’s been exactly the same 

number for the last four years. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my next 

question, are there an adequate enough number of qualified 

investigators in that office to respond to the complaints from 

throughout the province that may come to the office’s attention? 

 

  



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think my answer is the same as the 

question that I answered previously, which is that all parts of 

government would like to have more people and more money if 

they could. 

 

I guess what I would say here is that the job is being done well, 

and I associate myself with all of your previous remarks about 

the investigating officers. 

 

If we were in a situation where we had more money available in 

government, then I think this would be an area that we would 

seriously look at adding some more dollars. But at the present 

time they’re doing I think a very good job, and the backlog of 

cases or sort of the standing number of cases that are to be dealt 

with has not increased dramatically. It’s been fairly stable over 

the last number of years. And I think things are working well. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question  if a 

member of the public today came with a legitimate complaint to 

the Ombudsman’s office, what time frame would it take? What 

backlog? What would they be told  I’m sorry, we’ll get to 

you in a week, ten days, two weeks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it would depend on the nature of 

the case, but if it was an urgent matter, it would be dealt with 

right away. If it was sort of a standard one, it might take two to 

three months before the matter was started. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I guess then it would have to be a 

determination of what is an urgent case and what is one that 

could be put off  a matter of priorities. And I see you nodding 

you head and I guess we are in agreement of that. And I should 

know that as well. Are the . . . and again forgive me if the 

question that I’m going to ask was clarified earlier. Are all the 

investigators here in Regina and how are they dispersed 

throughout the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are three investigators in Regina 

and two investigators in Saskatoon as well as the assistant 

ombudsman in Saskatoon who has a half case-load. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. And do these investigators, are they 

separate and apart then from the Children’s Advocate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Osika:  And again, did we talk about earlier, the number 

that look after the Children’s Advocate office. Oh, that will be 

in the next series of questions. That’s a separate department, 

I’m sorry. We’ll wait, unless you want to answer that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, this matter of the Children’s 

Advocate is dealt with at the same time. The present situation 

 there’s the Children’s Advocate, the senior position, and 

then there are two Children’s Advocate investigators and a 

secretary, and there’s a fifth position that is not yet filled but 

which will be filled. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Another question that I have, Mr. Minister, and 

before I defer to my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena, is the 

qualifications, if I may ask . . . when you advertise for someone  

as an investigator, what are the job employment requirements, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Usually it requires a university degree and 

then related experience. Often police background is helpful 

because of the investigative skills. I think also looking at people 

who have some understanding of how government works would 

be a very good related experience. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. And 

firstly, I apologize  I didn’t realize I should be asking 

questions on the Children’s Advocate at the same time so that’s 

why I’m standing up again. And then the next thing, before I go 

into questions, is I have to wish the Deputy Chair a happy 

birthday. 

 

Mr. Minister, there’s been several concerns raised by both the 

Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate with respect to 

autonomy from government. Can you tell me how this 

government intends to address the concerns within the 

Children’s Advocate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the Children’s Advocate is an 

independent officer appointed by the legislature, and so that’s 

the independence, is that she reports directly to this body here. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So there’s just the one person and this person 

is appointed? Is that what you said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. Appointed by the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

(1130) 

 

Ms. Draude:  The appointment is on a one-year contract, or 

one year or five years? Can you explain the appointment 

process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s a five-year contract. 

 

Ms. Draude:  From our short experience in our duties here as 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), most of us have 

had a number of times that we’ve had to call and talk to the 

Children’s Advocate, and I understand their office too is very 

busy. Is there a backlog there? Is it increasing  the number of 

cases that they’re to deal with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  They are just in development stage. Like I 

say, they’ve only hired four out of the five people that they plan 

to have, and so they’re very busy. But it’s hard to . . . I mean I 

don’t know if there’s a backlog because they’re still putting 

their office together. 

 

I’d also, just on your previous question, I’d like to clarify the 

appointment. And it’s set out in section 12, it’s in Part III, about 

the Children’s Advocate. And it basically says that there should 

be appointed as an officer of the legislature a Children’s 

Advocate. And this Children’s Advocate is appointed by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council on the recommendation of the 

Assembly. So the Assembly recommends but the actual 

appointment is by Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I would understand, from the 

very name of being a Children’s Advocate, there could be 

additional concerns in the areas . . . actual geographic locations 

where the largest number of children are, and that is in the 

North. I’m wondering, first of all, if a lot of the native 

population . . . if there is an increasing number of cases from 

the North and if there’s been any thought to an officer being in 

the North. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The office is located in Saskatoon, 

partially for that reason. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the Children’s Advocate has 

received a cut in funding of about $8,000. Could you explain to 

me where these cuts will be coming from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s actually an increase of $22,000 to 

the Children’s Advocate’s budget, but it’s offset by a $30,000 

decrease because part of the rent component was put into the 

Ombudsman’s office because I think there’s some sharing of 

some space. And so there’s $30,000 less in rent, but the actual 

salary amount has gone up slightly. And part of it has to do with 

when they hired the people, they’ve had to reclassify the 

salaries to pay a little bit higher because of the excellent 

qualifications of the people. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Can you give me an idea of how much of the 

$342,000 budget actually goes to rental and administration, and 

how much is actually spent on actual programing and 

education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  As I stated previously, the salary 

component out of the 342,000 is 272,000. And so then the 

remaining money relates to administration. And the way it is set 

up now, the Ombudsman’s office pays all of the rent for them 

because they’re sharing space. And so the other expenses are 

primarily things like postage and telephones and computer 

support. 

 

And so as far as having a specific budget for education, I’m not 

sure that there is a specific one, if that’s what your question 

was. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, are all the cases that are referred 

to the Children’s Advocate referred by Social Services, or can 

individuals or parents come separately to the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think all of the cases come from the 

public. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So how are the public aware of the Children’s 

Advocate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s a number of ways that the 

Children’s Advocate is . . . sort of the information about her 

role in Saskatchewan is spread. I know from personal 

experience that she has spoken to many, many groups and 

indicated that she’s there. Also just the discussion around the 

time that the office was created, that’s also been of assistance. 

 

I know that throughout the network of Social Services but also  

all of the non-government organizations that are involved in this 

field, they know that they have another opportunity or another 

tool to use when there are problems that need to be resolved 

relating to children. 

 

And so I think there’s fairly common knowledge through the 

people who are concerned about children in Saskatchewan that 

this office exists. And as the role continues and as more reports 

are filed and as people understand that this is a valuable part of 

our Saskatchewan society, I think that it’ll be even more widely 

known. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. I know that 

when a child’s advocate has spoken to groups, I would imagine 

and most naturally would be in the larger centres . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You’re indicating that maybe that’s not true. I 

know a case in my constituency that people weren’t aware of 

the Children’s Advocate  they didn’t get the information or 

the help they needed through Social Services. 

 

And I guess it is one of my duties to explain that there is a 

child’s advocate, but I’m not sure that a lot of people, especially 

in rural Saskatchewan . . . and again I’m going to bring this up 

for my colleague from the North. I’m sure that if a small town 

in Kelvington-Wadena constituency isn’t aware of it, I would 

think that there’d be even less chance that somebody in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse would be aware of it. 

 

I’m wondering if there’s some way that the department is 

considering making sure that through the schools or through 

some system that children would be made aware or parents 

would be made aware of this office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that the Children’s Advocate 

would agree with you 100 per cent because one of her personal 

goals and one of the goals of the office is to increase the 

awareness in the province, and probably just by having this 

debate and discussion right now we are adding more 

information about the Children’s Advocate to the people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think some of your suggestions about going and making sure 

that schools know that the office exists and some of these 

things, those are important. And I’m sure that she would be 

quite interested in talking with you and members of your caucus 

about how you might assist and how the government might 

assist in spreading information. 

 

I know that she has spoken in La Ronge; I’m not sure if she’s 

been at Ile-a-la-Crosse. There actually is in her report a list of 

all the, sort of the formal occasions where she has spoken about 

her role and you can see that  I think it’s appendix 1 or 2  

in her report. 

 

But it’s a new, innovative position that we have here in 

Saskatchewan, and I think we all need to support her and make 

sure that the job that she and her staff are doing is well known. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We all recognize the 

importance of this office and that’s why we’re asking this many 

questions. We want to make sure that people are aware of it. 

  



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

I’m wondering if your department has a vision for it into the 

future that actually sees an expansion of activities or 

empowerments of this department. Could you tell me what you 

see the Children’s Advocate. . . by the end of this term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  As this is a new office, we’re continually 

assessing what things they should do. It’s set out what their 

mandate is in the legislation, and also I think the Children’s 

Advocate has some very clear goals about the kinds of things 

that she and her staff would like to do. And practically, I’m not 

sure we can see for sure which direction it’s going, other than 

there are many issues about children in Saskatchewan that are 

important to address and we can’t rely just on the Children’s 

Advocate to address all those issues. 

 

And I’m not sure if you noted, but in the reports out of the 

western premiers’ conference in Dawson City which was just 

held earlier this week, one of the issues that was discussed by 

all four western  well all six western — governments was the 

issue of child poverty and how this is actually a national agenda 

item which should be discussed by all of the premiers. 

 

I think what we can’t do is say that the Children’s Advocate, 

with four people there, or five when they’re up to full speed, is 

going to deal with all the children’s problems. We all have to be 

part of that, whether it’s the justice system, Education, Social 

Services, Health  the whole of government. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Getting back to 

again, Mr. Minister, because I do again appreciate what the 

investigators or the inquirers have to carry out and some of the 

pitfalls perhaps . . . I guess, would it be fair if I asked you if you 

could relate the terms of reference for an investigator, their 

rights, responsibilities, and all their powers, if you wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that, speaking on behalf of the 

child advocate, I know she’s very keen and concerned to 

preserve the term “child” or Children’s Advocate for her staff, 

as opposed to investigator, and leave the investigator over in the 

Ombudsman’s office. But these are children’s advocates. Their 

role is to speak up for children. 

 

But with that introduction, the mandate for the advocates is 

basically delegated from the Children’s Advocate, the person. 

And the role is set out in section 12.6, subsection 2. And it 

states: 

 

The Children’s Advocate shall: 

 

. . . become involved in public education respecting the 

interests and well-being of children; 

 

The Children’s Advocate shall: 

 

. . . receive, review and investigate any matter that comes 

to his or her attention from any source, including a child, 

concerning: 

 

. . . a child who receives services from any department or 

agency of the government; 

 

. . . a group of children who receive services from any 

department or agency of the government; and 

 

. . . services to a child or to a group of children by any 

department or agency of the government; 

 

And the Children’s Advocate shall: 

 

. . . where appropriate, try to resolve those matters 

mentioned in clause (b) (which I’ve just read) that come to 

his or her attention through the use of negotiation, 

conciliation, mediation or other non-adversarial 

approaches; and 

 

The Children’s Advocate shall: 

 

. . . where appropriate, make recommendations on any of 

those matters mentioned in clause (b). 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just wanted to clarify 

— and I apologize — I was relating not only to the child 

advocate; I was also relating to the Ombudsman’s investigators. 

My concern was that in fact they had sufficient authority when 

they are making inquiries through a department  and I’m not 

questioning that they do, but I just want to make a comment and 

then I’ll defer to my colleague to continue  that they do in 

fact have this sort of open door and the ability to go in and get 

all the facts and details from government agencies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not aware of any problems in that 

area at all. I think that they have the ability to get the 

information that they need when they require it. 

 

(1145) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 

have one more question. 

 

Were there any complaints about the Children’s Advocate 

received by this Assembly last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Not that we’re aware of. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. Thank you for 

your staff and keep up the good work in the departments. 

 

Item 7 agreed to. 

 

Item 9 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. I just have a few short 

questions for the minister. Could you just tell me, in an 

abbreviated form, what the actual mandate and vision of the 

conflict of interest officer is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner coordinates disclosure of assets held by 

members of the legislature, provides advice on conflict of 

interest issues, and provides an opinion on compliance under 

The Conflict of Interests Act if requested by a member of the 

legislature or by the president of Executive Council. The  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

commissioner also conducts inquiries requested by the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Could you give me an idea of how many 

inquiries the officer would actually delve into in a year; just an 

average? 

 

The Chair:  Order. While we’re waiting for the minister’s 

response, I want to advise committee members that for the 

second time this day your esteemed Chair made an error. It’s 

hard to believe, I know. I announced the amount to be voted as 

$6.253 million as opposed to total for Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, $81,000. So it’s that line item, $81,000, that is 

before the committee. 

 

I thank all committee members for their benevolence in 

allowing me to correct that error. We’ll wait for the minister’s 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The main job of the Conflict 

Commissioner is to meet with members of the legislature and 

with their spouses to prepare the conflicts information for filing 

with the legislature. There are some inquiries, but we don’t 

have the report from the Conflict of Interest Commission tabled 

in the legislature at this time and so it’s not really possible to 

answer that question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Deputy Chair, can I have leave to 

introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s a great 

honour for me to introduce a group from St. Brieux today. 

There’s 21 students and 5 parents and 1 teacher, I understand, in 

from St. Brieux. There’s actually three of us in our 

constituency. St. Brieux is a unique little town, not only the 

town itself with the thriving industry there, but because it 

borders not only the Humboldt constituency but also 

Kelvington-Wadena and also the Melfort-Tisdale area. And we 

all like to sort of take pride in the fact that you are sort of part 

of all of our constituencies. So I’d like to welcome you all 

today. 

 

There’s Jackie Laczkco, Jackie Mark, Sharri Laczkco, Roger 

Lefebvre, and Debbie Coquet here today as well as the students, 

the 21 students, and I’m hoping that you will be interested in 

the debate we have going at this moment. And I think you’ll 

understand that this is an important part of the work of the 

Assembly, to make sure that each one of the departments is 

looked at individually. So enjoy your time here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Legislation 

Vote 21 

Item 9 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Minister, could you tell us who the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner is accountable to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Derril McLeod, who is the 

Conflict Commissioner, is accountable to the legislature, to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The expense for salaries decreased by about 

. . . from $75,000 in ‘95-96 to $50,000 in ‘96-97. Could you 

explain this, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d be happy to do that. There’s been 

no change at all in the operations of the office. The difference in 

salaries and operating is a result of classifying contractual 

services differently in the two years. Last year the contract that 

the commissioner had for office services was classified as a 

personal services contract, and therefore it was included as 

salaries. In ‘96-97 this contract has been classified as 

contractual services, and therefore it’s operating expenses. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So that may be part of the reason why the 

operating expenses actually increased from $6,000 in ‘95-96 to 

$31,000 in ‘96-97. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. If you’ll notice, the total 

cost of the office was $81,000 both years  no change. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Do you as minister believe that The Conflict of 

Interests Act is actually fulfilling its purpose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would have to say yes, that it is fulfilling 

the job that it should. But as with all things that are ongoing, 

we’re willing to listen to any suggestions that may be available 

from your caucus about this, and we would be happy to listen to 

any suggestions. But we think that it’s actually accomplishing 

the purpose. It’s only, I think, the second year of operation now, 

so there’s still some things to be learned. But I think it’s doing a 

good job. 

 

Ms. Draude:  My last question, Mr. Minister, is, because it’s 

fairly new, are you looking at any changes or any improvements 

yourself, as the government side of the House, in changes to the 

mandate or the workings of this department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In general, we’re quite pleased with the 

way the legislation is working, but we are looking forward to 

Mr. Mcleod’s report because there may be some suggestions 

that he has about ways to improve it, and we’d be very willing 

to look at that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister, and thank you 

to your officials. We have no further questions. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  I thank the minister and his officials and the 

opposition for their questions and invite the minister to move 

that we report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

  



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  With leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1200) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Chairman, I’m very pleased to be introducing to the 

members in the House this morning a group of students who 

would represent my favourite grade 5 class in all of Moose Jaw. 

In fact it’s my favourite grade 5 class in all of Saskatchewan. 

This would be the grade 5 class from Empire School in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

And among them is my favourite grade 5 student in all the 

world, that being our daughter Stephanie. I would like all 

members to welcome the grade 5 class from Empire. They’re 

accompanied today by their teacher, Nancy Findlay. Please 

welcome these students and I look forward to meeting with you 

a little later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, 

Develop and Sustain Irrigation 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome to the 

minister and his officials. I didn’t know whether the minister 

wanted an opportunity to introduce them or not, but I guess he 

can do that at some time. 

 

First question, Mr. Minister, would be, and I believe I have 

asked this one before, is what brought about the changes that 

led you to believe that you need to make some changes within 

the irrigation community and consequently resulting in the 

introduction of Bill No. 39? 

 

The Chair:  Before the minister answers, I would ask him to 

make part of his answer as introduction of his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I was intending to do that, Mr. 

Chair. I have, to my right, Harvey Fjeld, who is the 

vice-president of irrigation and agricultural services with Sask 

Water. And to my left is Micheal McDougall, general counsel 

for Sask Water. 

 

Mr. Chair, and to the member opposite, I guess to summarize 

the reason that we’re bringing this Act before the House is that 

we’re working towards what we believe to be a responsible way  

of delivering irrigation systems. The principle that we’re 

working on is that it be a user-pay system. And it is basically 

amalgamating and doing away with three individual pieces of 

legislation  The Water Users Act, the South Saskatchewan 

River Act, and The Irrigation Districts Act. 

 

And what we are attempting to do is to provide uniform 

legislation so that all irrigators in the province are working 

under the same piece of legislation. It will attempt, I think, to 

simplify the administration of irrigation projects and allow 

research projects to be funded, directed, and controlled by 

irrigators. I think the other part that we would see is these 

changes facilitating economic development opportunities with 

irrigation projects. 

 

So that really is basically what this Act is about. It covers 332 

acres of land that are under irrigation. And I would want to say 

that the province of Saskatchewan has a major investment in 

irrigation projects. We’ve spent more than $160 million in 

irrigation since 1986, which is a fairly substantial commitment. 

We feel it’s time that we moved to now a user-pay system 

where irrigators who benefit from the results of irrigation will 

be financing and funding these projects on their own. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked, 

mentioned in your comments, about how much money’s been 

spent on irrigation since 1986. Can you tell me how much has 

been spent in that area since 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can’t give you, right now, the 

exact figures. 

 

I should correct my remarks. I think I said — I should correct 

my remarks  I think I said 160 million since 1986 and I 

should have said, since 1966. The amount that the province has 

invested in irrigation since 1991 is in the neighbourhood of 

$500,000. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I’ve had a fair bit of discussion 

with a lot of irrigators, in particular on the west side of my 

constituency, and the reoccurring comments that I hear again, as 

mentioned before to you, are with the regulations of the Bill. 

 

Since our last discussion, has there been some work done in 

regards to regulations? And if there has, is there a set of them 

that we can see or that you’d be prepared to table? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, but I can inform the member 

that we will be putting together a group to work on the 

regulations. We will be putting six people on from SIPA 

(Saskatchewan Irrigation Projects Association) and two from 

private irrigators, and they will be working with us to develop 

the regulations that will come over a period of months 

following the passage of this Bill. 

 

It’s our intention to work with irrigators. I think that without the 

involvement of those who are directly involved in irrigation as 

we develop the regulations which will govern guidelines by 

which they operate . . . without their involvement I think we 

could run into some degree of difficulty. So it’s our intention to 

work very closely with irrigators, private and through SIPA, to  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

ensure that we have appropriate regulations that govern the 

irrigation projects in the province. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess you are well 

aware, as is the rest of your cabinet, how I feel on regulations as 

it pertains to legislation. I guess I could go through my spiel 

today but I think I’ll leave that for another day and not put your 

officials through that one. 

 

However, I certainly agree with the discussions that are needed 

with industry and the users as you develop the regulations. 

However, I do believe that those should be done before we’re 

having to deal with the legislation. 

 

Just a comment on the new corporations that are being formed 

 I’d just like to get a couple of comments from you if I could, 

Mr. Minister  if you would agree that they will be a form of a 

Crown corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I can’t agree with that. The 

legislation specifically disallows them from . . . says that they 

are not going to be Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Just further on that note then, in the creation 

of these. . . with this new legislation, the creation of these new 

corporations, would it be fair to say that will involve some 

increased bureaucracy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, what it is is  and I guess with 

respect to whether or not these are Crowns, that is addressed in 

section 41 of the Act — what this is is a way of giving 

producers . . . getting stakeholders a way to involve themselves 

in these initiatives and that’s what we’re attempting to do with 

that part of the Bill. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. As I said earlier, I’ve had a fair 

bit of discussion with a lot of the irrigation groups and 

individual irrigators, and at this point in time I’ll go through 

some of their concerns and maybe you can address them in this 

forum that I can relate back to them. 

 

One of the concerns that have come up from a couple of the 

districts is the issue with the levies being tied to the land as 

opposed to the owner. It appears some of the folks seem to 

think that if the levies are not tied to the land, there could be a 

problem of course in a number of areas with the districts. I 

guess one being with not being able to plan ahead, knowing that 

the land will be involved if there is, I guess, some default, that it 

would be hard for them to collect the fees from the person that 

has gone  the owner that has gone. So would you comment 

on that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials that a 

collection of arrears is tied to the land but that the levies will be 

put together by the local bodies. But the arrears are tied to the 

land. Okay? 

 

Mr. McLane:  So just to clarify, Mr. Minister, then in my 

mind. I don’t much, or quite understand that, if there’s . . . Is 

that the way it is now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  What this new Act does is it allows 

for collection of arrears to be tied to the land. But in terms of 

the agreement, that is with the individual farmer. So that’s what 

this will do. So arrears will be dealt with; that’s part of the land. 

But the agreement itself is with the producer. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the other 

concerns that have been raised as well was with the  just bear 

with me, Mr. Minister, till I find this  is with the replacement 

fund. And I think I’ll just read from the letter that I was sent in 

by one of the water user groups, if I might, and I’ll get you to 

comment at the end of it. And I quote from the letter: 

 

The board understands the objective of the irrigation 

replacement fund which is to provide for long-term 

funding for replacement of irrigation works and to ensure 

utilization of the original Crown investment in irrigation. 

 

Is that a correct statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess the short answer to that 

would be yes. What we are attempting to do is put in place 

long-term, sustainable funding to maintain and run and operate 

these projects. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. It goes on to say: 

 

Our concern is that a 5-year Agreement with our 

Association in which the replacement costs increase 

rapidly does not allow us the time needed for economic 

development and the growth which in turn enables our 

irrigation project to expand . . . 

 

The question on this one would be, are you still planning with a 

five-year agreement? Is that the plan? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would say to the member that we 

have two agreements that now have been signed, both with 

Riverhurst and with Lucky Lake. And I’m also told by the 

officials that it is going to be phased in  that it starts small 

and grows over a period of years so as not to put immediate 

pressure on the areas. 

 

So I think the fact that we have been able to reach agreements, 

two that I’ve mentioned, would indicate that it will provide a 

workable solution for the long term. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So are you saying that the plan that’s been 

already signed then is a five-year agreement for the phase-in of 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, both Riverhurst and Lucky 

Lake have signed. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another concern 

was that . . . and I guess it relates back to whether it’s the 

landowner or the land itself that’s in the agreement, as it relates 

to a flood irrigation district or an area where it would be 

possible for one of the members of a particular irrigation district  

  



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

to actually hold up a watering of the district because of a certain 

crop that is grown within the flood. How will this be addressed 

under these new corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess in areas where there is an 

agreement, that would create no difficulties. This might arise in 

an area where there right now is no agreement. And I am told 

by the officials it would be a process of negotiating an 

agreement, negotiating a settlement, in areas where there is no 

agreement existing now. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. What would happen if they can’t 

come to an agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I’m told that the associations 

would basically only have two options. One would be to allow 

for free service if they can’t reach an agreement, or the other 

one would be to have expropriation, to request expropriation. 

 

But I think it would be fair to say that there has been in the past, 

and my understanding is, a good deal of cooperation, farmers 

working with farmers in these areas. And it would certainly be, 

I guess, a last resort; no one would want to see that kind of an 

approach taken unless all other examples had been pursued. 

 

And I think it’s fair to say that the process of negotiations has 

shown in the past that it can work and that it will work. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of the people 

that have been involved . . . or I should say have not been 

involved in irrigation for a number of years are still paying 

taxes and levy toward that. How is that problem being 

addressed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m just wondering if I could ask 

the member to rephrase his question because I think the 

officials and myself are not really clear in terms of what you 

were asking me. If you could just repeat the question for us. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. It’s in regards to people that are 

in a district that aren’t irrigating any longer, and they’re still 

being levied taxes. Some of the farmers are concerned that 

they’re still having to pay the tax. How is that issue being 

addressed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It’s a graduated scale, and it goes 

from year one to year five. And in year five or more the fee 

would be zero; year four would be 5 per cent; 10 per cent for 

three years; 15 per cent for two years; and 20 per cent for one 

year. It decreases over a period of years and after five years the 

charge would be zero. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I understand that part of it. The 

concern is, is — that some of the farmers have — is that they’re 

not happy with that. They don’t see why they should be paying 

that levy for the continuation or a portion of it for the next five 

years. How is that being addressed, or is there any . . . what 

discussions have taken place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think it’s been a matter of 

discussions and negotiations. If they have not irrigated since  

1991, under this Act they pay nothing. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, I had another 

discussion going with the Premier. I wonder if you could state 

that again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I’m going to try and give you 

the same answer that I gave a couple of minutes ago. And 

hopefully you and the Premier will discontinue your dialogue 

for just a short period of time here. 

 

I am told that if they haven’t been irrigating since 1991, they 

will pay nothing under this Act and under what’s proposed here. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thanks. In the Act it talks about abandoning 

irrigation works, water control works, and water supply works. 

Can you give me an example of what that would entail. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The system is and the process is if a 

canal is abandoned it would be replaced with pipe. In terms of a 

district, if that were to disappear, what we would do is 

reallocate the water to another jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It also talks in the 

Act about the Water Corp entering into agreements with other 

provinces or federal government. What discussions have taken 

place to date with that, and can you give us an example of what 

might . . . what kind of an agreement might take place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess the one example that I could 

give in terms of a situation that is already in place is the 

Saskatchewan Irrigation Development Centre, in that we have 

formed a partnership arrangement, a cooperative arrangement, 

with the federal government. That would be the kind of 

initiative that would be covered under that portion of the Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Also in clause 3, sub-clause (3) of 3, it talks 

about the, again, the Lieutenant Governor in Council providing 

financial assistance up to the amount of $100,000. That seems 

. . . I guess what I’m asking is why they . . . why you would 

have that leeway here and why it wouldn’t possibly take an 

order in council to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, it’s part of The Water 

Corporation Act, and I think the level of $100,000 is set, in that 

orders in council are . . . And we will discuss this, I believe, 

later today in terms of limits with SaskPower. What we’re 

trying to do is to speed up the process of doing business. I don’t 

think $100,000 is an unreasonable figure to be dealt with 

without having an order in council, without having to bring it to 

cabinet’s attention. 

 

Sask Water is governed by a board of directors on which two 

cabinet ministers sit. We have people from around the province 

who represent different interests with respect to irrigation and 

so they will also scrutinize the expenditures, you know, of this 

nature. 

 

So I think the $100,000 is a reasonable limit at this time. 

 

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

Mr. McLane:  Also in the Act it speaks of an irrigation 

development area, which I understand of course replaces the old 

language. I don’t recall seeing that definition being defined in 

the Act. Could you explain to me what you’re proposing with 

the development areas and why it wouldn’t be defined? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well what we would be doing — 

and it’s just a little further on in the Act — the corporation will 

publish a notice, will gazette a notice with respect to each area, 

and in that, it will have its name and its number, its geographic 

area, the boundaries under which it will be operating, and its 

native establishment. So it will be made public through the 

Saskatchewan Gazette. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Has the corporation, I guess, estimated as to 

the number of those development areas that they would foresee 

in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — What we’re doing is reinforcing our 

existing system in which there are five districts, five existing 

districts. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You also talk in the 

Act about, in clause 5, I guess it is, that the applicant must 

apply to Sask Water in any manner that the corporation 

considers appropriate. And what does that mean? What does 

appropriate mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think what we’re trying to do is 

give the corporation leeway in terms of trying to, attempting to, 

minimize the amount of red tape. If we have say four or five 

farmers coming together with an application, I don’t suppose 

that it would require the kind of process that if a larger project 

were to come. 

 

So what it does is gives the corporation I think the 

responsibility to put in place a reasonable process whereby 

these applications can be received. Clearly the smaller ones 

would require less than say a larger project, and that’s what this 

allows for. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess in the Bill as well it talks about 

concrete factors. And I wonder what . . . could you give us 

some idea what Sask Water would consider concrete factors in 

deciding whether or not a proposed district is in the best 

interests of the applicants and landowners in the proposed 

irrigation district. Where will those be laid out? Is that another 

part of the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I think it would be a matter of 

what the local mood would be and what the quality of water is 

and what the quality of the land is. Those would sort of be the 

factors. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the other 

comments that I had received from an irrigation district was 

with terms to auditing. And the concern was, for the district, the 

costs that might be entailed with auditing of those groups, 

irrigation groups. Would you comment on that one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Under the old system, some of  

these would be dealt with by the Provincial Auditor. I think 

what we are doing with this legislation now is we’re allowing 

for local accountants to do the audits for them, to do them on a 

local basis. And I am told that an audit to deal with an entity of 

these natures would be somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

$300 a year. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Will an irrigation district be able 

to, I guess, incur a deficit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, they can incur a debt of up to 

80 per cent of one year’s levy, and that can be financed locally. 

So I guess if they were looking at a project, the amount of 

financing would have to be, you know, 80 per cent of whatever 

they can generate in revenue in one year. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 78 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 79 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re moving fairly 

quickly there and I just felt that you needed a bit of a breather, 

and I didn’t want to disappoint the minister in commenting on 

this section of the Act. I’ll be quite brief. 

 

Of course this Assembly knows my opinion on the regulations 

and the tabling of such, and I just have a hard time 

understanding why a government that professes to be so open 

and accountable would have a problem bringing forward the 

regulations and tabling in this House for us to have a look at. 

 

The changes that are made here in this legislation have been 

talked about for some time, and of course the government 

would have had the last five years in order to go out and listen 

to the irrigators and the waterers and the users as to what 

they’ve got to say and what they’d like to see in this Bill. 

 

So I’m just not sure that why we have to go through this process 

with every piece of legislation, that the regulations are always 

tabled at a later date, and we don’t have a chance to look at 

them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I appreciate the member’s 

comments, and you know I think it’s been historical in this 

legislature that legislation is taken out to the general public. 

And this has been a piece of legislation that’s been discussed 

with users, with irrigators, for many, many months to get their 

input as to what kind of changes they would like to see. After 

passing the Act, I think it’s only fair that users, people in the 

general public, have the opportunity to look at the Act and work 

with us in developing the regulations. And I think that that 

process is not unusual. It’s been one that’s carried on in 

Saskatchewan for decades. 

 

And I can give the member the assurance that we will make the 

development of these regulations a very public process because 

we intend to do very widespread consultation with users  

  



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

because these are the regulations under which they will operate. 

We want them to be user-friendly, and we want them to be what 

industry will want to work within. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, just to the minister opposite. He 

talks about this being historical, and that’s fine. I often hear the 

Premier talk about the Saskatchewan way and doing things 

different in the province and wanting to make change. And I 

think it’s high time, as do most of the people of the province, 

that we do things different with the government, and the 

government themselves is more open and accountable and 

accessible. And I think this is one way that they could prove to 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that indeed they are interested in 

being open and accountable. 

 

Clause 79 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 80 to 82 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 87  An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like 

to introduce my officials to you and to members opposite. I 

have with me, to my right, Larry Kram, who is general counsel 

for SaskPower. To my left, Tony Harras, vice-president of 

systems operations and decision support. And to my far right is 

Terry Meier, manager of materials and engineering in 

transmission and distribution. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

have a number of questions to ask you regarding this Act, and I 

just want to firstly make a statement and tell you what our 

viewpoint on the Act is. We feel this Bill, although it’s quite 

short in length, it will make a significant difference in terms of 

what it will do to public accountability. 

 

During second reading of this Act we stated our views on this 

one, like other Bills before this House, that there was no point 

in passing this Bill unless there were some changes with respect 

to how Crown corporations are held accountable. 

 

The Government House Leader stated that a well-informed 

opposition is the best check on abuse in Crown corporations. 

And we believe in this Bill we see the government providing 

more freedom and more power to SaskPower to conduct their 

affairs. At the same time, however, there appears to be no 

improvement in the power or tools provided to the opposition 

under this Bill to hold the government accountable for its 

management. 

 

I would like the minister to explain to us how he can justify 

giving SaskPower more powers but not providing the 

opposition and the public with more tools to ensure that it is  

accountable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I want to say firstly to the 

member that this amendment would put SaskPower on the same 

footing as the other Crown corporations  SaskTel, SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), SaskEnergy. So it’s 

basically just bringing up to date an Act that was put in place in 

1950. 

 

The changing environment that SaskPower finds itself operating 

in means that they have to make some decisions on a more 

timely basis. They have to be making decisions quicker. And 

the process, as it now exists, requires a number of steps for an 

order in council to be passed. 

 

It would first come to the board of directors of the Power 

Corporation on which three cabinet ministers sit at this point in 

time, along with a number of people from around 

Saskatchewan. From there it would go to the Crown 

Investments Corporation board which is a group of cabinet 

ministers. It’s chaired by one minister, and there are about five 

other cabinet ministers on that. 

 

(1245) 

 

From there it would come to cabinet, and then cabinet would 

have the opportunity to look at it. And then an order in council 

would be signed which would make the expenditure . . . and the 

process by which the expenditure would be made would then 

have been completed. 

 

Right now the corporation is somewhat bound by that process 

because it does take some time in order to get it through the 

board, then to CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), then to cabinet, and then finally passed. And 

some of the decisions that are required by the corporation to be 

made do not allow for that kind of time frame to expire before a 

decision is made. 

 

They’re dealing with other entities, with other utilities, with 

respect to swapping of electricity, just as an example, or sales of 

electricity. And when the value is in excess of what the 

requirements are, it has to go through this process. So 

sometimes they find themselves in a position where they can’t 

do business because of the time it takes to get the decision 

made. 

 

I want to say in terms of the members of the opposition and the 

accountability process, as you will know, Crown Corporations 

Committee, which is a committee of this Assembly, sits on a 

regulation basis. The Crown corporations all are asked to 

appear before them to answer to questions with respect to 

expenditures, the direction of the corporation, management, 

why management decisions were made. Some very detailed 

cross-examinations happen with the officials who appear before 

Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

But I would want to say that I think ministers who represent 

cabinet, who represent the government and sit on this board, 

people from a cross-section of Saskatchewan, the general public 

who are represented on the board, do do due diligence in terms  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

of the expenditures of the corporation. I think the people of 

Saskatchewan can rest well assured that the process that their 

government uses allows for adequate scrutiny and adequate 

openness so that we can be assured that these corporations are 

acting in the best interests of the shareholders, who are the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a couple of 

comments on that. First of all, bringing this Bill into line with 

some of the Crown corporations, in our mind, is two wrongs 

don’t make a right. I guess we don’t believe that that was 

actually what we’re asking for. And truly the opposition doesn’t 

get an opportunity as this side of the House to discuss some of 

the changes or the some of the things you’re dealing with. 

 

Over the years, the Crowns have changed significantly, and the 

government has moved from administrating Crowns like 

SaskPower that were basically utility or resource companies. 

That’s significantly changed as Crowns now tend to be involved 

in a much wider variety of activities. They’re involved in 

activities that tend to bring them more into competition with 

other firms in this province. And they also tend to be involved 

with private partners who are often used as . . . they can be 

acting as shields. 

 

The government is also now managing a Crown sector which 

tends to be involved in international activities like SaskTel’s 

work. 

 

In this Bill, we have the minister providing SaskPower with 

more power at a time when they face more unknowns. Will the 

minister explain to the committee how he can justify this 

measure in this Bill at a time when SaskPower is facing more 

and more risk? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I will agree with the member 

in that the environment in which they’re operating has been 

changing dramatically, brought about by free trade, by 

deregulation that the federal government has been pursuing, 

both the federal Liberals and the federal Conservatives have 

been pursuing. So certainly it’s changed the nature of doing 

business, and we don’t deny that. 

 

I would want to say with respect to risk that we are doing 

everything in our power to ensure that the assets of these 

corporations  and SaskPower is the one we’re discussing 

today  are managed and dealt with in the best interests of the 

people of the province. That’s our responsibility. 

 

People in 1991 and again in 1995 charged us with the 

responsibility to manage these Crown corporations which are 

assets of the province. They charged each and everyone of us as 

MLAs with the responsibility to manage properly and with 

diligence the assets of the corporation. And they can choose and 

do choose to remove people from that position on a timely 

basis. 

 

We’ve now set our elections, that they will happen every 4 

years. People have opportunity to judge whether or not we have 

done a good job or whether we haven’t. We will make 

mistakes; there isn’t an administration or a government in this  

country that doesn’t. And we know that mistakes will happen. 

 

But what we have set in place with respect to the 

decision-making process for the Crowns is a very good system 

of diligence. Management will scrutinize a proposal. The board 

of directors . . . these are brought to the board of directors on a 

regular basis. We are made aware of the potential risk. The 

board will then make a decision. From there, it gets another 

level of scrutiny, that being Crown Investments Corporation. 

And any major expenditures are dealt with in that fashion, and I 

think it’s a very good process because it does allow for due 

diligence. 

 

What this Bill is doing, though, is allowing for expenditures of 

up to $1 million to be done without bringing through a major 

process. But does it have due diligence? The answer is, 

absolutely; that’s my role as chairman of this board, along with 

two other cabinet ministers. 

 

We have people from accounting backgrounds. We have people 

who have experience in the industry. We have people from 

consumers’ groups. We have representatives on SaskPower 

board from the union. We have a very good cross-section. And 

these are all people who are appointed from the general public 

and who have the same concerns that all people of 

Saskatchewan should have, and that be that these corporations 

be managed efficiently. 

 

With respect to the changing environment, yes, it is changing. 

And we have been making some fairly dramatic changes in 

terms of how we are operating this corporation and how we are 

positioning it so that it’s able to compete in this new 

market-place. So you are right; there’s lots of challenges. 

There’s lots of changes that need to be made, and we will 

continue to work with you to be able to act in the best interest 

of the corporation and of the province. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We want to ensure 

that you are obvious to the fact that once this Bill is passed 

there is three years before people actually have an opportunity 

to decide if what’s happening is the right thing, and there can be 

a lot of changes made in the meantime that will affect a lot of 

people. 

 

And also the Crown tendering review process is coming up, and 

I think that’s the time when people should have the opportunity 

to again let the government know if they agree with it. 

 

Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, with respect to this government’s 

decision to remove the requirement that SaskPower receive an 

order in council to dispose of or purchase chattel or personal 

property of more than a million dollars, I’d like to know how 

many orders in council SaskPower had to get for moves last 

year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I don’t have the exact numbers, but 

I think there was about a dozen put through last year, and over 

the last four or five years, there was something in between 60 

and 70 orders in council that were approved, that were put 

through the process. 

 

  



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, if these sorts of personal 

property transactions are no longer required to receive an order 

in council, I’d like to know what opportunity you feel the public 

actually has then to find out what SaskPower has been doing 

with our money. Could you tell us how we could get more 

detailed information as to what transactions are actually taking 

place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think the process that I outlined a 

little earlier, that members of the opposition and members of the 

government side are a part of. The committee of this legislature, 

the Crown review committee, on an annual basis brings forward 

. . . we bring forward the detailed information. 

 

SaskPower has appeared before this board just recently, and I’m 

not sure if you were in attendance to the meeting, but I know 

that the officials carried in binders this high of detailed 

information that members of the opposition and members of the 

government side of the House had the opportunity to question. 

 

We put forth internally to the Crown Investments Corporation 

through the board a business plan that outlines a longer-term 

plan. We are . . . I am hoping and I believe we are very open in 

terms of the information that we share, much of it very detailed. 

And those committees sit on a regular basis, and I think that’s 

the opportunity that the general public can be satisfied that all 

of us who are charged with the responsibility of managing these 

Crowns have the opportunity to scrutinize what they’ve been 

doing and what they intend to do. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering if it 

couldn’t be said that the government is moving in this direction 

to divorce itself from the responsibility for decisions made by 

Crown corporations such as SaskPower. If a deal goes bad right 

now, the cabinet could actually be held responsible. However 

with this amendment, the cabinet could actually plead ignorance 

of the whole situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, we haven’t and would never do 

that. I think the responsibilities have indicated ultimately . . . are 

the people who are elected to government. People give us that 

responsibility every four years and hopefully for many more 

years to look after their assets. And we could no more shirk the 

responsibility of the operations of the Crowns than we would of 

a line department. That’s just not how it is. 

 

Ultimately the people who are elected and the people who are 

placed on the government side and all of us really have a 

responsibility. Yours to do due diligence to ensure that what 

we’re doing  this process that we’re going through right now 

 works in the best interest of the corporation. 

 

Ours is, I guess, a little different in that we manage . . . set 

policy whereby the Crowns operate. And we scrutinize in, I 

guess, a little more detail and a little more frequently the 

operations through our roles as members of the board and me as 

Chair of the board. We have that responsibility and we would 

no . . . We can’t shirk that. That’s what we’re charged with 

doing. 

 

Management, on occasions, and all of us, will make some errors  

and we readily admit to that. What we attempt to do is minimize 

those risks and minimize those errors. But they do happen, and 

when errors are made, ultimately, as the chairman of the board, 

I’m responsible, and I’m part of cabinet so that makes cabinet 

responsible. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, are there absolutely any limits on 

SaskPower whatsoever once this amendment is enacted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, there are no limits now. But 

what it will do is it will still come to the board and we set policy 

with respect to Crown Investments Corporation and where it . . . 

and how it goes to that process. 

 

There are items that the board will scrutinize, the SaskPower 

board will look at, and we have a secretary who comes from the 

Crown Investments Corporation. And I’ve described to you the 

ministers that sit on that. And there are many items that will go 

to that body for review. 

 

We tend to want as broad a decision-making base as we can. I 

mean if we’re looking at a fairly major initiative, I, as the 

chairman of that board, want to be sure that my cabinet 

colleagues are comfortable with the decisions we’re making. 

 

So it’s not certainly an attempt to limit the decision making. We 

still will do due diligence. What we’re trying to do is speed up 

the process by which these decisions get made. 

 

There are many items that I will take to cabinet just based on 

my desire to have my cabinet colleagues aware of what is 

transpiring — I want to know what their feelings are about it — 

and many that we will bring to cabinet and caucus to have 

members share, you know, share the information and why we’re 

doing what we’re doing. 

 

All this is doing is attempting to speed up some of the 

decision-making process so that the officials in the Power 

Corporation can do business. 

 

We’re competing now in this open market-place, and we’re not 

a utility that is in a monopolistic situation any more. This is 

now a business that’s going to be out competing in the real 

business world. They’re going to be competing against some 

very strong competitors. And we want to allow them the tools 

to be able to do that. 

 

Business can’t wait for ever to make decisions. And I know you 

as a business person and myself will recognize that. The 

scrutiny, the due diligence, will still be there. We’re just trying 

to speed up the time frame in terms of making a decision on 

some of these issues. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, were there any requests for 

orders in council last year that was actually refused by cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No. 

 

(1300) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Wouldn’t it make sense for you as a minister  

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

in charge of this Crown to have the final say in matters for the 

Crown? At least then there would be a small amount of public 

accountability for the Crown then, although not enough, in our 

eyes. But we feel that at least the minister should have the final 

say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I guess ultimately that is in 

fact the case. We will set policy within the Crowns whereby 

senior management . . . And I want to say though that it’s not 

my role as chairman of the board to be involved in the 

day-to-day management of SaskPower. I don’t believe that’s 

appropriate. I don’t think that is the role that the board should 

play, nor is that the role that the board wants to play. 

 

We are there to assist management with different perspectives. 

Quite clearly that is part of our role. Our role is to work to 

developing policy. And that is the major role of the board. But 

I'd say to the member that I am certainly not abrogating 

responsibility as Chair of the board. I recognize what my role is. 

And I want to say to members opposite that the management in 

fact has been very, very cooperative in terms of sharing 

information with us, bringing us issues that they know we will 

want to deal with as a board. And that process will continue. 

 

We certainly have no desire to have the corporations less 

accountable. What we do have is a strong desire to position 

them so that they can compete in this new market-place. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually I don’t 

have any more questions, but I want to make sure that you’re 

well aware that we are not in favour of this. We feel that the 

people have to have the opportunity to know what’s going on. 

 

But I do want to thank you, and I would like to thank your 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’d like to thank the member for her 

questions. I know that you have concerns with the operations of 

the Crown and all the Crown corporations. And I appreciate 

your input in today’s discussion. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 38  An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

welcome to your officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ve already expressed our views on this Bill a 

number of times and today I’m pleased to have the opportunity 

to address the specific areas of concern on behalf of our caucus. 

 

Section 59 of the old Act deals with entry upon premises of  

customers. This old section allows the corporation to enter onto 

the premises of a customer for a number of reasons. The new 

section broadens that ability of an officer or an employee of 

SaskPower to enter the premises of a customer without any 

notice or consent by the person living on the premises in 

question. 

 

That particular notion gives us all a great deal of concern. The 

right to privacy here is being seriously infringed upon and I feel 

that these concerns need to be addressed. 

 

If you don’t mind, I’ll just move to different areas of the Act to 

refer to. 59(1)(a) states the corporation may enter the premises 

at any reasonable time to “inspect service conditions.” My first 

question, Mr. Minister, today is, what constitutes a reasonable 

time, and who decides what is reasonable and what is not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to say 

to the Leader of the Opposition that this is, I think, a reasonable 

piece of legislation in that it allows us entry when there is a 

hazardous condition . . . for officials to be able to enter in 

people’s premises. 

 

I want to remind the member as well that private citizens still 

are afforded protection under the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. That is still there; that still exists. 

 

This is not substantially different from what is in place at this 

time. And I want to remind the member that we have had access 

to people’s homes to do meter readings for 46 years. It’s not 

new, and I’m hoping that members of the opposition are not 

expecting to see a bogyman under a rock here because that’s not 

what this is about. It’s not what these amendments are about. 

 

And I want to just read the old Act and the existing Act, just 

this portion briefly for you. The new Act under section 59(1) 

says: 

 

The corporation may, by its officers and employees, (or 

agents) at any reasonable time, enter the premises of 

customers and do one or more of the following: 

 

(a) inspect service conditions; 

 

(b) read meters; 

 

Or three, and this is very important: 

 

(c) cut off the supply of electrical energy or steam or (may) 

discontinue any other service rendered if the customer fails 

to pay, when due, any indebtedness of the customer to the 

corporation; 

 

The old Act under section 59(1) said: 

 

The corporation may by, its officers and employees, enter 

upon the premises of customers to inspect service 

conditions, read meters and, when service is discontinued, 

to remove meters and other equipment belonging to the 

corporation. 

  



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

So what we’re doing basically is allowing the corporation to do 

its job. If someone doesn’t pay their bill, that there’s the ability 

to go in and disconnect the service. And I think you will agree 

that in circumstances where people aren’t paying their bills, it 

wouldn’t be, I think, sensible to have people who are paying 

their bills subsidize the service to them. 

 

When there is an emergency and an emergency situation where 

life and limb may be at risk, they have the ability to enter to the 

premises to deal with that kind of situation. They have the 

ability to read meters, to go in and read meters. And I want to 

say that this is not a major power grab by  no pun intended  

by officials from within the corporation. This is allowing them 

to do their business in a reasonable fashion. 

 

As I said, we’ve had the right to enter premises for 46 years, 

and SaskPower has never abused them. What we try and do is 

contact the clients, work with the clients, work with our 

customers, and set times where it’s convenient for them. 

 

We do all measure of interaction to try and set up a convenient 

situation with our customers. These are our customers. We’re 

not here to abuse anybody. We have 430,000 clients in this 

province who purchase electrical energy from us, and they’re 

our customers, and we do business in a fashion where we want 

to treat our customers fairly. And that’s basically all this is 

about. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I believe, and we 

have to believe that the intent of the legislation is such that will 

not in fact infringe on your customers’ rights. I’ll maybe just 

lump a few of these comments into . . . so that what you’re 

telling me and you may just reaffirm it in your answer, that the 

tenant or home-owner may have some say with respect to 

whether or not there is an emergency. 

 

If there’s no emergency and no real cause that the tenant 

perhaps may see as an emergency for officials to enter, then in 

fact the officials or representatives of the corporation will not be 

there. 

 

One thing along that same question, in the case of an apartment 

block, how will an employee enter a secured building without 

the permission of the landlord for that building if there’s an 

emergency in one of those blocks of premises? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials much of 

this kind of work can be done from the external portion of the 

building, and that meters in most apartment blocks are in a 

separate room, separate and away from people’s residences. 

 

Most apartments are set up where they’re all side by side, one 

by each. And I guess I think it would be safe to say, you know, 

in some emergency situations we may not be the first people to 

enter. A fire is an example where the Power Corporation would 

be called. I’m sure it would be safe to say the firemen would 

probably make the first entry to the building. And if we were 

required, if we were asked to assist them, we certainly would do 

that. 

 

I just want to say to the member that in no circumstances will  

SaskPower force entry onto a customer’s property or into a 

customer’s dwelling. That’s not why we’re here. And I say to 

the member, we work with our clients, with our customers  

phone calls, faxes, meter reading cards, you know. There’s a 

number of different things that we do to try and have the 

interaction to smoothly. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’ve just clarified 

one of the concerns that officials will not force entry unless it’s 

absolutely necessary. So I’ll go on just to ask, is the tenant 

allowed to refuse entry to an employee or officer when there is 

no apparent emergency at hand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The process I guess that the 

officials tell me they use, if they require entry and someone 

refuses entry, they don’t force their way in. They would 

probably go back to the office, try and get a court order through 

a legal process. But I don’t think . . . and I don’t know if you’ve 

heard of any instance where officials have . . . people 

representing the corporation have done that. I certainly haven’t 

in the months that I’ve been around as Chair of the corporation 

or before. I think there are lots of solutions out there rather than 

forcible entry. And certainly the corporation officials would 

pursue all avenues before that would ever take place. I don’t 

believe it would ever take place. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you again, sir. The 59(1)(c), the old 

section states that power may be cut off if a customer is more 

than 10 days in arrears. New section 59(1)(c) states that the 

power may be cut off if a customer fails to pay the debt when 

due. 

 

This raises a couple of questions here. What is the reason for 

the change, and what happens if a customer mails in payments 

and the money arrives one or two days late? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  This is dealt with by policy, and the 

policy of the corporation is that customers have 30 days, and so 

it’s not really a matter of one or two days. There’s lots of 

leeway here. And after 30 days, they would be sent notice that 

they are in arrears, and they’re sent, on most occasions, more 

than one notice. 

 

We deal with cut-offs in my office, I guess infrequently, but it 

does happen. With 430,000 customers in the province, you’re 

going to have some people who get behind in their bills for 

whatever reason. And cut-offs are a last resort. We try and work 

with the clients, work with our customers to get them up to 

date. In lots of cases we’ll offer repayment terms, you know, 

that they can afford. A cut-off is certainly the last ditch attempt 

to resolve a situation. And they have ample opportunity to work 

with the officials, work with the employees of the corporation 

to resolve outstanding bills when they become outstanding. 

 

Our bottom line is we want to keep our accounts and our bad 

debts down because, you know, bad debts just mean that other 

good, paying clients are subsidizing those that won’t pay. So we 

try and minimize the number. We work with them to get them 

back on track, and there’s lots of time given to them. 

 

(1315) 

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

Mr. Osika:  That is a clarification, Mr. Minister, that I 

wanted to hear from you, and I appreciate that. I guess it 

becomes a concern when there is a law that’s on the books that 

says if that is not paid when due . . . and that appears to be the 

change in that new section, and it does cause some concern. 

And I will be addressing it when we come to that section later 

on. 

 

The concern there, if in fact that is exercised, the cutting off of 

power and then the additional hook-ups, having to re-hook 

because it was an oversight or somebody’s been on holidays 

and you cut them off and then you have to re-hook it, there are 

costs involved. And those costs have to be borne either by the 

customer who may have inadvertently not met that due date 

deadline or in fact someone that’s been on an extended 

vacation. And those are the kind of problems. 

 

So I’m glad that you clarified that the statement in this new Bill 

that says “when due” also allows some opportunity for 

negotiation, if you . . . not necessarily negotiation; I’m sorry, 

that wasn’t the term. But at least some notification and 

agreement by SaskPower that it will not in fact happen the day 

after the money is due in the office. Thank you for that 

clarification. 

 

Let me just go quickly to 59(2)(a). In the case of an emergency, 

the corporation may enter the premises of a customer and . . . I 

guess the question that I have on this one, it’s very simply, if 

SaskPower employees are required to damage personal property 

in order to get into a dwelling, who then pays for these 

damages? For example, if an employee breaks a window or 

door to get into the home, will then SaskPower pay the repair 

bills or will that be charged back to the customer because of the 

emergency? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well typically we don’t have to 

enter residences. It’s to give us access to the grounds, and most 

of this work can be done by . . . you know, done outside of a 

building. But I guess if the costs were associated with actions as 

a result of what the customer has done, I think that probably it 

would be the responsibility of that customer. And I think these 

things would be open for discussion and interpretation based on 

individual circumstances. 

 

I think, you know, with sending any of this, legislation is 

legislation, regulations are regulations, but the bottom line in 

terms of dealing with a customer service entity, as SaskPower 

is, policy has to be developed that’s based on common sense 

and applicability. And I think that it changes from time to time. 

 

We urge and work with the employees to be courteous, to be 

reasonable in dealing with their customers. Those are the people 

that pay their bills; those are the people that allow for profits to 

pay for their salaries. And I think they recognize that. And so I 

think that’s . . . when you’re dealing with hundreds of 

thousands of customers, you’re going to have times when 

there’s disagreements, times when things don’t work well, but 

for the most part I think the corporation’s been serving the 

general public very well. 

 

But the bottom line is, policy has to be developed. It has to  

have the ability to change it and adapt it to the circumstances, 

but it’s got to be developed based on a common sense approach 

to dealing with issues. And that’s what I think the legislation 

will allow us to do. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. And that once 

again underlines public relations and good customer service, 

and I appreciate that. 

 

It is my understanding, under 59(3), that an officer or employee 

of SaskPower may enter the dwelling of a customer at any 

reasonable time in order to discontinue service under any 

circumstances prescribed in the regulations. Could you give me 

an idea of what other circumstances prescribed in the 

regulations might be, and will there be a consulting process 

before these regulations are implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that the officials have 

drafted the legislation such that unforeseen circumstances that 

may arise can be dealt with. I’m told that they can’t give a 

hypothetical situation, but it’s just to allow for something that 

may at some point in time down the road develop into a 

circumstance that can be dealt with then under this legislation 

and dealt with the way it’s drafted. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Before the regulations 

are drafted, will there be consultations? And will that be merely 

among your employees and your staff, or will there be 

consultations with others to approve some of these regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  You know, as a I think I indicated a 

little earlier when we were dealing with the Water Corporation 

Bill, I think in order to have good regulations and good policy, 

there needs to be consultation. And certainly in terms of 

developing a regulatory regime, we would want information 

shared, stakeholder input. And so I think it’s fair to say that I 

can assure the member that we would consult with the affected 

parties as we develop regulations. Certainly if regulations were 

drafted, take them out for feedback. Man, I think that’s a 

reasonable approach to take. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m confident, 

but I’ll make this more in way of a comment or a statement 

rather than raise it as question. But I would truly hope that there 

will be provisions taken into account with respect to protection 

of tenants’ rights, that in fact . . . for example, that an employee 

or an officer may not enter a home where there are children 

present but no parents or guardians  provisions and 

regulations of that nature. 

 

Mr. Minister, again the questions, and I appreciate you and your 

officials answering and dealing with these. And please 

understand our concerns on behalf of your customers, the 

people of Saskatchewan, with respect to what may be perceived 

as perhaps extended rights to government agencies, that people 

may in fact feel threatened by. And that, I hope, is not the intent 

 I’m sure that it’s not the intent  of this particular Bill. I 

appreciate very much your underlining the fact that there will be 

precautions. There will be the type of regulations . . . there will 

be consultation to ensure that those regulations do not infringe 

on the rights of your customers, our citizens of this  

  



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1996 

great province. 

 

I thank you; I thank your officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I just would like to 

thank the members of the opposition for their questions. I think, 

as I indicated earlier, we’re all here to do a job. That’s 

representing the people of this province. I appreciate the 

thought that was put into the questions and the concern, and I 

will look forward to having this issue and having the officials 

be able to work under the guidelines of this new legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, I would propose an amendment 

to clause 3: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

words: 

 

“if the customer fails to pay, when due, any indebtedness 

of the customer to the corporation” 

 

where they occur in clause 59(1)(c) as being enacted 

therein and substituting the following: 

 

“when customers are in arrears for more than twenty days 

in payment of accounts for the supply or service”. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Just to comment briefly, I 

understand the intent of the amendment that’s put forward by 

the Leader of the Opposition. It would be my position that this 

would be a policy issue that I think would be better dealt with at 

a corporate level as opposed to putting it in legislation. 

 

It may be that 30 days is appropriate; it may be that 15 days is 

appropriate. But I think it would be better set in policy and in 

regulation as opposed to in statute. So I couldn’t support the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, thank you. Continuing to deal 

with clause 3 of the printed Bill, I propose . . . oh, I’m sorry. 

There’s a vote on it. I’m sorry. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Osika:  One further proposed amendment, a House 

amendment, Mr. Chairman, to: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting subsection 59(3) as being enacted therein; 

and 

 

(b) by deleting subsection 59(4) as being enacted therein 

and substituting the following: 

 

“(3) for the purposes of this section, the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council may make regulations governing the 

entry of premises of the officers and employees of the 

corporation.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chair, I think I would ask for 

just a brief clarification from the Leader of the Opposition. I’m 

not sure what this amendment is trying to achieve. As I see it, 

his amendment would remove the portion that would refer to 

the entry of premises by the officers and agents of the 

corporation. Maybe he could explain to me what this is trying to 

achieve? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That would allow 

then for a little more clarification with respect to the . . . under 

which circumstances that the employees or officials would have 

access to premises without prior notification, without something 

a little more specific in the regulations and in the policy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  You know as I indicated earlier, I 

think what we are attempting to do is with policy . . . and this 

again, I would see as being a policy development initiative. 

With policy, we would want to use a degree of common sense 

in terms of how we handle our clients. These are people that 

pay the bills. These are the folks that allow this company to 

exist, and certainly we want to be able to treat our customers 

with respect, with a fair, you know, with a degree of decency 

and honesty. And I think that the legislation as it’s drafted 

would allow us to do that. So I can’t support this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1330) 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, 

Develop and Sustain Irrigation 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 87  An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

  



June 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

Bill No. 38  An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker:  Before members depart, I want to wish to all 

members of the Assembly that you’ll spend an enjoyable 

weekend enjoying the hot Saskatchewan sunshine in your 

constituencies and with your families. Having said that, this 

House now stands until Monday at 10 o’clock a.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:33 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2271 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2271 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2271 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2271 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2271 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2271 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2271 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2271 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2271 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2271 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2272 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2272 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2287 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2288 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tabling of Liberal Party Contributions 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2272 

 Favourable Statistics for Saskatchewan 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2272 

 Wet Seeding Conditions at Kamsack 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2273 

 Launch of Regina Dragon Boat Race Festival 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2273 

 Two-year University Classes for Northern Saskatchewan Students 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 

 4-H Achievement Days 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 

 Destination Saskatchewan and the Regina Airport 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

 Quality Physical Education Award at George Lee School 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Political Contributions 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2274 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

 Plains Health Centre Closure 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 

 Political Contributions 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 

 Drunk Driving Accidents 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2278 

 Casino Tours 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2278 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2278 

 Treaty Land Entitlements 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2279 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTIONS 

Extended Hours 



 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2279 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 118  An Act to amend The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2280 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Legislation  Vote 21 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2281 

  Osika .................................................................................................................................................................... 2281, 2283, 2286 

  Draude ................................................................................................................................................................. 2282, 2284, 2286 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2288 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2288 

 Bill No. 87  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2292 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 

 Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2295 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2295 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2298 

 Bill No. 87  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2298 

 Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2299 

 

 


