
























































May 29, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1963 
 May 29, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Fort 
Qu’Appelle, they’re from Kamsack, they’re from Yorkton, Pilot 
Butte, Rosetown, Regina, Bangor, Swift Current, and virtually 
all small communities throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities, Mr. Speaker . . . are people from such places 
like Whitewood, Grayson, Esterhazy, Yorkton, Langenburg, 
Yarbo, Lemburg, Bredenbury, Welwyn, and Gerald, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 
Kylemore, Torquay, Estevan, Weyburn, Wadena, and 
throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon, Leross, Ituna, Regina, but the majority are all from 
Kelliher, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Gray, Riceton, Balgonie, but mostly from the 
city of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina and 
from Wadena, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of people from Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities of Chaplin, Caronport, Riverhurst, Lafleche, 
Saskatoon, and a good number from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina here. They’re from Ituna. They’re from Saskatoon. And 
they’re also from Kayville, Oxbow, Regina Beach, Silton, and 
all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order petitions regarding the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and pursuant to 
rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 



1964  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 
 

Bill No. 98  An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of 

International Child Abduction/Loi concernant l’application 
à la Saskatchewan de la Convention sur les aspects civils de 

l’enlèvement international d’enfants 
 

Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 98, An Act respecting the 
Application to Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil 
Aspects of International Child Abduction, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 99  An Act respecting Co-operatives/ 
Loi concernant les coopératives 

 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chairman, as Chair of the 
Non-controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 99, 
An Act respecting Co-operatives, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 100  An Act respecting the Regulation of Drivers 
and Traffic on Saskatchewan Highways/Loi concernant la 

réglementation de la conduite automobile et de la 
circulation sur les routes de la Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 100, An Act respecting the 
Regulation of Drivers and Traffic on Saskatchewan Highways, 
as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 101  An Act respecting Wills/ 
Loi concernant les testaments 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 101, An Act respecting 
Wills, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 102  An Act respecting the Distribution of Estates 
of Intestates/Loi concernant le partage des successions non 

testamentaires 
 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 102, An Act respecting the 
Distribution of Estates of Intestates, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the Committee of the Whole on the said 
Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 103  An Act respecting Powers of Attorney/ 
Loi concernant les procurations 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 103, An Act respecting 
Powers of Attorney, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 104  An Act to facilitate the Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Judgments and Awards/ 

Loi visant à faciliter l’exécution réciproque des jugements et 
des sentences arbitrales 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 104, An Act to Facilitate 
the Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments and Awards, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 105  An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards/ 
Loi concernant l’application en Saskatchewan de la 

Convention des Nations Unies pour la reconnaissance et 
l’exécution des sentences arbitrales étrangères 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 105, An Act respecting the 
Application in Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention 
on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral 
Awards, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 106  An Act respecting the Maintenance of 
Dependants of Testators and Intestates/Loi concernant 

l’aide aux personnes à charge des testateurs et des intestats 
 

Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 106, An Act respecting the 
Maintenance of Dependants of Testators and Intestates, as 
being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 

be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No. 107  An Act respecting the Reciprocal 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders/Loi concernant 
l’exécution réciproque des ordonnances alimentaires 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 107, An Act respecting 
The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 108  An Act to amend The Change of Name Act, 

1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 
 sur le changement de nom 

 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 108, An Act to amend The 
Change of Names, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 110  An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995/ 

Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 110, An Act to amend The 
Education Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 



1966  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 109  An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 
1995/Loi modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services 

 de l’état civil 
 
Ms. Draude:  As Chair of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 109, An Act to amend The 
Vital Statistics Act, as being controversial. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to introduce to you and through 
you to my colleagues in the Assembly, a group of 70 grade 5 
students from Lumsden Elementary School. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
Lumsden Elementary School is a very progressive school, and 
Lumsden is a wonderful community, and they often invite me to 
visit their school, so it’s a pleasure for me to invite them back 
here today. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Ray Tourney, Mrs. 
Darcee Robb, and Mrs. Tracy Taylor. I am looking forward to 
meeting with them shortly for a photograph and some 
questions, and I hope they enjoy the procedures today. And I 
ask all of you to join me in giving them a warm welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

British Columbia Election 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was listening 
to the debate yesterday in the Assembly I was reminded of some 
of the more interesting and incorrect predictions that have been 
made by politicians over the years. Who can forget Grant 
Devine’s statement that Saskatchewan is so prosperous you can 
afford to mismanage it and still break even. Or who can forget 
the member for Thunder Creek’s comments that 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating would not be upgraded because 
we are only eliminating 2.5 billion in debt. 
 
And then there was Gord Campbell’s prediction that Gord 
Campbell would be the next premier of B.C. (British 
Columbia). Well, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that Mr. 
Campbell and his Liberal Party have taken their appropriate 
place in history, as yesterday Premier Glen Clark’s New 
Democrats were re-elected in British Columbia, and the 
Liberals are left as an eastern-based party with no government 
west of the Miramichi. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the New 
Democratic Party of B.C. and the many people in British 
Columbia who rejected the right-wing cynicism of the Liberals 
there, as the people of Saskatchewan rejected the right-wing 
cynicism of the Liberals here less than a year ago. Each of us 
will draw our own conclusions from the closeness of the 
results, but it’s difficult to deny that the people of B.C., like the 
people of Saskatchewan, are more interested in moving forward 
into the new century than yearning for the previous one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that western Canada will 
continue to be represented by two strong voices of national 
unity and social compassion, and offer a truly clear alternative 
to the right-wing priorities of the Liberal government in Ottawa. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
comment on last night’s election result in B.C. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to go to member’s 
statement B, since Mr. Campbell was not quite able to claim 
victory last night. However, Mr. Speaker, while Premier Clark 
should be congratulated for his victory last night, I think too he 
must recognize it is in many ways a hollow victory. Not only 
did Mr. Clark not receive a majority of votes cast in the 
election, he did not even receive a plurality of votes cast. 
 
While we must all celebrate our democratic system, we must 
also recognize the anomalies that sometimes result from it. 
Sometimes the most popular party doesn’t win, but that’s the 
way our system works and we have to live with it and respect it. 
 
So while Mr. Clark has claimed a victory in term of seats, it 
certainly isn’t a ringing endorsement of his government. 
Because of that, Mr. Clark will have to govern with 
pragmatism, with diligence, rather than arrogance, recognizing 
the vast majority of British Columbians voted for a free 
enterprise alternative last night. 
 
The Premier of this province may very well, and the members 
opposite may very well, be rejoicing, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
certain they are also reflecting on the outcome in British 
Columbia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, this past weekend I attended the 
1996 conference of the Saskatchewan Voice of People with 
Disabilities in North Battleford. 
 
The Voice of People with Disabilities has served Saskatchewan 
for more than 20 years now. Until recently it was known as the 
Voice of the Handicapped, but their new name reflects a better 
way of thinking about abilities and disabilities. 
 
The name may have changed but the organization has not. It is 
still the Voice, and it speaks out loudly and clearly on many  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

issues that are vitally important. 
 
Over the years the Voice has spoken out about the abilities of 
disabled people, the need to introduce attendant services, the 
need to remove the barriers to employment, and has supported 
the development of the Provincial Interagency Network on 
Disability, and the creation of independent living centres in 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
The theme of this year’s conference was, Security For The 
Future. The topic is a timely one. There are cut-backs all around 
us, concerns about pension plans and the social safety net, and 
disabled people are very vulnerable when it comes to these 
changes. I for one am glad to know that the Voice is watching, 
and listening, and making sure its members are well informed 
about these important issues. 
 
It’s also appropriate that the Voice held its meeting in North 
Battleford because the Battlefords are an active and inclusive 
community that delivers programs and services that are 
accessible to people with disabilities. 
 
I’d like to thank the Voice and its members for contributing to 
our province. I’d also like to congratulate them on a successful 
annual meeting. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Stony Rapids Small-school Games 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate all the participants in the small-school games being 
held in Stony Rapids, Saskatchewan. Thirteen schools are 
participating in the games all week — students from Uranium 
City, Black Lake, Stony Rapids, Descharme Lake, Garson Lake, 
Cole Bay, Jans Bay, Michel Village, Brabant Lake, Timber Bay, 
Weyakwin Lake, Dore Lake, and St. George’s Hill. 
 
These students are taking part in a wide range of activities 
ranging from track and field events to cultural and fine arts 
events. One of the most interesting aspects of these 
competitions is that a member of every community will be on 
each team, so that if one team wins an event, every community 
will go home with a medal. 
 
This is a creative approach to community enhancement. Any 
time we can teach our children cooperation and good 
sportsmanship, we are building stronger adults for the future. I 
would like to commend all the organizers, the teachers, the 
parents, and the community of Stony Rapids, who helped make 
the small-school games possible. I’d like to also congratulate all 
the students who are participating in these events. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mosaic  Regina’s Festival of Cultures 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Beginning 
tomorrow in Regina you’ll be able to travel the world in three 
days and visit 18 different countries. I am referring, of course,  

to Mosaic 1996, festival of cultures. 
 
On Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, thousands of volunteers 
will be busy greeting, feeding, and entertaining people who will 
be able to visit the 18 pavilions. Each pavilion reflects the 
culture, traditions, cuisine, and costumes of their host countries. 
 
The hon. member from Regina Lakeview will be pleased to 
know that the Scandinavian pavilion is back this year at the 
Student Union Building at the University of Regina. 
 
A number of new attractions have been included in the 1996 
edition of Mosaic. Children’s Corner is an interactive, hands-on 
experience where children can explore the cultures of 
participating pavilions. 
 
Passports can now be purchased at a number of businesses in 
Regina. It’s great entertainment value; adults pay $9 for a 
passport; seniors and youth, $6; and children under five get in 
free. Passports contain valuable information about bus routes, 
the pavilions, and special performances. Free bus transportation 
is available for everyone who has a passport. 
 
I offer my best wishes to the Regina Multicultural Council, all 
of the Mosaic participants, and the volunteers, who make this 
yearly celebration such a wonderful success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Building Moving Industry 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to commend the actions recently taken by a number 
of individuals to prevent disaster for the building moving 
industry in Saskatchewan. A short time ago, building movers 
were sent letters informing them that SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) and the Department of Highways had 
severely tightened up the rules regulating how building movers 
obtain permits for each job. 
 
I was contacted by two movers from my constituency who were 
irate with what had taken place. They claimed that the new 
guidelines established by the government were so restrictive 
that they would actually drive many building movers out of 
business. Furthermore, the new rules were drawn up without 
any consultation with the moving industry. Eventually a few 
individuals spearheaded a meeting among the building movers, 
including Ron Hudye of Canora and representatives from 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
SGI, and the Department of Highways. I’m happy to report that 
a settlement was mediated without much difficulty and that it 
seems satisfactory to all parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard much talk from the members opposite 
about loosening the restrictions on Saskatchewan’s small 
business, but if these outside people had not intervened, the 
government would have effectively tightened the noose on the 
entire moving industry. I would like to thank all the parties that 
helped diffuse this potentially disastrous situation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1968  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Recovery of Government Funds 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday yet another sad chapter in a very sordid tale was 
played out in a Regina courtroom as another former Tory 
cabinet minister was sentenced for her misdeeds of the ’80s. I 
was simply astounded last evening as I watched the news, to see 
the new leader of the new PCs (Progressive Conservative) say 
with a straight face that his party feels as wronged by the 
actions as his one-time colleagues as do the people of 
Saskatchewan. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that leader feels absolutely 
no remorse for the actions of his party and has no intention of 
making it up to the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Bill I’m introducing immediately following 
question period, the so called THIEF (The House Internal 
Economy Fraud) Act, will make collecting such ill-gotten 
money back directly from political parties possible. I ask the 
Premier today whether he’s prepared to support this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well I say to the leader opposite we 
are not going to disclose our position at this time. When the 
matter comes up, we will debate it. But we are not going to give 
you any commitments at this point in time as to what will be 
done with the agenda of the House. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Board of 
Internal Economy decided to look into ways of getting some of 
this money back; however, the Minister of Energy and Mines 
told the media that he’s unsure whether it will be possible to 
recover this money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill I’m introducing today will in fact make it 
eminently possible to get this money back, so I’ll ask that 
minister whether he thinks this Bill or a Bill similar to it would 
not help the Board of Internal Economy take steps to recover 
this money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  What the Minister of Energy and 
Mines said yesterday was that the Board of Internal Economy 
might well benefit from some independent legal advice. I say to 
the Leader of the Opposition that seems to me to be far 
preferable than passing a Bill which prejudges the matter. 
 
There is a question of civil liberties involved here, a question of 
due process. It strikes me that the process suggested by the 
Minister of Energy and Mines respects that due process. Your 
Bill really does not. 
 

Restitution for Victims of Youth Crime 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently a Bill was 
introduced in this House which finally tipped the scales of 
justice a little more towards the victims of crime  namely, the 
government will now allow police to identify some released 
offenders. I do believe that this will help our society as a whole 
but, Mr. Speaker, the work cannot stop there. There are many 
other areas in our justice system that should and must be looked 
at. One of these is restitution to victims of crime, namely crimes  

committed by youths. 
 
I noted with interest a Bill introduced in the Manitoba 
legislature which allows victims of youth crimes to seek 
compensation from young criminals’ parents. Clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, some parents, guardians, should be held accountable 
for the misdeeds of their children. 
 
My question to the minister is whether he believes this type of 
legislation would be beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d like to thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for that question. The whole issue of restitution has 
been dealt with in many ways. The civil law at present allows 
for restitution to be sought from parents and I think the new 
Manitoba legislation actually confirms that they are not 
changing the law in that sense. What they are doing is they’re 
reversing the onus. 
 
Our position is that this whole issue is being dealt with by the 
federal government as they look at the Young Offenders Act, 
the review of the federal Justice Committee going across the 
country. There are many things that need to be looked at. One 
of the things is: who bears responsibility for youth in our 
community and the damages that they cause in our community? 
 
We don’t want to be in a situation where we are further 
compounding the difficulties for young people and for parents 
of young people. It’s a community issue. We’re very concerned 
about it. We’re interested in listening to any suggestions, but 
we’re going to be very careful before we make any moves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Care Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, Liberal opposition members 
from Wood River and Arm River were in Swift Current this 
morning, where many of the seniors who are being kicked out 
of the Swift Current Care Centre are picketing the local health 
board office today. As one might expect, it is difficult for many 
of these frail pioneers to get around, but they are in a desperate 
situation. They are doing what they can to draw attention to the 
pain and anxiety that this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government is creating. 
 
The minister has stated in the past that a home will be found for 
each of the 70 residents. However at this meeting today it was 
confirmed that every long-term care facility in Swift Current is 
full. In addition, there is also a substantial waiting-list. 
 
Given these facts, will the Minister of Health explain where 
these seniors will be placed? How far do they have to be moved 
from family and friends to be placed in a suitable living 
accommodations that the minister constantly speaks about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member knows that the 
facility is not slated to close until December 1 of this year. The 
member knows that, Mr. Speaker. And there are several  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

months, obviously, for suitable arrangements to be made, and 
I’m sure that the district health board will want to consult with 
the residents of the care home and with their families. 
 
But I think the member also knows that 30 long-term care beds 
are currently available at Palliser Regional Care Centre in Swift 
Current. Twenty beds will be converted for long-term care at 
the Swift Current Regional Hospital, and there are additional 
beds, contingency beds, available at Swift Current Regional 
Hospital in the event there is a problem accommodating people. 
But it is not expected that by December 1 there will be a 
problem accommodating the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I indicated in the House yesterday, I give the House my 
assurance that no one in long-term care in Swift Current or 
indeed in the province will be left without good and decent and 
adequate care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, once again this government is 
attempting to shift the blame to a district health board when in 
fact it is the NDP government that is creating the problem 
through its chronic under-funding of the health care system. 
 
And who are the victims? Our sick and our elderly. Isn’t it 
ironic that in the NDP’s 1991 election platform document they 
stated and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan is proud of its senior citizens. They are our 
pioneers. Their hard work and determination help to build 
our communities and our province. They have earned the 
right to a retirement with dignity and security. They 
deserve no less. 

 
Perhaps the Premier would like to explain why our seniors are 
getting so much less, why his government is treating them with 
absolutely no dignity or security. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I obtained some information 
from the Department of Health that I’d like to send over to the 
member. And one thing this information  and the other 
members of the opposition  one thing this information 
discloses is that the Swift Current Health District received an 
increase in funding this year of $159,000. 
 
It also indicates that if the federal Liberal cut to health care had 
been applied to that district, the district would have incurred a 
decrease in funding of $544,000, Mr. Speaker, which was 
back-filled by us. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I think that 
I have to accept responsibility for the level of funding that is 
provided to the districts. There’s no question about that. The 
districts have to live within their financial means. And I say to 
the Liberal Party  notwithstanding the fact that they’ve cut 
health care spending through their federal counterparts, which 
we’ve back-filled  if you believe that the solution to health 
care situations is to pour more and more money into them,  

would you please tell the people of Saskatchewan where the 
money comes from? 
 
Does it come in the form of a tax increase or does it come in the 
form of a $1,000 per family premium? Please tell the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Four-day School Week 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, Scenic Valley 
School Division is going ahead with a sound proposal that will 
alter the way the school week is organized, improve education 
for their children, and save precious education dollars. It is a 
proposal that their teachers support, the local division supports, 
92 per cent of parents support, and that includes taxpayer 
support, and support staff was onside as well. 
 
Unfortunately, Madam Minister, the school division has to 
proceed against your wishes since you said no to this proposal. 
Last week when you met with the Scenic Valley Division 
representatives, you scolded them. You said you needed to 
ensure the children wouldn’t be harmed by this project. 
 
Madam Minister, they had the same concerns. They asked the 
same questions. They’ve done their research. There will be 
more teaching time in every week. There will be fewer days lost 
to substitute teachers. There will be no time loss because kids 
are pulled out for driver ed and these sorts of things. 
 
Madam Minister, your government promotes . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The hon. member has 
been quite lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go 
directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Your government promotes creative 
solutions. It doesn’t make sense, Madam Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Now I have asked 
the hon. member to go directly to his question. And I’ll ask him 
to go directly to his question now or I’ll recognize another 
questioner. Directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  And I’m doing that. Why have you changed 
your mind about something you were so actively promoting just 
a little while ago? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the Scenic Valley School Division did put forward 
a proposal to go to a four-day week in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It was to be a one-year pilot project. 
 
The proposal came to me in early May. I had a very good 
meeting with the Scenic Valley School Division last week 
where we discussed the proposal and I indicated that we had 
some issues that we needed to sort out before we could go 
forward with the pilot project. But I certainly did not rule out 
the pilot project for the 1997-1998 school year. 
 



1970  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that we’re concerned about is the 
impacts that this proposal would have on small children, 
children in middle years, and children with learning disabilities. 
Mr. Speaker, this proposal talks about an extended school day. 
It means that classroom time would extend by some 25 minutes 
and we wanted to ensure that this proposal would not impact 
upon the quality of education to the children I’ve referred to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Scenic Valley has 
done their research. No one is more concerned about what will 
happen to the children than the parents themselves, and they are 
almost totally in support of what they want to do. 
 
It’s like your colleague said the other day: either you believe in 
the local decision making or you do not. Clearly you don’t. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, this is just another example of an NDP 
minister sitting in the ivory tower in Regina telling rural people 
what’s best for them, when you promised just the opposite. 
Does it make sense that educational professionals, school board 
members, and 92 per cent of the population want it, and you’re 
going to say no? 
 
Madam Minister, the least you could do is support the pilot 
project that will improve education and save them money. And 
they need to do that now. Will you do that today? Will you 
promise not to stand in the way of this pilot project? Will you 
promise not to waste precious tax dollars on court challenges or 
something else frivolous? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I know that the people in 
Scenic Valley  and I did have an opportunity to meet with the 
board of education and the director of education  are 
extremely concerned about issues of quality of education. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Education is concerned about those 
issues as well. 
 
This is a proposal that has not received much work in Canada 
and I understand that there is one such project in Alberta. Mr. 
Speaker, we would want to evaluate the project in Alberta, and 
other parts of Canada, or the United States, to ensure that the 
extended school day did not dramatically impact upon small 
children, middle years children, and children with learning 
disabilities. 
 
Those are important issues, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Education and government should be concerned about. And I 
think that the public will agree with us, that it’s important that 
we take those kinds of considerations into proper evaluation in 
order that we can go forward with any potential pilot project in 
the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Service Districts Act 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 
Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. 
 

Mr. Premier, we understand that yesterday you met with the 
presidents of both SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM. And we understand that once again 
you heard definitively from these people their opposition to 
your Service Districts Act. Your government’s Act has been 
reported to you as being unacceptable to rural Saskatchewan 
and to the towns and villages and cities of this province. But as 
Sinclair Harrison put it, and he summed it up nicely, “It’s up to 
you (this is a quote now, it’s up to you) how the legislation 
goes.” 
 
Mr. Premier, what he is recognizing here is that you’re the boss 
and you’re in charge. So I ask for them today, from you, the 
boss that’s in charge of this government: Mr. Premier, have you 
made up your mind? Have you made a decision? Will you today 
stand in this Assembly and tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
you have heard them and that you will withdraw this Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 
question is the same answer that I gave yesterday in anticipation 
of the meeting. And I’ll repeat it very briefly for the member. 
 
It may come as a surprise to the Conservative Party but we’re 
but four years away to the 21st century, or less, and the world is 
changing dramatically everywhere, including in rural 
Saskatchewan as it is in urban Saskatchewan. And it is 
incumbent upon us, given the fact that we all face the task of 
public debt  all governments everywhere, all ideologies  to 
make sure that we have the best infrastructure that we can have 
for the 21st century for rural people. 
 
Now in that task we seek the cooperation of SARM and SUMA 
and the government as a partner in active partnership. The 
methodology of achieving the end result is not important. What 
is important is that we prepare our rural people, our urban 
people, our young people, everybody in Saskatchewan, to be 
ready for the 21st century. 
 
And we heard the submissions. I communicated my 
considerations to them. Both sides are doing some considerable 
thinking, I would suspect, of the points that we articulated and 
in the next few days some announcement will be made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Increased Welfare Rolls 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, once again the number of people on welfare in 
Saskatchewan is increasing. There were 82,070 Saskatchewan 
residents on welfare in March. That’s an increase of 2,500 since 
the end of last year and an increase of 25,000 since your 
government took over office in 1991. 
 
Other provinces are taking positive action to bring their welfare  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

numbers down, but here in Saskatchewan the numbers continue 
to climb  82,000-plus on welfare. I think that’s a disgrace, 
Mr. Minister. And it’s a direct result of a lack of new jobs and 
opportunities for the people here in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are the welfare numbers in this province 
continuing to grow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Third Party for that question and I believe he is aware of the 
answer to that question in some regards even before he asks it. 
He will know that the social assistance case-load in 
Saskatchewan has taken some dramatic rises over the last few 
years, essentially as a result of two decisions made in Ottawa. 
 
One, the decision to make fundamental changes to the 
unemployment insurance program which brought many new 
cases and people onto our welfare system. And number two, the 
unilateral decision by the federal government to abdicate their 
responsibility to care for treaty Indian people off reserve. That 
too presented a significant increase in the Saskatchewan 
case-load. 
 
The member should know that if those two factors were taken 
out of today’s case-load, this case-load would be considerably 
smaller than it was in 1991. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we share the view of the member that this is 
not a satisfactory situation. We’ve seen the economic fortunes 
of this province turning around. We’re seeing jobs being 
created and we are determined, Mr. Speaker, to reform the 
social assistance program to make it the best program in all of 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, other provinces are 
breaking the welfare cycle. They are making fundamental 
changes through job creation and through positive work . . . 
welfare reform initiatives . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . like 
workfare, yes. Yet on Friday the Premier was at a conference in 
Ontario slamming workfare. 
 
Mr. Minister, from March ’93 to March ’96 Alberta has cut the 
number of people on welfare by over 50 per cent through job 
creation  through job creation  and a workfare program. 
During the same time frame, the number of people on welfare 
in Saskatchewan grew by nearly 14,000 — during that same 
time. 
 
Mr. Minister, every day we hear members of your government 
bragging about how well the economy is doing. And if this is 
the case, why are the number of people on welfare continuing to 
rise and why are you refusing to consider a program that has 
worked well in other provinces, like workfare? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say one or two 
things. I explained to the member carefully, I thought, why the 
numbers in Saskatchewan have taken a dramatic rise. It’s 
because of decisions of right-wing governments; this decision 
being made by the right-wing government in Ottawa. 

He asks about what other provinces are doing. Well I refer him 
to his right-wing friends that are the Government of Alberta. 
What has been the solution in Alberta, Mr. Speaker? It’s to take 
the poorest of the poor and give them one-way bus tickets, 
mostly to Saskatchewan or British Columbia. That’s how they 
bring their rolls down in Alberta. 
 
That is irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, and this government, this 
government has taken the position since its election  and it’s 
a fundamental principle of our political movement  that we 
will not punish the poor for being poor; but we will seek ways 
to provide independence for those who are today dependent on 
social assistance; that we will seek ways to strengthen this 
economy to provide opportunities, not only for people on 
welfare, but for all of our people in Saskatchewan. That’s what 
we’re doing, Mr. Speaker; we’re going to lead the nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Highways 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I will ask all hon. members to 
come to order to allow the hon. member for Athabasca to put 
his question. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
highways are a complete mess, Mr. Speaker, and northern 
Saskatchewan is worse. My question is for either the Minister 
of Northern Affairs or the Minister of Highways, whoever gives 
us an adequate answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, northern highways are in a state of 
constant disrepair. Hundreds of people become stranded every 
season because the road conditions are atrocious and 
maintenance is non-existent. Who do you think is going to pay 
the cost to fix thousands of dollars of damage caused by ruts, by 
rocks, by washouts, and washboards? Northern people, Mr. 
Minister, that’s who. 
 
Now I hear your government’s grand solution is to provide 10 
yards of gravel for every kilometre of northern roads  10 
yards, Mr. Speaker. In the South, RMs (rural municipality) and 
contractors at least budget 100 to 150 yards of gravel per 
kilometre. 
 
Now my question to the minister: are you trading in your gravel 
trucks for a helicopter? Because the only way you can spread 10 
yards of gravel over one kilometre of road is by aerial seeding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I think the member from 
Athabasca is trying to run away from the major issue. The 
major issue, Mr. Speaker, is the $114 million cut-back from the 
Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1972  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  If we had $114 million, Mr. Speaker, we 
would probably be able to pave all the roads in northern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, the member 
has a problem with the Liberals in Ottawa. The only reason why 
he’s not able to see the . . . Mr. Speaker, the only reason why 
when I spoke last time on the member from Prince 
Albert-Churchill, Kirkby . . . I would say this much: he was 
dancing up a jig before the last election. I understand now that 
some people say he might be line-dancing in Prince Albert, but 
with all the mess that he created in co-management, I don’t 
think that’s the case. I think he’s probably doing some ballroom 
dancing in Ottawa because we never see him and that’s the 
reason why. He’s down there dancing for the Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Northern 
Affairs has a brand-new name. We just thought of this now. 
We’re going to call him Quiet Owl because he don’t give a hoot 
for the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  The Minister of Northern Affairs can blame 
the federal government all he wants. The fact is his government 
is giving northern highways only one-tenth of the gravel the 
roads in the rest of the province gets  one-tenth, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s now telling the people of northern Saskatchewan that he 
thinks their concerns about safety and transportation are only 
worth one-tenth of the people living in the rest of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, is your government planning to close down 
depots and start selling off Highways’ equipment in the North, 
showing even less of a commitment to northern people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I think that the Liberals 
from across represent the blind owl. Basically because, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen a $6 million program on the Cumberland 
bridge that the member from Arm River opposed this past 
week, and the member from Athabasca had to apologize for this 
week. 
 
I think he’s a blind owl over there and I think, Mr. Speaker, 
didn’t see the road to Grandmother’s Bay. I think that the blind 
owl on the other side did not see the road to Athabasca in his 
own constituency. Mr. Speaker, the improvements on . . . 
(inaudible) . . . in his own constituency to improve it in regards 
to forestry in northern Saskatchewan and also the five 
kilometres on Garson Lake road, Mr. Speaker. I think we have 
blind owls over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Service Districts Act 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Cypress Hills asked a very important question today, Mr. 
Speaker, and mine is much of a follow-up of the same. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday in this House I called on the Minister of  

Municipal Government to answer questions relating to The 
Service Districts Act, and ask her to explain who truly is in 
charge of this portfolio. 
 
This question was answered by the fact that the Premier stood 
and addressed the issue. This morning when questioned by the 
media about a meeting with the heads of SARM and SUMA, 
the Premier indicated that he will give further consideration to 
The Service Districts Act, and he stated and I quote: 
 

We are open-minded to consider the arguments and 
positions advanced by people like Mr. Harasen and Mr. 
Westby. If we can get the cooperation of our partners, I’d 
always prefer no legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the person in charge of 
Municipal Government. Will the Premier explain if this means 
he is now prepared to put this Bill on the back burner until all 
parties involved have reached a consensus on sharing services 
which, by the way, municipalities are already doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. I did not hear 
part of the question, but I wonder whether or not the hon. 
member was saying until all parties come to their senses, I think 
was the question as it was prefaced. And I don’t believe that 
that’s a proper accusation, if I heard correctly, a proper 
accusation to make against SARM or SUMA. 
 
I think that SARM and SUMA have been . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Listen, Mr. Speaker, I said I did not know what 
he said. If . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well then sit down and listen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The hon. member from Wood River 
 who was not here and the House was operating in an orderly 
and functioning fashion  should be out of the House all the 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order! Order. Order. I 
will ask hon. members on both sides of the House to come to 
order. I want to remind the Premier that it is inappropriate to 
refer to either presence or absence of members of the Assembly 
and I’ll . . . Order, order, and I’ll give the Premier a moment to 
complete his answer if he wishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m advised by others of 
my colleagues who have heard the question that the word used 
was consensus, I believe. That being the case, I apologize to the 
hon. member for using the words that I did because that’s what 
I thought he said, but I was obviously in error. 
 
The question has to be answered as I did to the question by the 
Tories. We want a cooperative manner, a mechanism to make 
sure that the people in SUMA and SARM and the Government 
of Saskatchewan work together to revamp rural Saskatchewan 
for the 21st century. That’s building for the future. It’s working  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

for the future. 
 
We’ve always preferred a cooperative approach. We still prefer 
a cooperative approach. And if SUMA and SARM indicate that 
there’s a partnership approach which takes place with respect to 
us, we’re prepared, more than prepared, to do the same. 
 
But the reality is the world is progressing. And we either are on 
that side of working for progress and positive change, or we are 
like the Liberals and the Conservatives, sticking our heads in 
the sands and fighting that change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Provincial Training Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to inform the 
Assembly that Saskatchewan is developing a new provincial 
training strategy. Today I released a discussion paper outlining 
the reasons we need a new training strategy and the principles 
on which that strategy will be based. Copies have been made 
available to all members. 
 
This draft paper will help to focus discussions with our training 
partners. We have had some preliminary discussions on this 
subject, but the consultation will now be formalized and 
organized in round table meetings across the province. 
 
There are four main reasons why we are developing a new 
training strategy. First, there is less money in the system 
because of federal funding cuts; second, the economy is 
changing, requiring new types of skills; third, technology is 
changing rapidly, offering new ways to deliver training and 
causing changes in how we do our work, which requires 
changes to our training; and fourth, Saskatchewan population is 
changing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we shape this strategy we will ensure that it is 
responsive to the market-place. We will ensure that training is 
linked to jobs. We will ensure equitable access to training and 
we will design the training as a shared responsibility among 
learners, industry, education institutions, communities, and 
governments. 
 
Our recent experience with the JobStart, Future Skills program, 
is one example of the innovative, more effective approaches we 
are exploring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is facing many choices as we design 
a system of labour market services for the next century. The 
new provincial training strategy will be developed in 
cooperation and collaboration with the many people and 
organizations who have an interest in that system. It will build 
on Saskatchewan’s considerable strengths and on the 
contributions of many people. 
 
At the end of the day, we will have a relevant, flexible, 
high-quality training system that helps Saskatchewan people get 
jobs. We will have a system that helps to make  

Saskatchewan business and industry competitive in the global 
economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the input of all members of the 
Assembly, as well as interested partners in education and 
training. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, 
thank you for the copy of your document and your 
announcement as well. I’m very encouraged by the fact that we 
are recognizing, of course, that job creation, job training, and a 
new strategy are necessary. Ever since the election we have 
been calling for real action on job creation. And I think that 
addressing training and education and in trying to develop a 
new plan are very crucial for this province’s success in job 
creation. 
 
The minister has stated that training will be linked to jobs, and 
that is essential. Our young people need the opportunities, they 
need the opportunities here in Saskatchewan, so that when they 
complete these highly skilled, new training programs that 
indeed that there is a job available for them. And I look forward 
to that kind of input. 
 
In the short time that I’ve had to look at the document, I note 
that there is a lot of comments made about the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Technology. The program at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
has been . . . the programs at SIAST have been excellent. But 
there is a need to readdress it. We need to look at new 
partnerships. The finances, as the minister has indicated, are 
crucial, and we can’t look at the situation where students will 
be expected to pay the huge increases in tuition. 
 
So we have to establish a strategy. That strategy has to involve 
new partners; it has to involve a development of new training. 
There is a constant change in terms of the kind of skilled 
worker that we need. So I look forward to contributing as I 
might, and my colleagues do, and I encourage all people in 
Saskatchewan to assist in developing a strong partnership with 
all of the people involved in creating an excellent training 
program in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our 
party, I think we should also respond in kind to this proposal 
and the information brought to us by the minister. 
 
We certainly can never, ever educate our children too much. 
And so I guess tentatively we would say that we support in 
principle what we are hearing being said. Obviously though, 
nothing is 100 per cent, as we have discovered in the past few 
days. We even find people aspiring to get to 99.9 and thinking 
that’s close enough, when in fact in life we have to use a 100 
per cent goal and maybe accept 99.9 if we get there. And most 
of us will never achieve that kind of a goal. 



1974  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

So I ask the minister not to set his goals too low. Let’s set our 
goals at 100 per cent of employment, 100 per cent of education, 
100 per cent of opportunity. And having said that, then I would 
suggest to the minister that there may be some more room to 
move in terms of looking around the world at what can be done 
to achieve the goals we need to achieve. 
 
He has outlined some aspirations of what his goals are. They’re 
lofty aspirations and we applaud him for those directions that 
he wants to go in, but there are never too many things that you 
can learn about how to achieve that goal better. 
 
Take a look at Switzerland. I’d remind you again, here is a 
country that has for many, many years looked at the problems of 
getting their young people into the job market and how to best 
achieve that without expanding costs. 
 
So they’ve backed up the system from post-secondary back 
down to the high school level. And in fact in the high school 
level they have an apprenticeship program over there, I 
understand, where some of the children now are being trained 
for specific jobs along with their reading, writing, and 
arithmetic that normally we would look at, just to use an old 
cliché of how the educational system works. 
 
And so some of that cost then is translated, Mr. Speaker, back 
into the high school system where it’s sort of absorbed, just as 
though the same ordinary costs would be now for an education. 
And it doesn’t cost them very much more that way. In fact 
maybe not as much. 
 
And yet these people have made up their minds a little bit about 
where they’re going to go. And these are of course targeted 
towards the kind of jobs that are available in society. 
 
So maybe we do have to take a look at some of the outside 
world and see if there are some better ways that we can improve 
on it, although we do agree that the minister is going in the right 
direction and we hope that you will continue to work hard to 
help our young people to find work in the jobs that are 
available. It’s no use educating people if there are no jobs after 
they are finished with their education. 
 
And so thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 117  An Act to Enable the Recovery of Funds 
Stolen by Members of the Legislative Assembly (The House 

Internal Economy Fraud/“THIEF”) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move first reading 
of a Bill to Enable the Recovery of Funds Stolen by Members 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I wish to table a  

report from the Provincial Auditor on the 1995 financial 
statements of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) subsidiary Crown corporations, pursuant to 
section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In accordance with our policy and 
being an open and accessible government, I table the answer. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 109 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 94  An Act to amend  
The Education and Health Tax Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, after my remarks, I will be moving second reading of 
The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1996. This Bill 
adds new provisions that will improve the application of the 
education and health tax to inter-jurisdictional carriers as 
announced in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, truckers who operate in Saskatchewan and in one 
or more other provinces or states are required to pay the 
education and health tax on their vehicles and repair parts based 
on their proportionate use in Saskatchewan. The amount of tax 
payable is determined by the value of the acquisition, the 
percentage of total distance travelled in Saskatchewan, and the 
tax rate. 
 
Starting January 1, 1997, Mr. Speaker, the method of taxing 
these vehicles is being changed so that the tax will be collected 
each time the vehicle is registered. The tax rate will decrease 
each year from about 4.2 per cent in the year the vehicle is 
acquired to less than 2 per cent in later years. In addition, 
eligible carriers will not be required to pay tax on their trailers 
and repair parts. 
 
These changes, Mr. Speaker, are expected to be revenue neutral, 
and will benefit both the province and the trucking industry. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, inter-jurisdictional carriers are licensed 
to file monthly tax returns or pay tax when they register their 
vehicles to each province in which they operate. This 
arrangement has worked reasonably well over the years. 
However some carriers, particularly those based in Alberta and 
the United States, have been able to avoid paying their fair 
share of tax on their vehicle usage in Saskatchewan. To fix this 
problem and to provide an incentive for carriers to purchase 
their vehicles, parts, and repairs in Saskatchewan, the recurring 
sales tax is being introduced. 
 
Under the recurring sales tax, Mr. Speaker, inter-jurisdictional 
carriers will be exempt from paying tax on their trailers, parts,  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

and repairs purchased in Saskatchewan. This initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, will benefit both the carriers and Saskatchewan truck 
dealers. It will essentially put them on the same level 
playing-field as carriers and truck dealers in Alberta where there 
is no provincial sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, carriers who register their vehicles in other 
jurisdictions for use partly in Saskatchewan will pay the 
Saskatchewan recurring sales tax to their home vehicle 
registration office. This revenue will be forwarded to 
Saskatchewan when the vehicle registration office in that 
province or state submits the registration fees that they collected 
from their carriers on behalf of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recurring sales tax is similar to the sales tax 
changes implemented by British Columbia earlier this year. 
Also several American states have a similar tax that is collected 
by each jurisdiction on a mileage-prorated formula. 
 
Once the recurring sales tax is fully implemented, it should 
provide the following benefits to the trucking industry and to 
the province. It will simplify and streamline tax reporting for 
carriers. It will reduce the time spent on auditing carriers. 
Compliance will be improved so that all carriers will pay their 
fair share of tax. The exemption for trailers and parts will 
benefit inter-jurisdictional carriers and Saskatchewan truck 
dealers. It will improve the cash flow for carriers, and it will be 
consistent with one-stop shopping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of responsible, targeted tax 
measure that strengthens our economy and creates jobs. 
 
I would also note, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association has been very supportive of replacing the current 
sales tax formula with a recurring sales tax. And they have been 
working with Finance officials to ensure that it is implemented 
as smoothly as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to take 
a few moments today to discuss the amendments that have been 
tabled to The Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
The purpose of this Bill, as I understand it, is to deal with the 
problems of inter-provincial trucking companies and bus lines 
which operate in Saskatchewan, but register their operations 
and their vehicles outside of the province. By doing this, these 
companies avoid paying the education and health tax on their 
new vehicles. When this tax is applied to new vehicles, it is 
more commonly known as the Saskatchewan vehicle tax. This 
tax varies from the 9 per cent E&H (education and health) tax 
because the rate of taxation is reoccurring and declines 
depending on the length of time that vehicle is owned or leased. 
 
The Bill before us today attempts to create a new process 
whereby two or more jurisdictions may cooperate in the 
collection of these taxes. This is to attempt to ensure that each  

jurisdiction is able to collect the taxes owed to it by trucking 
and bus line companies. 
 
Under this new system of taxation, companies will be able to 
purchase or lease their vehicles tax free, but will pay a prorated 
tax each time they register their vehicles. The vehicle 
registration office in each jurisdiction will collect the tax and 
registration fees and remit them to the province. 
 
This Bill goes on to set up a formula for the calculation of the 
amount of the Saskatchewan vehicle tax that is to be paid on 
commercial vehicles that only operate partially in 
Saskatchewan. The formula and annual tax rates will be used in 
determining the amount of prorated tax that must be paid each 
year on these commercial vehicles. 
 
New sections also establish tax exemptions for trailers and 
repair parts used with these vehicles but are subject to this 
reoccurring tax. It seems to me that these amendments are 
mainly for clarification purposes and are not highly 
controversial in nature. 
 
The liability of payment of this tax falls on one of three people: 
either the person who finances the vehicle, the person who 
manages the vehicle while it is in Saskatchewan, or any person 
who determines the utilization of the vehicle in question while 
it is in our province, can be held liable to pay the Saskatchewan 
vehicle tax. 
 
It is this section that causes a few questions and concerns. Does 
the truck or bus driver fall under the wording of, the person 
managing or determining utilization of the vehicle? Due to the 
fact that this tax is joint and several, the government can collect 
the tax from any of the above people. I think the truck drivers 
have a right to be concerned that they may be liable for the 
truck company’s tax payments. This area will be discussed in 
more detail in Committee of the Whole. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Act goes on to deal with distance ratios, tax rates, and 
adjustments to tax payable under the discretion of the minister. 
The Minister of Finance may increase the amount of tax payable 
by a truck or bus company and may also intervene in situations 
where an agreement or arrangement has been made that 
artificially reduces taxes owed. 
 
It is somewhat alarming that the minister is not required to 
show or to prove that there has been a deliberate attempt to 
evade or avoid the tax in question before cutting through 
agreements and changing the amount of tax owed. This seems 
to me as though the minister has been given an extraordinary 
amount of power in this regard. 
 
With the passage of these amendments into law, the 
government will have the power to make regulations with 
regards to agreements between Saskatchewan and other 
jurisdictions; the manner in which the tax can be paid; listing 
tax exemptions; the calculation of refunds or credits; and the 
form of refund or credit. 
 



1976  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Again there is a bit of concern over regulations, but they too 
can be dealt with more effectively in a Committee of the 
Whole. Due to the fairly straightforward nature of this Bill, I 
see no reason to hold up debate any longer. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise and move second reading of a Bill to amend The 
Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act. This Bill 
introduces changes to the Saskatchewan tax incentive for 
investments in labour-sponsored venture capital corporations 
that will parallel the changes to the federal tax incentive as 
announced in the March 6, 1996 federal budget. 
 
The Bill also introduces several technical amendments 
necessary to clarify existing program policies. The 
labour-sponsored ventured capital corporation, LSVCC, 
program was introduced in 1986 to provide organized labour 
the opportunity to create and maintain jobs in Saskatchewan by 
sponsoring the raising of capital and channelling that capital to 
small and medium-sized businesses. The program also provides 
encouragements for groups of employees to invest in their own 
places of employment. 
 
The program allows for the creation of three different types of 
venture capital funds. A type A pool fund is permitted to issue 
equity shares to any Saskatchewan resident and use the capital 
thus raised to invest in a number of different small and 
medium-sized businesses. A type B employee fund is a single 
purpose LSVCC which can only issue shares of its equity 
capital to employees of the business in which the corporation is 
investing. National LSVCCs are broadly based investment 
corporations registered under federal income tax legislation. 
 
To encourage Saskatchewan residents to support these venture 
capital funds, The Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporation Act permits the issuance of provincial income tax 
credits. 
 
This Bill introduces changes which will reduce the value of the 
Saskatchewan tax credit for investments in national LSVCCs. 
The Saskatchewan tax credit will decline from 20 per cent on 
the value of an individual’s investment to 15 per cent. The 
provincial tax incentive for investments in type A and type B 
funds will remain unchanged at 20 per cent. 
 
It is also the intention of this government to parallel federal 
changes by extending the minimum holding period for 
investments in provincially registered LSVCCs from five years 
to eight years and by instituting a three-year waiting period 
during which an investor who has redeemed an LSVCC share 
will be ineligible for new provincial tax credits. 
 
In addition to these policy initiatives, this Bill implements 
several technical amendments to The Labour-Sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Act. These amendments represent  

clarifications of current policy and administrative practices with 
respect to the labour-sponsored venture capital program. 
 
I would be pleased to answer questions concerning the 
amendments when discussing this Bill at Committee of the 
Whole. It therefore gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 
move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act for a 
second time. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
haven’t had a lot of time to consider the ramifications of Bill 
95, which amends The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Act. And because of this, I’ll only speak to it very, 
very briefly today. From what we can see, much of it is just a 
housekeeping Bill to clean up the original Act proclaimed in 
1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anything that encourages investment into our 
province by its citizens is welcomed by this caucus. Because in 
the end, for all the sanctimonious nonsense spouted by this 
government about job creation, it truly is the people of this 
province who create the wealth and create the jobs. 
 
This particular Act deals with the workers of the province. It 
allows workers in Saskatchewan to conscientiously invest their 
hard-earned money into the world of business. Instead of being 
employees, through these investments they would have a real 
stake in what happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a good idea for everyone in our 
province to get a taste of both the world of business owners, 
particularly small-business owners, and the world of employees. 
In our free enterprise system, each of these factors depend on 
the other for survival. Very often in our province one gets the 
feeling that workers, particularly those workers who are part of 
trade unions, really don’t have a good understanding about the 
pressures that face the owners and operators of business. And 
perhaps in many cases the opposite is true as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in Bill 95 offer some 
amendments to the Act passed some years ago. I understand, 
however, workers in the province have not often used the 
provisions laid out in this Act to their fullest extent. I 
understand so far there’s been an under-used . . . it’s been an 
under-used Act. In committee, we will be asking the minister 
why she thinks this is, if in fact she agrees to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I obviously get suspicious whenever the 
government opposite deals with a Bill that touches on the 
power or rights of our trade unions. I believe that suspicion is 
justified, given the unconditional loyalty the government has 
shown to trade unions over the years, sometimes at the expense 
of those of us who are not a part of unions. And we want 
assurance about the power to invest by the leaders of trade 
unions. 
 
In committee, we’ll be asking the minister to clarify potential 
concerns we might have after being able to study its 
ramifications to a closer extent. 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

However, I do recognize as well that many of the changes 
appearing in these amendments do appear to be that of 
clarification. For example, the time limit for any monies raised 
under the provisions of this Bill to invest in type A corporations 
have been shortened. 
 
As well, many of the changes regarding tax credits issued under 
this Act are being made to coincide with amendments set by our 
federal government. This is also true for the new clause 
mandating a waiting period for reinvesting in one of these 
venture capital schemes once an investor has cashed out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we do have some questions about this Bill 
and these amendments, we’re willing to take these questions up 
with minister in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 96  An Act to amend  
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today I rise to move second reading of a Bill to amend 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, with over 30,000 members 
and more than $116 million under trusteeship, has established 
itself as an integral part of the retirement savings plans of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is the only tax deferred plan 
available to people who don’t qualify for an RRSP (registered 
retirement savings plan). Member funds are professionally 
managed and the plan has generated a competitive rate of return 
averaging 9.5 per cent over the past 10 years. There are no 
minimum contributions or fixed payment schedules. The money 
is protected from seizure, claim, or garnishee by creditors of 
any sort. 
 
The changes we are introducing in this Bill are designed to 
make the plan more flexible. These changes are necessary so 
that the plan can better meet the needs of its members. 
 
People have told us they want to contribute to the plan for more 
years. They want to contribute beyond the current maximum 
age of 65. We are therefore prolonging the upper age limit for 
joining and contributing to the plan. Members will be able to 
contribute to their Saskatchewan Pension Plan accounts for a 
longer time. 
 
As a result of this change, the plan will also raise its mandatory 
retirement age. These changes also make the rules more 
consistent with those governing other pension plans and 
retirement savings plans. 
 
People will no longer have to be Saskatchewan residents to join 
the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. This Bill will remove the 
Saskatchewan residency requirement and provide future, new 
marketing opportunities for the plan. 
 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan includes many couples where 
both spouses are members of the plan. One of the amendments 
contained in this Bill will allow the transfer of death benefits 
between spouses within their plan accounts. 
 
Members of the plan have told us they want more options 
available to them when they begin receiving their pension from 
the plan. Changes in this Bill will pave the way for offering 
additional options to retiring members. These changes will 
allow the plan to offer products similar to those available to 
those in the market-place. Products  such as life income 
funds, LIFs; locked-in retirement income funds, LRIFs; and 
locked-in retirement accounts, LIRAs  will give retiring 
members more control over the income generated by their 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan account. These options will be 
prescribed in the regulations. 
 
Another amendment in this Bill will allow members to transfer 
funds to their Saskatchewan Pension Plan accounts from other 
pension or retirement savings plans. Recent changes to The 
Pension Benefits Act and regulations have given employees 
greater portability of their pensions. 
 
People will now be seeking to consolidate their retirement 
savings by transferring their funds to one vehicle. It is 
anticipated that these transfer amounts will be relatively small. 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is ideally suited to handle these 
small pension amounts. The regulations will establish the rules 
governing these transfers. 
 
To set the framework for the future growth of the plan, this Bill 
establishes that any deficits in the annuity fund are payable 
from the General Revenue Fund. The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan is prudently managed by an independent board of trustees, 
and the chance of a deficit in the fund is small as pension 
liabilities are closely matched to the income stream generated 
by investments. The fund currently has a surplus of more than 
$145,000. 
 
Other amendments included in this Bill are of a housekeeping 
nature consistent with these announced measures. The changes 
announced in this Bill will provide more opportunities for 
people to build a financially secure future through their 
personal retirement savings plans. The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan has a cost-effective administration which can effectively 
provide pensions for its members. The prudent management of 
this plan will serve members well into the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will 
not speak at length on this Bill since it appears to be a mainly 
housekeeping piece of legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, thousands of Saskatchewan residents have 
contributed to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. For many, it is 
the only plan that they have outside of the Canada Pension Plan. 
It is important that we do everything in our power to ensure this 
pension plan remains strong and provides our residents with at 
least some small measure of additional  



1978  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

security at their old age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears some of the changes proposed in this 
amending Bill will give contributors to the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan some increased options in how they receive their 
benefits once they do in fact retire. They’ll have the option of 
taking a life annuity from the plan or having their retirement 
funds transferred to one of three pension benefits: lifelong 
funds, locked-in retirement income funds, and locked-in 
retirement accounts, which I understand will be established by 
cabinet. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will have some questions about these types of 
pension benefits when this Bill comes before us once again at 
Committee of the Whole, because, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
have the government’s guarantee that these types of benefit 
payment plans will serve Saskatchewan residents well. We will 
also want assurances that there will be a mechanism in place so 
contributors to the plan are made well aware of their choices 
and the implications of each. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the changes prescribed in this Bill bring 
the Saskatchewan Pension Plan closer in line with the registered 
retirement savings plans which quite obviously have become a 
major part of Canadians’ retirements plans as they become less 
and less trusting of the Canada Pension Plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill now allows residents who have moved 
from Saskatchewan to continue to contribute to the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. We will want to know why this 
change was made. Other changes include such minor 
modification as increasing the maximum age of contributors to 
the Saskatchewan Pension Plan to 71 from the original 70. 
Again, this brings the plan in line with the rules governing 
RRSPs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also have some questions regarding clause 
4 of this Bill. Under this clause, it is spelled out that any 
deficits in the plan’s annuity fund are payable out of general 
revenue. While we understand the annuity fund currently is in a 
surplus situation, we will want some assurances this will remain 
the case in future years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see no reason to hold this Bill in second 
reading. However, as I stated, we will be asking the minister for 
many clarifications on the new and the old clauses of this Bill. 
We’ll want continuing assurances that the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan remains a valuable tool for Saskatchewan 
residents in the future, and we’ll want to be assured that these 
proposed changes will make the plan stronger. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 44  An Act to 
amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks for this 
opportunity to once again address Bill 44, a Bill to amend The 
Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my previous comments on the Bill, I made the 
argument that before the government asks permission to give 
more freedoms to Crown corporations, both government and 
the Crowns should be made more accountable to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that this argument will not fall on 
deaf ears. Here we have the government wanting to give Crown 
corporations extra powers to engage in more activities when so 
many suggestions and recommendations for improving 
accountability continue collecting dust. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
much like giving a kid a car when they’ve shown every reason 
that they couldn’t be trusted with a bicycle. 
 
While the troubled Crown sector has re-jigged some deals on a 
piece-by-piece basis since this government has came to office, 
no real improvements have been made to the accountability of 
Crown corporations. That’s a disturbing comment on a 
government which promised from day one to open the books. 
Inherent in such a promise was a commitment that they would 
not only open them, but this government would do something to 
ensure abuses never occurred again in the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite basically ask for two things 
in this Bill today. They ask for freedom to lend money or 
provide assistance to any company, even though they may not 
have shares in that company. They also ask for free rein to enter 
into capital market activities. These activities in both cases are 
so poorly defined and left wide opened that the government will 
basically be able to do whatever it wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are tired of governments that do whatever 
they want. The assets of the people of Saskatchewan tied up in 
these Crowns are immense in size and they should not be put at 
the mercy of politicians whose foresight and planning is limited 
to a four-year period of office. Setting up a better system of 
accountability would improve upon this situation. 
 
With respect to this Bill, the members opposite may ask why 
they should provide this House with better tools of 
accountability before asking for more powers for the Crowns as 
they are doing in Bill 44 here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should provide more tools 
of accountability for the simple reason that they focused on this 
in their 1991 election platform. The people of Saskatchewan 
deserve the best. They deserve to see this commitment to 
accountability kept. They deserve the innovation that our 
community leaders have offered this province since it was 
founded. This government should try to be an innovator rather 
than an evader when it comes to public accountability. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should provide  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

these tools because our Crown sector has undergone some 
fundamental changes. While the Crown sector changed, the 
tools of accountability remain as they were some 20-odd years 
ago. 
 
While a few changes occurred such as giving the Crown 
Corporations Committee a mandate to ask about the future 
direction of Crowns, the committee remains somewhat 
powerless for several reasons. The primary reason is that it’s 
dominated by government members who usually follow the 
marching orders of their parties. Unless significant 
improvements are made, providing Crowns with the sorts of 
powers they are asking for in Bill 44 would simply just make 
this problem worse. 
 
The basic problem with Crown corporation accountability, 
which the members opposite must recognize, is that times have 
changed. In the 1970s, Saskatchewan Crown corporations were 
vastly different. Since that time, we fought many holy wars over 
the usefulness of Crown corporations, but none of these 
conflicts have improved upon the accountability system. 
 
In the 1970s we had the debate over the nationalization of a 
significant portion of our potash industry. In the early ‘80s, we 
fought over whether the NDP’s family of Crown corporations 
were gouging our own families. In the 1980s, the Tories tried to 
privatize Crowns through public participation, while in the 
1990s, the NDP re-jigged some of the deals and said that they 
would open the books. 
 
Through all of this, Crown corporations drastically changed but 
little, if anything, improved with respect to accountability. 
Since the 1970s, there’s been a profound change. Crown 
corporations expanded drastically to the point that they had 
more people on their payrolls than our entire public service. 
After the ‘80s they shrank, thanks to privatization. The 
combination of these two events and others profoundly changed 
the nature of our Crown corporations. 
 
In the 1970s we had a host of utility Crown corporations that 
were accompanied by a group of wholly owned, export-oriented 
resource Crowns. Mr. Speaker, what we have today is a whole 
different bag of goods. We have a small number of utility 
Crowns that are engaged in an ever wider range of activities. 
Added to this is a number of resource companies that are only 
minority owned by the government. The changes, however, go 
on. 
 
We now have a number of Crown enterprises  like 
NewGrade, Crown Life-HARO, and the Bi-Provincial upgrader 
 where the government is a majority or significant owner but 
exercises little control. Add to this a series of direct loans to 
things like banks and packing plants. There is also an ever 
widening net of Crown corporation subsidiaries, and 
partnerships with private corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m pointing out here is that over the last 20 
years, through a combination of events and decisions, our 
Crown sector has become a very mixed enterprise. No longer 
does it boast a large but simple portfolio of enterprises or 
investments. It’s a very complicated web that involves some 40  

per cent of all government financial activity. 
 
No longer are ministers clearly answerable for the performance 
of a public investment, Mr. Speaker. While these people are 
actually answerable for getting us involved in a variety of 
investments, they often manage an investment along with a 
series of private partners. As minority shareholders, they’re 
responsible to us for their activities. But they now have the 
company of private partners who may feel that they have no 
responsibility to us even though they benefit from taxpayers’ 
money. As a result, Mr. Speaker, the days when everyone 
understood that the minister was strictly answerable for what 
occurred in the Crowns has passed into an evening of cloud and 
confusion. Unfortunately, accountability measures have not 
kept pace with these changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1991 the NDP government took over a Crown 
sector that had greatly changed from the one it left behind in 
1982. While deals have been re-jigged, no overall attempt to 
change the system of accountability to meet the challenges 
posed by the new, mixed set of investments was ever made. The 
usual post-activity set of controls continues. These controls 
were inadequate 20 years ago, and they’re still inadequate 
today. If new powers are given to the Crown through Bill 44, it 
will just make these entities even less accountable. For that 
reason, Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us is a bad idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has finally announced their 
undertaking to review the Crowns in a public review process. 
Aside from being curious about how much this review will cost 
the taxpayer, from all indications it will not involve a review of 
failings of the accountability system. 
 
While this government has no clear, decided purpose for its 
Crowns, it should not only find one, but it should also produce 
a coherent vision of how they feel these Crowns will be held 
accountable in the mixed-enterprise era. 
 
Back in the 1970s the former premier, Allan Blakeney, used to 
argue the Crowns made profits so that the government could 
support programs for the public. In 1982 the public didn’t buy 
that argument, and they still don’t buy it today. Frankly, the 
residents of this province are more likely to believe that the 
purpose that this government has for its Crowns is to indirectly 
raise taxes. 
 
Despite the fact Crowns are making record profits, the 
government collects less money from them while they continue 
to shovel more into projects like HARO Financial and others. It 
goes there instead of to support our programs. 
 
Clearly no one knows what purpose this government wants our 
Crowns to serve. Without a clearly defined purpose, Mr. 
Speaker, it defies logic that the government should be asking 
for more powers for the Crowns. Obviously Crowns will 
require certain powers, but I would suggest to the members 
opposite that those powers should reflect the purposes which 
Crowns are expected to achieve. 
 
Deciding what powers Crowns should have, or giving them 
more, and only after that deciding what purpose they are to  



1980  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

serve makes no sense. To use an often used metaphor, that’s 
like putting the cart before the horse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier in my speech I referred to the changing 
environment facing the Crowns. One aspect which has held 
constant through all the years and through that changed 
environment is found in the behaviour of the politicians 
involved. Every party represented in this House has engaged in 
selective responsibility when it comes to Crown corporations. 
 
(1500) 
 
The members opposite and their CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) predecessors are by far, however, 
the most practised at this. Selective responsibility is the sort of 
behaviour that should really concern everyone when we are 
discussing a Bill like The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act. Mr. Speaker, selective responsibility is the process where 
politicians try and get closely identified with the good things 
which Crowns do while distancing themselves from the less 
popular things. 
 
After his first bout with state-funded enterprise, T.C. Douglas 
learned this lesson quite quickly. A failed brick, shoe, and box 
plant meant the government of the time had to put something 
between themselves and the Crowns, something that would 
allow them to take credit where possible and avoid blame where 
desirable. Over the years, Mr. Speaker, that’s evolved into the 
government finance office and then into the Crown Investments 
Corporation. Both these agencies helped ministers avoid being 
accountable all of the time. They oversaw the Crowns and 
began handling much of their financial affairs. They distributed 
monies between the Crowns and collected the profits from them 
and made decisions as to how they would be used. This 
arms-length relationship let politicians come close when it came 
to handing out a new power line or phone exchange but still 
allowed them to keep their distance when money was lost or a 
project failed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite ask for more powers 
to lend money and engage in capital market activities in this 
Bill, this problem of selective responsibility remains unfixed. 
As the Crown corporation sector’s activities became more 
mixed, this whole problem actually worsened. Ministers have 
carried selective responsibility to new heights. The whole 
process has turned into a new tower, but unfortunately if 
nothing is done, it’s just going to topple over. 
 
Ministers are accustomed to using organizations like the Crown 
Investments Corporation and its predecessor to avoid 
accountability for unpopular projects or decisions. Today, with 
the mixed investments, loans, warrants, partnerships, and 
subsidiaries, the politicians have found yet another defence. 
They now can say that they can’t disclose all the necessary 
information to hold themselves accountable because it might 
reveal secrets which would harm their private sector partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of shielding their private sector partner, 
the mixed investments, which often involve all types of 
interactions with private partners, are just a disguise. They 
disguise what the government really wants. All too often what  

this government and it predecessor, the Tory government, 
wanted was to use the private sector partners to help the 
government avoid accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty poor way to treat your shareholders, 
the taxpayers of this province. So here we have a government 
that wants to give Crown corporations more powers when they 
haven’t even solved the current mess they found themselves in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem with our current situation is that all 
we have in this province is after-the-fact accountability. There 
is almost no means of demanding that the corporations which 
spend our money and manage assets, which belong to us, 
provide some pre-activity controls to the Assembly. The Crown 
Corporations Committee can ask questions but it’s still 
constrained by what sort of information the Crowns are willing 
to give. That, Mr. Speaker, is the very failing in our system, and 
government should be fixing it before asking for more powers 
like they are doing in this Bill to amend The Crown 
Corporations Act. 
 
Basically we are in a messy position. To sum up how 
ineffectual the tools of accountability have become in this 
province is to paint a pretty sad picture indeed. We have a 
mixed Crown sector where ministers use private partners to 
shield themselves from accountability. That mixed sector is 
involved in a much wider range of activities, often across the 
world, that could lead to many unforeseen problems. 
 
All the controls which we have on our Crowns as members of 
this House only involve an after-the-fact review of their actions. 
To make matters worse, our Crown corporations still basically 
control what information is released. The Provincial Auditor, 
for example, reports that certain Crowns don’t even give the 
cabinet documents they really require to properly plan for the 
corporation. 
 
Last of all, ministers continue to use the selective responsibility 
tactic to cheat Saskatchewan residents out of a reasonable 
chance to know how their money is being handled in the 
Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these things should be solved before this 
government gets the additional powers it is asking for here 
today. Giving them any more powers will just further 
complicate matters and make it more difficult to fix the system 
down the road. 
 
We should not be surprised however, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has been in power for close to five years, and even 
though it’s known about problems like the unfunded pension 
liabilities, they don’t want to deal with them until the next 
century. With that sort of attitude, we can see why they ask for 
more powers to make a mess of things so another, let’s say 
Liberal, government will have to sort them out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the government gets the powers they are 
asking for, I would like to suggest that it should go searching on 
the shelves of commissions’ and auditor’s reports. Brush some 
of that dust off and take positive action on the 
recommendations that are laid out in those reports. 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

Mr. Speaker, the Gass Commission provides a good example. 
The government had the Gass Commission do a study in an 
effort to fulfil its open-the-books promise. That commission 
made a number of key recommendations that should not be 
sitting idly on the shelf. 
 
One of those recommendations dealt with the issue of selective 
responsibility which I mentioned earlier. This is one of the 
suggestions which I believe should be addressed before any 
more powers are given to the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Gass Commission recommended that all 
dividends made by a Crown corporation or a joint venture 
should be paid directly into the Consolidated Fund which is 
now known as the General Revenue Fund. Mr. Speaker, today 
we currently have government allowing the CIC Crowns to pay 
their holding company. The Crown Investments Corporation, in 
concert with government, decides what amount it is going to 
pay to the government. Through this process, ministers are able 
to keep their distance but yet still cosy up to the Crowns when 
it’s desirable to do so. 
 
The greatest shortfall of this process is that the Assembly and 
the public are frozen out of the process. What results, Mr. 
Speaker, is much like what we saw earlier this year. We have a 
government out on the road telling us that they must cut all 
sorts of programs, while Crown corporations make hundreds of 
millions in dividends. The government has the Crowns pay a 
mere 50 million in dividends, while it threatens all our rural 
communities with cuts. This, Mr. Speaker, is all done without 
any debate in the legislature. 
 
If all these dividends had to be paid into the General Revenue 
Fund, we could have a debate in this House as to whether the 
Crowns should get a couple hundred million while our schools, 
health care, and roads only receive 50 million, which works out 
to be a much smaller share of total Crown dividends. 
 
I fear, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite don’t want a 
debate. They don’t want to subject more spending to the 
legislative budget process where it rightfully belongs. They just 
want to go on spending money from the Crowns, money that 
belongs to the public, as though it were some private slush 
fund. They don’t think that public debates on how much 
Crowns should get versus how much our rural health districts 
and our universities should get would be worthwhile. 
 
Once again, it goes to show that the private school kids over 
there on the government benches think they know better. Well 
the truth is, Mr. Speaker, they don’t. They might know a lot 
about evading accountability, but they don’t know what’s best 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, and to the minister, 
if you want these powers you first have to demonstrate that you 
will be using them wisely. Try and show that you can do this by 
immediately implementing the Gass Commission’s 
recommendation and bring Crown revenues back into the fold. 
By doing so, you will end the behind-the-doors approach . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Langford:  To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I got 28 
students from East Central School, just east of P.A. (Prince 
Albert). They’ve driven here I’d say for probably a four-hour 
trip and I wish them a good journey back, a safe trip. I will be 
meeting with them for drinks and photos and questions. These 
students are accompanied by the teacher, Mr. Phaneuf, 
accompanied by chairperson Mrs. Chandler, Mrs. Byrne, Mrs. 
Jinjoe, and Mrs. Buckingham. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce two very special people to me and to 
my constituents, Mary and Chester Rustad, from Rose Valley. 
Thank you for stopping in to see. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, it’s 
time to bring Crown revenues back into the fold. By doing so 
you will end the behind-the-doors approach where our Crown 
profits end up building cable in Chicago and England, instead 
of making jobs in Saskatchewan. By doing so you will end the 
destructive, shameful practice of selective responsibility now 
practised by cabinet ministers when it comes to the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the government gets more powers for the 
Crowns, they should also act on a few more recommendations 
found in the Gass Commission. That commission recommended 
that a process should be laid out whereby significant 
transactions within the Crowns are reported soon after they take 
place. The government suggested it was committed to doing 
this but their record makes one wonder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these very same people who want more powers 
today also are the same people who can’t seem to get it together 
to inform taxpayers about significant transactions. The Gass 
Commission suggested that the people of this province  



1982  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

deserved an overview about major transactions which would 
include a number of useful pieces of information. They 
suggested that it should include an outline of the specific 
purposes of the transaction and how they were to be managed. 
They also proposed mandatory risk assessments while also 
calling for a clear outline of how the public and government 
would be regularly informed about progress of any project or 
investment. That, Mr. Speaker, is the ideal, and I think that that 
is worth pursuing. 
 
Effort should be spent pursuing ideals like this, Mr. Speaker, 
but instead this government wastes its efforts trying to get more 
powers for Crown corporations without any regard for 
accountability. The lack of regard they’re showing today is a 
continuation of their decision to brush off recommendations 
like that to inform the public of significant transactions. In the 
last year, for example, they bought 94 per cent of HARO. The 
minister said nothing of this transaction, but only left the CIC 
press officer to say a few brief words to the public. 
 
Last year this government also purchased several cable 
franchises in the United Kingdom, in several major 
transactions. In fact they did it during the election. The only 
word we heard of it was in a news release announcing the sale 
of the new cable franchises. Those franchises involved 
obligations ranging up to $50 million by the end of the century. 
Somehow, Mr. Speaker, they were not important or significant 
enough to warrant providing the information that the Gass 
Commission suggested should be offered to the public. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister should be ashamed of this record. He 
should be ashamed to come before this House and ask for more 
when they can’t even handle what they’ve got. They want more 
power when they don’t even take the time to ensure that the 
Crowns provide the CIC board, which is made up of cabinet 
ministers, with the information they need to make proper 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, aside from that shameful display, there are a 
number of other key improvements to the accountability system 
that should be made before any other powers are granted. 
Unfortunately, like the others, they remain sitting on the shelf 
gathering dust. 
 
Included among other major recommendations of the Gass 
Commission, which was not acted upon, is a call to ensure that 
public policy initiatives like rural bus transportation are clearly 
dealt with. The commissioners wanted the government to 
decide to either continue cross-subsidization or start directly 
funding such public policy initiatives by subsidy to the 
corporation from the General Revenue Fund. 
 
The argument behind the latter is simple. If some corporate 
activities aren’t intended to make profit but are supposed to 
deliver some desirable social service, then the taxpayer should 
consider funding those services instead of continuing the 
charade of straddling a corporation with an impossible mandate. 
 
The commission also suggested that rules be clarified as to how  

much money can be committed to a project or program before 
legislative approval is required. Just last year the government 
committed another $150 million through the Crown 
Investments Corporation to HARO Financial, who then directed 
it to Crown Life without any debate in this legislature. Add to 
that the $37 million commitment to a casino, also without any 
debate. 
 
While all this goes on, nurses are laid off and health facilities 
continue to close in many areas across rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if the government feels these are 
worthwhile activities, then they should not be afraid to put them 
to the test of debate in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite show such little regard for 
accountability but yet the minister and the members opposite 
are here today asking for more and saying, trust me, we’ll 
handle the new responsibilities in the Bill to amend The Crown 
Corporations Act just fine. I will give the members opposite 
credit for being so boldfaced. Any member who can defend 
such an indefensible position must have a lot of gumption to 
keep on doing this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Gass Commission also recommended that a 
clear policy be laid out with respect to the circumstances that 
Crown corporations should be able to retain their surpluses. It 
also suggested that a process be decided to sort out how 
Crowns could recover their losses from future income. 
 
No action has been taken on this, but yet it appears this 
government puts grabbing more powers ahead of acting 
responsibly. The commission also wanted the government to 
clearly lay out mandates for each Crown and outline the reasons 
and the extent to which the government should have interfered 
in the Crowns. The Gass Commission also asked government to 
consider no longer having its ministers serve as Chairs or 
Vice-Chairs on the boards of the various Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of acting on these matters, the government 
decided to ignore the problems plaguing our system of 
accountability. It felt that getting Don Ching a job or giving 
Jack Messer a new car or a raise were far more pressing 
concerns facing our Crown sector. 
 
The truth is, Mr. Speaker, these things are not important. The 
most important thing in the operation of our Crown 
corporations is to ensure they serve a clearly defined purpose 
that will better the lives of the taxpayers in this province, who 
own them. 
 
Secondly, the residents of this province should be able to hold 
the government accountable for how it runs these Crowns 
through this House and its committees. The opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, should have access to the information that it needs. 
The Crowns should not be able to determine what sort of 
information they give us. More efforts should be made to 
provide pre-decision controls. Some of these improvements 
could come by implementing suggestions from the auditor and 
the Gass Commission, but should by no means stop there. 
These are common sense suggestions and solutions. 
 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

I ask the members opposite to consider the words of Ralph 
Waldo Emerson who wrote: “Common sense is genius dressed 
in its working clothes.” Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan do have a great deal of common sense and 
common genius, and they deserve better. 
 
In this Bill before the House today, this government wants to 
continue to erode the already battered system of public 
accountability for our Crown corporations. They want to give 
the Crowns more freedom, but they offer no suggestions as to 
how to improve the accountability, to ensure that the powers 
they ask for will be well used and properly monitored. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an out-dated system of accountability that 
had its flaws to begin with. Those flaws became more 
pronounced over the years as the nature of the Crown sector 
changed. This system needs to be modernized to head off 
potential abuse. The members opposite should focus their 
efforts in this direction, take action on some of the 
recommendations to improve the system that have come 
forward in various reports and commissions. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, before I give up the floor to others in 
the opposition benches, I must add that I will not be supporting 
this Bill. No additional powers like those laid out in the Bill to 
amend The Crown Corporation Act should be granted until this 
government takes action toward improving the system by which 
we, as taxpayers, can hold our Crown corporations accountable. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
learned colleague from Thunder Creek has already spoken at 
great lengths on this Bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I thank 
the members opposite for their attention, Mr. Speaker. And I 
believe he brought up some very valid points. I can only hope 
the members opposite were paying attention, and that they are 
willing to reconsider this self-serving piece of legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, although I think we have made our point of 
view clear, I think that there is even more to be said about this 
Bill. We strongly believe that any Bill that proposes giving even 
greater power to Crown corporations must be thoroughly 
explored. It is because of this that I would like to speak briefly 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fred Van Parys and Don Ching must be overcome 
with joy. You see, I have to mention both of them since both of 
them are pulling in $167,000 in salary as president of SaskTel. 
If the government pushes Bill 44 through, the Crowns will have 
seen even less accountability to the taxpayers of this province. 
Is this fair? 
 
Do the members opposite think that the public wants Crowns 
like SaskTel to invest their money at random without being 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, I 
think I can speak for the large majority of people when I say no, 
that’s not what they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before this government even considers giving 
SaskTel more power, they should look at the problems that the 
company has already had. For example, has this government  

already forgotten the re-engineering fiasco at SaskTel in 1993? 
Mr. Speaker, in this completely disastrous approach to 
restructuring, SaskTel pushed employees to the absolute limits. 
The 11 middle management participants involved in the process 
were removed from the office, daily communication, and their 
co-workers, and worked long hours in a high-pressure 
environment on tasks that served no purpose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this devastating decision by SaskTel is still 
warranting a place in the press. Just last week the Financial 
Post talked specifically about the failure of SaskTel’s 
re-engineering. The article said: 
 

In the end, miscommunication, mistrust, and mistakes 
undermined the effort, and after several years and an 
investment of several million dollars, the re-engineering 
was quietly wound down. 

 
The loss of time, money, and initiative was wasteful 
enough, but these represent only a fraction of the cost. The 
heavy-handedness, particularly of the consultants, broke 
the framework of trust between management and labour 
that is a prerequisite for the enduring change. 
 

This does not paint a pretty picture for SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
And of course we’ve heard rumours lately that there’s been a 
power struggle between Don Ching and Mark Stobbe which has 
seen Stobbe get fired. In fact in Dale Eisler’s commentary in 
yesterday’s Leader-Post, he outlines some of the power 
struggles between this government and SaskTel. He says: 
 

The word from some at SaskTel was that Stobbe’s loyalties 
rested more with the government than with SaskTel. That 
is nothing but code language for saying Stobbe was too 
closely aligned to Aldridge, which is why Ching wanted a 
change. Whatever the case, expect Stobbe to resurface at a 
senior position somewhere within government. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this sounds like a lot of poorly hidden 
political gains. It shows that there are power struggles going on 
between SaskTel and the government. So why does the 
government want to give more power to the Crown 
corporations? As the member from Thunder Creek suggested, it 
must be because they want to avoid accountability for any poor 
choices that are made. 
 
Maybe by passing Bill 44 they think they will erect a legal 
shield so they can pass responsibility off to someone else. We 
know they have done that with municipalities, school boards, 
and district health boards, so it would come as no surprise if 
this were their motive. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it would almost 
come as more of a surprise if this wasn’t their motive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want to play with the taxpayers’ money 
without telling these taxpayers what they are doing. A classic 
case in point of this is the LCL (Leicester Communications 
Limited) cable deal that this government made last year. This 
government purchased cable franchises in the United Kingdom 
without letting Saskatchewan people know. In fact most people 
had no idea that the purchase had been made until the 
government talked about selling it. 



1984  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, those franchises could have cost the people of this 
province up to $50 million. Is this what we can look forward to 
if this Bill goes through — more huge spending sprees with no 
accountability? If so, Mr. Speaker, we will protest loudly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this stage of the game there is little point on 
going on over the details of Bill 44. My colleague, the member 
from Thunder Creek, gave an excellent overview of why this 
Bill is not good for the people of Saskatchewan. And having 
heard about the disasters in a Crown corporation like SaskTel, I 
can’t see how this Bill could possibly produce anything 
positive. 
 
People want more accountability from this government, 
particularly when it comes to tax dollars. And the members 
opposite must admit this Bill has the completely opposite 
effect. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  With leave of the House, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today it’s my pleasure, on behalf of the Minister of Labour, the 
member from North Battleford, to introduce to you and through 
you a group of students, 12 grade 7 students, from St. Joseph 
School in the city of North Battleford, in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. Teachers accompanying are Denis Carignan and 
Rhonda Patterson. The Minister of Labour is out at a meeting in 
Kenosee this afternoon, so I’m pleased to introduce these folks. 
I’ll be meeting with them in a few minutes, I believe, to answer 
any questions they might have. And I would ask all members of 
this Assembly to warmly welcome them to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 88 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 88  An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I have 
already spoken about this Bill and have expressed how deeply 
disappointed we are that the government would bring forward 
such a thoughtless piece of legislation. Well my opinion is no 
different now after I’ve had time to examine it in greater detail. 
Therefore, before Bill 88 is passed to the Committee of the  

Whole, I would like to make a few additional comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has continued to disregard rural 
Saskatchewan. Time and time again we have come up with 
concrete examples to show how contemptuous this government 
is when it comes to rural communities. I’m sure the members 
opposite would like to pass it off as a political game. They 
would like to think we are saying these things simply because 
we are in opposition. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that we say these things because 
they are true. And when we say them . . . because we see 
firsthand how rural Saskatchewan is suffering because this 
government has turned its back on the unique lifestyle of rural 
residents. Every day we talk to constituents who are fed up with 
this government’s actions. Hospitals are closing. Jobs are being 
lost. Their communities are dying, and this government doesn’t 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the members opposite would like 
to think, we are not the only ones who have noticed the 
government’s vicious cuts. The Melville Advance published a 
letter that was sent to the Justice minister by the mayor of 
Melville condemning the closure of the Melville court-house. 
 
The letter says, and I quote: 
 

Dear Sir: 
 
I write this letter with regret and anger. Your cold, faxed 
letter of March 28, 1996, is indicative of your style of 
government. You wrote us March 8, 1996, saying no final 
decision has been made with respect to Melville. Clearly 
that was intentionally misleading or naïvely so. The 
statistics do not justify your government’s action. I reject 
the lack of consultation, this cold-blooded approach and 
pure disregard for our community. The community for no 
reason is being battered by your government. 
 
We have been quiet as long as we can. We respect the 
government’s right to make decisions for the good of the 
general public, but here we feel that has not occurred. Why 
would you mislead us? Why would you not have the 
courtesy to meet with us to hear our proposals? 
 
For example, why must the consolidation be to Yorkton? 
We have the facilities of equivalent nature to Yorkton. Our 
statistics justified our existence. Political expediency is not 
the same as doing the right thing. Was consideration given 
to closing Yorkton’s Court of Queen’s Bench office and 
consolidating to Melville? 
 
I have lost respect for your government. My council 
requests that a meeting be held with yourself, the Premier, 
and other government officials to discuss reversing this 
decision. As well, the future of our Crop Insurance office, 
Renewable Resources office, and the movement of other 
government services from our community to other 
communities must be discussed. 
 
We fear it is the intention of your government to seek  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

retribution from us because we do not have a government 
MLA, and we cannot stand idly by while you try to destroy 
our community. We will become the only city in this 
province to lose a Queen’s Bench office. Our statistics for 
trials show we are ahead of every community of a 
comparable size. Does closing this office make better use 
of government resources? Let people judge your actions by 
the standards you establish. Yours truly, Michael Fisher, 
mayor. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this letter is coming from the mayor, not from the 
opposition parties. So obviously the issue here is not whether 
we are playing a political game or not. The issue is that people 
are frustrated and angry with this government, and they want a 
change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that . . . The Justice minister never even replied 
to the letter. An editorial in the May 15 edition of the Melville 
Advance said, quote: 
 

We find it inexcusable and unacceptable that government 
cannot at least extend our city the courtesy of a reply to the 
letter to Justice minister John Nilson written by Mike 
Fisher, March 29. 

 
The editorial goes on to say: 
 

It’s little wonder an almost palpable cloud of pessimism 
hangs over our community. Unfortunately, Nilson isn’t the 
only one guilty of silence and ignoring the legitimate 
concerns of city officials. Premier Roy Romanow was sent 
a letter, also dated March 29, in which a meeting with him 
and the appropriate ministers to discuss Melville’s future 
has been requested. Again there’s been no response. The 
silence has been deafening. 

 
The silence has been deafening, Mr. Speaker. This is what the 
people in communities are saying about this government. They 
think the government has long since stopped listening to their 
concerns, and they are getting sick and tired of it. All they want 
is someone who will listen to them and who will look out for 
their best interests. Instead they get a Bill like No. 88, which 
essentially lets the government close down court-houses with a 
greater ease. Already Melville and Kerrobert have hit the 
chopping block, which has had a significant impact on these 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t help but wonder how many more are 
slated for closure across this province. We already know that 
the government is anything but open about their plans when it 
comes to closures, whether it is Crop Insurance offices, 
highway depots, or court-houses. They keep their plans closely 
guarded and then spring it on everyone involved. I can’t 
understand how they think this strategy fits into their promise to 
have an open and accountable government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may not realize how serious 
the loss of a court-house can be to a small town. For one thing, 
like any business, a closure means job loss, and job loss means 
that some people may be forced to leave the community. Every 
time a family leaves a community the impact has a domino  

effect. 
 
Because this government bases education funding on the 
number of students, the loss of students can mean a loss of 
programs or resources. And of course the other businesses in 
the community suffer as well. They are losing potential 
customers, and this hurts their profits. If they are forced to close 
and leave town, the cycle goes on. So before the members 
opposite defend legislation like Bill No. 88, they should take a 
good hard look at what the long-term results may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see no point in continuing to speak on this Bill. 
The people of Saskatchewan will be better served if we can 
discuss it rationally and seriously in the Committee of the 
Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
left is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Behind Bill is 
Bill Van Sickle, executive director of administration. And on 
my right is Brian Smith, the executive director of the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also I’d like 
to welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon. 
 
With respect to Bill 55, under clause 3, Madam Minister, clause 
3 proposes to replace section 6(3) of the Act with new wording. 
And as I understand it, section 6(3) of the Act deals with the 
situation of a municipal employer that decides to participate in 
the municipal employees pension commission but does not 
begin making contributions immediately. In this situation, as I 
understand it, the municipality would make a lump sum 
contribution to the commission. 
 
Now the existing section 6(3) sets out a clear formula for 
calculating that sum. Under that section, the sum was calculated 
as being the greater of either an actuarially determined amount 
or two times the amount that would have been contributed by 
the employees during the relevant period. 
 
I understand, Madam Minister, that the Bill would replace that 
method with the following formula: 
 

. . . (an) amount, determined by the commission in 
accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles, 
that the commission requires for the purpose of funding 
any allowances that have accrued to the employees of the 
employer during the period of participation . . . 



1986  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Madam Minister, the difficulty that I see with this new formula 
is it doesn’t include any fall-back element in case the actuarial 
calculations prove to be inadequate. 
 
So what are the financial consequences of having no fall-back 
formula and becoming totally dependent on actuarial 
calculations? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what happens is municipal employers have to be in 
the plan. They have no choice but to be in the plan. Often 
they’re not aware of that so they don’t contribute initially to the 
employees’ pension. Then they become aware of the fact they 
have to be in the plan and then there is this clause stipulating 
how they have to participate. 
 
Really what this is saying is that they have to contribute the 
actuarial value of participation in the plan. And that’s a fair and 
reasonable way of doing it. 
 
I should point out all of the changes. This is not a 
government-run plan. All we do is administer the plan for the 
municipal sector. They’re the ones who decide on the changes. 
They’re the ones who do that sort of analysis. So the changes in 
this Act are either of that kind or they’re changes required 
because of compliance with the Income Tax Act. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, though, in this respect, 
what convinces you though that the lack of any fall-back 
formula will not place the fund in any sort of danger of not 
having sufficient reserves. We don’t want to see anything 
happen to the municipal employees pension commission, I 
mean, if there’s no fall-back formula any more. Could you 
please comment? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I don’t see that there’s any fall back in the existing 
situation. An actuary looks at the plan and says, okay this is 
how much you owe to the plan to ensure that the plan can 
provide for the benefits. 
 
But again, what I’m saying to the member opposite is unless we 
want to say to the federal government that we don’t want to 
comply with the Income Tax Act, or we want to say to the 
municipal employees, even though this is your plan, you own it, 
it’s your money, all we’re doing is administering it for you, but 
we know better than you how you should be running this and 
therefore we’re going to use power we don’t have to block 
changes that you desire to make or that the Income Tax Act 
requires, the government is not in a position to do anything 
unless, as I say, they want to, say, forget the Income Tax Act or 
forget what the employees themselves have decided they want 
to do. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to the 
explanatory notes and what we’ve heard here. The reason for 
the change is to bring the legislation in line with the 
requirements of section 147.22 of the Income Tax Act of 
Canada. These notes explain that the Income Tax Act does not  

allow employers to match contributions based on the salaries of 
members. 
 
And that may be the case, but if the federal legislation will not 
allow a formula based strictly upon employee contributions, 
then we have to ask a question: is it adequate to simply delegate 
the entire process to the commission or its actuaries? Shouldn’t 
there be some other formula to fall back on in the event that 
they may be proved wrong? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, no I don’t believe so. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to clause 4, 
subsection 14(3), it’s a change, one that has a potentially 
dramatic financial consequence for the municipal employees’ 
pension plan. 
 
My questions would be several, but one would be, what will be 
the financial consequences upon the municipal employees’ 
pension plan of increasing the permitted length of breaks in 
service from six months up to two years? 
 
And another would be what financial guarantees are there going 
to be in the plan to make sure that it doesn’t run out of money 
as a result of such breaks in service? 
 
And another question would be would it be appropriate to 
provide for some special contributions in this regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the extending of the leave requirement costs very little 
to the plan because you’re not accruing any benefits when 
you’re on leave. It just allows you to be on leave for a longer 
period of time. So the cost would infinitesimal. 
 
The other thing is The Pension Benefits Act ensures that plans 
like this have to have certain requirements to guarantee their 
solvency. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Also with respect to clause 4, should there be 
some graduated scale for some small, reasonable contributions 
to be made by the employee who would take more than two 
years off? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, everyone pays the same contribution. The length of 
time they’re away doesn’t affect the plan or its solvency. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I realize your department’s 
provided us with explanatory notes; and my next comments and 
questions are with respect to clause 5, but your notes argue that 
the changes in clause 5 are necessary in order to fully comply 
with the, I’m told, section 8506(4)(a) of the income tax 
regulations. 
 
Now for my part, Madam Minister, I’ll accept this explanation. 
But there surely must be something that we could do with the 
interest that’s more creative than merely pretending it doesn’t 
exist with respect to this particular part of the income tax 
regulations. 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

So I have a few questions. Would it not be possible for the 
interest on contributions in excess of the limits to be credited to 
the individual employee’s own entitlement account with the 
plan? 
 
Another question would be where does the minister plan to put 
the interest on contributions in excess of the permitted limits? 
And just another question would be where is the interest going. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Because of The Income Tax Act, we 
have to correct the legislation to ensure that interest is not paid 
out. But the chances of this happening are very, very, very slim 
because the plan is never likely to be in a surplus position. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wasn’t able 
to hear the minister’s response there just now. If you wouldn’t 
mind, Madam Minister, just to repeat it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the answer is that in 
order to comply with The Income Tax Act, you have to say that 
you cannot pay any surplus that is not required for the solvency 
of the plan to the members with interest. But it’s not a 
significant change because the likelihood of that ever 
happening is very, very slim. It has never occurred and we don’t 
anticipate it ever occurring. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to clause 6 
section 17(1.1), again I realize the explanatory notes provided 
by your department tell the reader that you’ve apparently 
received a legal opinion telling you that section 147.22 of the 
Income Tax Act no longer allows employers to match 
contributions based on the salary of members, and so in this 
case, a change is necessary. 
 
Could you just respond as far as who provided that legal 
opinion? And can you elaborate on the opinion and explain why 
dollar-for-dollar contributions on the employers would actually 
run afoul of the Income Tax Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, Revenue Canada 
was the one that told us specifically that we had to make that 
change. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, if we are required by 
federal legislation to move away from old, tried and true 
dollar-for-dollar formulas, I think we’d owe it to our municipal 
employees to enact a formula that is at least sound financially as 
was the old formula. Have you considered any formulas other 
than simply delegating the entire process to actuaries? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, Revenue Canada said this has be removed from the 
legislation. They didn’t say that the commission cannot 
continue to do dollar for dollar. The commission intends to 
continue to do dollar for dollar. It just can’t be specified in the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I thought this was 
somewhere where we could combine as members on opposite 
sides of the House here and perhaps we could have established 
some made-in-Saskatchewan formula here to protect our  

municipal workers. 
 
But I’ll go on to clause 7, section 21(1), the next major change 
proposed by the Bill being found in clause 7. It changes section 
21(1) of the Act which covers payments to employees who pass 
away after their pension is vested but before becoming entitled 
to receive an allowance and who’ve not left a named 
beneficiary. 
 
Under the existing rule, as I understand it, the pension plan 
would pay to the estate an amount that would be . . . for one 
example, twice the employee’s contribution to the plan plus the 
amount in the employee additional contribution account plus 
the employee’s annuity account plus the employee’s annuity 
surplus account, and plus the employer’s additional 
contribution account, and finally, the amount in the employer 
annuity account. 
 
Under the Bill, that entitlement of the estate will be altered and 
the new entitlement, as I understand it, is to be the total of three 
things here. One is the commuted value of the employee’s 
allowance calculated as if the employee’s date of death were the 
employee’s date of termination. And plus the amount by which 
the employee’s contributions plus interest exceed 50 per cent of 
the amount mentioned in sub-clause (1), and the last five items 
in the old formula. 
 
So, Madam Minister, how is the commuted value, how is it to 
be calculated, if you could? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The commuted value is computed 
with the help of an actuary, and it’s defined in the Act, page 1 
of the interpretation part of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to clause 7 
(21)(1), the old formula was replaced by something called 
commuted value based on the assumption that the employee 
was terminated at the time of his death. And added to that is 
another value, and that other value is the amount by which the 
employees own contribution to the pension plus the interest 
earned on those contributions are greater than the commuted 
value of the pension. 
 
So in other words, if the employers contribution plus interest is 
greater than 50 per cent of the total commuted value, then that 
excess margin is added onto the entitlement. So I’d have just a 
few questions with respect to this. 
 
Madam Minister, is the family of the deceased municipal 
employee going to get more or less than before because of this; 
and does the change that you propose in your Bill promote good 
investment practices by those who are in charge of 
administering the plan? 
 
And another question is what mechanisms are going to be put 
into place in order to make sure that the commuted value is 
going to be a fair one? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, people will get less, 
probably, because again it’s Revenue Canada that has said the 
practice of the past was too rich. And again to ensure that that  



1988  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

the pension plan is solvent, the actuary will . . . an actuarial 
report will ensure that that occurs. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, also with respect to clause 
7, the new provision referring to the death benefit calls for a 
payment of a commuted value, then it goes on to add a specific 
small additional amount to that entitlement. And I’m referring 
to the portion of the employees contribution plus interest that is 
in excess of over 50 per cent of the commuted value. 
 
And it sounds great at the first glance but the worries are that 
the size of the employees contribution plus interest, especially if 
it’s a large amount, will be used by those in charge who alter 
the commuted value in such a way to keep our payment to a 
minimum. 
 
So. just a final two questions here with respect to this Bill. 
What mechanisms would be put in place to calculate the 
commuted value of the death benefit and how those rules will 
be applied? 
 
And another question: what assurances can you provide that the 
rules for determining a commuted value will not be used so as 
to minimize entitlements for the families of deceased municipal 
employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think the main guarantee of 
fairness is that the commission has employees on the 
commission. So the employees’ goal will not be to minimize the 
benefits to their members. The employees’ goal on the 
commission will be to ensure that it’s fair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, the Act will basically make a number of positive 
amendments. It straightens out the rules upon marriage 
break-up while it also ensures that those on disability benefits 
as well as their employers continue to contribute to pension 
plans while the employee receives those benefits. 
 
In addition with the other pension-related Bills that we have 
before the House, this particular Bill will separate much of the 
legislation which deals with defined contribution pensions from 
those which deal with defined benefit pensions. 
 
Now this piece of legislation primarily deals with defined 
benefit pensions, and that leads me to the following question. If 
you’re willing to commit the time and effort to refinements like 
these, why are you not willing to commit yourself to the modest  

amount of time and effort it would take to appoint a committee 
to examine the unfunded liabilities in these defined plans as 
well as some of the other pension issues? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this is a minor change to a piece of legislation. If we 
want to get into that other issue, we could get into it, and we 
could be here for a period of time. 
 
But this is something to ensure that this is a fairer piece of 
legislation when it comes to people who unfortunately have a 
marriage breakdown. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to the Bill, I 
was curious as to why the government feels the need to change 
the meaning of the term employee. Clause 3 of the Bill amends 
section 2(c). The explanatory notes that your department kindly 
provided to the Bill give one the impression that this change of 
meaning is necessary to provide some sort of tie between this 
Bill and the public employees superannuation plan which is 
being continued under Bill 64 as the public employees pension 
Act. 
 
What I’m curious about is why a tie is necessary here when 
most of the provisions dealing with that latter-defined 
contribution plan were removed and placed in their own piece 
of legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This is . . . (inaudible) . . . for the 
purposes of early retirement programs. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to clause 4 in 
the Bill, there are some new provisions with respect to disability 
benefits. Could you tell us what groups or persons in the 
province were consulted with regard to those changes? And 
secondly, could you tell us whether any of those groups 
approached you or your department to ask that these changes be 
made? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we talked to all of 
the major employers involved in the plan and also to their 
bargaining agents. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, in clause 6 of the Bill 
there’s also amendments which will impact upon children of an 
employee who dies prior to superannuating. The new provision 
states that the maximum total allowable payable to the children 
of such an employee would be one-quarter of the allowance to 
which the employee would have been entitled if the employee 
would have been superannuated on the date of his or her death. 
 
This is a change from the previous provision, which said that 
the maximum for all children was to be 250 per cent of the 
allowance to which each child is entitled, which in turn was to 
be divided equally amongst the children. The department’s 
explanation of this change is that it clarifies terminology which 
is obviously confusing. And I’d like to ask, however, if this 
change in terminology in any way will reduce amounts which 
surviving children would receive. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no, it won’t. 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, this Bill 
makes particular reference to commuted value in clause 3(a); 
it’s just one of those references, while clause 11 is another one. 
And while it uses this term, it makes no reference as to exactly 
how the benefits will be calculated beyond saying that they 
must be in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could provide an explanation of 
the method by which those benefits would be calculated. And 
secondly, I wonder if she could provide an explanation of why 
it’s not made more clear within the Bill itself. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The boards will make the criteria 
more specific. And generally accepted accounting principles 
and actuarial soundness are in fact quite specific in terms of 
what they mean as general framework, and then the boards will 
decide the specifics. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, moving along . . . With 
respect to marriage breakdown, there are provisions in the Bill 
which deal with objections. In the event that a couple settles a 
dispute between themselves of their own volition or in a court, 
there’s no problem. This Bill, however, provides an opportunity 
to object to the splitting of the pension asset at the time of the 
agreement. And that’s a positive change. 
 
There however is a problem, and I might have mentioned it 
before with respect to another Bill. But the problem is that one 
of the parties has an objection to . . . the board involved is not 
obliged to follow any court order regarding a settlement 
between a separated couple. 
 
It says in the Bill that in this situation the board may apply to 
the Court of Queen’s Bench for direction. And I’d say the board 
should be required to apply to the court for directions. In lieu of 
that, it should be at least be forced to hold back on complying 
with the court order until they’ve received a certificate signed 
by the registrar of the court noting that the time for appeal has 
passed and that no appeal has been filed. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could just offer a comment on why 
the board, in this, is placed in a situation where it isn’t required 
to apply for direction from the court or abide by a court order. 
That would just be my final question, asking for comment on 
this particular Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. We still don’t understand exactly that question that 
you’re asking. Could you explain that again or clarify that? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  I think what is happening here with respect to 
the Bill is you’re making the board have to proceed . . . placing 
them in a situation where they’re not getting any court ordered 
direction, I guess, is what I’m getting at with respect to this  
if you just could make some comment in that regard. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, if I understand his question correctly, the answer is 
the board cannot act without some direction from the court. 
That is, they cannot just decide to split assets; they have to get  

direction from the court in order to do that. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I have no other 
questions with respect to this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public 
Employees 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, in clause 3 of this Bill, you outline the mechanics of 
the plan, and at the outset we find that the existing body . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Are you able to hear? 
 
At the outset we find that the existing body, the Supervisory 
Board of the Public Employees (Government Contributory) 
Superannuation Plan will continue, but it will be referred to as 
the Public Employees Pension Board. The Bill also proposes 
leaving the board composition virtually the same, namely a 
chairman, three members representing participating employers, 
and three members representing employees  and all of which 
you appoint. 
 
So, Madam Minister, have you given any consideration to 
allowing any of the appointees to this board to be chosen by 
either the employees’ organizations or the employers? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, although we have 
the legal power to make the appointments, in fact the members 
are chosen by the employees; we just accept their choices and 
appoint them on their advice. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  With respect to clause 5, Madam Minister, 
among the powers of the board, there appears to be some 
duplication. In subclause 5(a), the Bill appears to seek the 
authority to delegate a large portion of the powers and 
responsibilities of the board under a contract or a series of 
contracts, now that being in, as I say, subclause 5(a). Yet in 
subclause 5(b), the Bill appears to authorize the board to hire its 
own staff. 
 
So, Madam Minister, is it presently the intention of the 
government to have the board contract out its work using 
subclause 5(a), or is it presently the intention of the government 
to have the board hire its own staff as defined in the latter 
clause, subclause 5(b). 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Neither one. We assume that the 
Department of Finance will continue to do the administration. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, then could you provide us 
with an explanation for that then please. 



1990  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You just have to give people 
freedom of choice. But we don’t anticipate contracting out to be 
the result. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Along with that freedom of choice then, 
Madam Minister, I assume that there is a consultation with 
others, and if there is some indication that they wish to do so, 
they could. If you would just comment. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, there’s no desire to change. It’s 
just giving them the freedom to change if they did desire to do 
so. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to clause 5(e), 
the proposed powers of the board as set out in that clause 
include the means to, and I’ll quote: 
 

enter into any agreement, engage the services of or retain 
any technical, professional or other adviser, specialist or 
consultant or do any other things that the board considers 
necessary for the purposes of managing, investing or 
disposing of all or any part of the assets of the fund; 

 
So, Madam Minister, how will this power to engage the 
services of specialists be different than the powers to either 
retain people on contract or hire people on staff? And in theory, 
could the provision put the entire pension fund into the hands 
of a single investment professional? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The board would not be wise to do 
that, and there would be no reason why they would do that. But 
there’s no change here relative to what the situation is today. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to clause 5(g), 
and this is a clause giving the board the power to establish 
policies for the investment of the assets of the fund and for the 
calculation and allocation of revenues accruing to the fund. 
 
Madam Minister, do you accept that, since it’s the minister who 
appoints all seven members of the board, and it is in fact the 
government who will have power to establish policies for the 
investment of the assets of the fund, as well as develop policies 
for the calculation and allocation of the fund, revenues accruing 
to the fund. 
 
Another question I have, what policies does the minister and the 
government intend to establish for the investment of the assets 
of this fund? And will the minister affirm that the government 
will definitely not be tying the hands of the board by insisting 
that they restrict their investments in instances, for example, 
they’re referred to as ethical investments and maybe you might 
just outline what that in particular means. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The government since 1977 has 
never tried to impose anything; there’s no interest in changing 
that from here on either, so we have no desire to interfere in the 
activities of the board. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, also in respect to clause 6, 
section 6, my next question will deal with that. 
 

And as I read the clause it appears to give the board absolute 
and final authority to determine, and again I would quote here: 
 

. . . any question as to the application, interpretation or 
intent of a provision of this Act or of the regulations, (and 
furthermore the clause states that) . . . the decision of the 
board is final. 
 

So, Madam Minister, in the old section found at section 40 of 
The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act it’s 
somewhat different. And in my view it was less restrictive. It 
read, and again I’ll quote here: 
 

If any question arises as to the application, interpretation or 
intention of a provision of the plan or of the regulation 
made under section 47, it shall be determined by the board 
and decision of the board shall be final. 
 

Madam Minister, you’re proposing to expand the area of 
jurisdiction of the board to include absolute power, with no 
right of appeal from what used to be called the plan, to the 
entire Act. 
 
And I’m sure you’ll agree it’s unusual to allow an appointed 
body to interpret its own legislative mandate. Interpretation of a 
legislation usually is performed by the courts. The courts are 
one of the important pillars of government and one of their jobs 
is to interpret legislation, making sure that the bodies which 
have been given power by the legislation would do three things. 
One would be, obey the directions in the legislation. Next 
would be, perform their functions in a fair and reasonable 
manner. And thirdly, that they don’t exceed their jurisdiction. 
 
So, Madam Minister, why do you want to deviate from those 
principles in this case by allowing the Public Employees 
Pension Board the exclusive power to interpret this legislation 
without any recourse to the courts? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We believe they already have that 
under the current legislation and this is just a continuation of 
that. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  But, Madam Minister, I believe there is a 
change here and it’s not going to allow any affected parties a 
forum for review of your chosen board’s decision. So I think 
that it’s not quite fair to be suggesting that there is no change 
with respect to this. So if you would just make some further 
comment. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think the key thing is that the 
board members are actually members chosen by the members of 
the plan themselves, so that they have the capacity to approach 
their own board member and revisit decisions. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, other pension plans though, 
they’re governed by legislation which includes recourse to 
courts. Like, for example, The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 
includes provisions for applications to the court for various 
purposes. So why should the provincial employees’ pension 
plan in this case be any different? 
 



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

I don’t want to belabour this for any longer. This will be my 
final question to you with respect to Bill 64 today. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we do not believe 
this is different and we do not believe that there is an issue here. 
There has never been an issue raised with respect to this. 
There’s never been a problem. So in a sense we don’t see 
anything broke that needs to be fixed here. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension 

Annuity Fund 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome, Madam Minister, and to your officials. And I’m 
delighted to talk about this exciting Bill. 
 
To begin with, I’d like to ask a question regarding interpretive 
aspects of this Bill. The Bill before us will involve a number of 
pension plans that’ll be designated according to the regulations. 
Can the minister explain which pension plans will be 
designated, and why those particular plans will be designated? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The only ones we’ve determined to 
date are the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 
the public employees. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Does this mean that all provincially supported, 
defined contribution plans or just some of them? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Right now, to the member opposite, 
it’s just some. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Under the list of 
powers given to the board, I see the board will be given the 
power to enter into any contractual service with respect to the 
activities of the board, and the board may delegate any of its 
powers to a contractor. I wonder if the minister could explain 
what sort of contracting services are being contemplated under 
provision clause 3(2)(a)? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, this is the same as 
the previous Bill. It’s just permissive. It allows this to occur. It 
doesn’t mean that there’s any intention for any contracting out 
to occur, and we don’t anticipate any occurring. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Could the minister explain how the provisions 
I spoke of in the previous questions differ from the provisional 
clause found in 3(2)(e)? If you read their clause, it talks about 
hiring technical professionals, advisers, consultants, or other 
specialists. I would like to know why this Bill contains these 
two different references, and why there’s not simply just one of 

them? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, one part of the Bill talks about the assets of the fund 
and what you can do with respect to the assets. The other part 
talks about the administration of the fund. So they’re quite 
separate issues. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m concerned about these references . . . is 
that there appears to be no limit on either one of them. And that 
could be a problem. What we could have is a board giving some 
of its authority to possibly just one consultant. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister why these powers are so broad and if 
she’s not concerned that this may place pensioners in a certain 
degree of risk. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This is consistent with the previous 
legislation. There’s no difference in terms of the powers. I think 
the other thing you have to have is some level of confidence 
that the board is not about to do anything foolish because its 
members will not allow it to do anything that is unwise. 
 
Ms. Draude:  With respect to the powers of the board, I see 
the board will have the power to charge a fee for any service it 
provides. I would like to know if the minister could list the sort 
of fees that the board will likely be imposing under this 
provision. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, there will not be any 
monthly fees charged to members. The only thing that this 
allows to occur is  again, it’s permissive  fees to cover any 
administrative costs that should be charged back to the fund. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, in this Bill 
there is a clause which will make the decisions of the board 
final. When I read that provision it concerns me, because the 
board has the final say to the application, interpretation, and the 
intent of this Bill and its regulations. It’s fairly sweeping. 
 
Could the minister explain why such a sweeping provision is in 
this legislation? And can she assure us that this will not usurp 
anyone’s common law rights to seek legal remedy, particularly 
for something like error of law or jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this is consistent with what is in other plans and again 
there’s no issue here. There’s never been a problem so again 
you have to rely on the good judgement of the members of the 
plan and also the good judgement of the people who sit on the 
board who represent the members. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, under clause 6 can you 
firstly confirm to me that the concept of specialty funds is a 
new concept, and that the concept was not found in the old 
legislation under any other name. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, that’s true. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can you give me a concrete example of how a 
specialty fund would be different than the regular pool of assets 



1992  Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1996 

in the fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, you may for example 
want to set up only a bond fund rather than merely a bond and 
equity fund. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I see this Bill will allow for the creation of specialty 
funds for pensioners. The board will gain the power to 
designate which categories of pensioners and whose annuities 
will be paid out of any such specialty funds. 
 
Could the minister provide an example of what sort of specialty 
funds will be set up and what classes of people she will expect 
to have interest in these monies invested in the funds. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again what it is, Mr. Chairman, is 
it’s facilitating. It’s allowing these things to occur. There’s no 
plan or design to create any particular specialty funds. It allows 
more flexibility. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, with regard to this specialty 
fund, could you provide the list of people or groups you feel 
that was consulted with and showed interest in having such a 
provision in this Bill? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  As with other legislation affecting 
pensions, we talked to all of the major players and their 
bargaining agents. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Deputy Chair, and Madam Minister, we 
have here the possibility for several funds. Can the minister tell 
us how the board or the government intends to report on the 
performance of the funds to the person whose funds are at stake 
as well as to the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, in the annual report 
back to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Will people receive orderly statements and will 
this Assembly receive financial statements that report the 
performance of each fund, or will it simply be the ineffective 
global or consolidation reports that we often see government 
give? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, these are annuities 
and the regular monthly payments are guaranteed. So what 
matters then is what is reported in the annual report back to the 
government. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, why have you decided to ask 
us to expressly declare by law that provisions of The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act will not apply to the Public 
Employees Pension Board, the funds, and the annuities 
purchased from the fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, this is absolutely 
consistent with what is happening now and what has happened 
since these funds have been created. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, in his recent 

report the Provincial Auditor suggested that there is a definite 
problem with the administrative charges and costs of various 
pension funds. 
 
One of the powers the board will acquire will include the ability 
to levy charges or fees for service. Imaginably, administration 
could or will be one of these fees. The auditor says that the cost 
of administrations vary significantly between pension plans. In 
this Bill we have specialty funds set up and kept separate from 
other funds. 
 
Could the minister explain what provisions or policies will be 
put in place to ensure administrative charges will not involve 
too great or unnecessary a variance from one fund to another? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, people will be allowed to buy 
the annuities elsewhere, so if the costs are too high they will 
obviously buy them elsewhere. 
 
Ms. Draude:  While I have no problem with what I see the 
government has added when he’s added the term “former 
spouse” essentially to categorize a certain number of people and 
their particular rights or privileges under this Bill, could the 
minister tell the committee why this term “former spouse” is not 
defined. I understand it is not defined under The Income Tax 
Act either. I think that if it’s this government’s intent to ensure 
that people’s needs are addressed in the Bill, then the term used 
to describe them should have been properly defined. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I would think the term “former 
spouse” is pretty clear. I would ask the member opposite how 
she would define a former spouse. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I think that I have no other 
questions at this time and we’ll proceed to the conclusion of 
this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its  



May 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

title. 
 

Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public 
Employees 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension 

Annuity Fund 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to make a 
motion which I shall read for the benefit of the House. If given 
leave, I will move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, the Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Assembly, notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, do observe an evening sitting time on 
Wednesday, May 29, 1996, from 7 p.m. until 10:30 p.m. 

 
The Speaker:  That motion is not in order. It has to be 
seconded by a member who is seated in his assigned seat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I would ask for leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Elphinstone: 

 
That this Assembly, notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, do observe an evening sitting time on 
Wednesday, May 29, 1996, from 7 p.m. until 10:30 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  It now being 5 o’clock, this House will stand 
recessed, unless . . . Okay. This House stands recessed until 7 
o’clock p.m. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just before you make that comment, 
perhaps it might be of convenience to yourself  and I think 
some of the staff to the Assembly  if we actually went to 
Committee of the Whole. Why don’t we invite the Clerk to call 
out the next order of business, and then it’ll be some 
convenience to yourself and the staff. 

The Speaker:  The House will require leave to revert to the 
. . . prior to this Chair’s ruling. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1963 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1963 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES  
Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills.......................................................................................................................1964 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................1966 
Langford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................1984 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
British Columbia Election  

Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1966 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1966 

Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities  
Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................1966 

Stony Rapids Small-school Games  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1967 

Mosaic  Regina’s Festival of Cultures  
Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1967 

Building Moving Industry  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1967 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Recovery of Government Funds  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1968 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1968 

Restitution for Victims of Youth Crime  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1968 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1968 

Swift Current Care Centre Closure  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1968 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1968 

Proposed Four-day School Week  
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1969 
Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1969 

The Service Districts Act  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1970 
Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................1970, 1972 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1972 

Increased Welfare Rolls  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1970 
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1971 

Northern Highways  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1971 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1971 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS  
Provincial Training Strategy  

Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1973 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1973 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1973 

 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 117  An Act to Enable the Recovery of Funds Stolen by Members of the Legislative Assembly (The House 
Internal Economy Fraud/“THIEF”)  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1974 
TABLING OF REPORTS  

Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1974 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1974 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1974 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 94  An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act  
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1974 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1975 

Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act  
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1976 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1976 

Bill No. 96  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act  
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1977 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1977 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 44  An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1978 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1983 

Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1984 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1985 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1985 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1988 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1988 

Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public Employees  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1989 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1989 

Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund  
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1991 
MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1991 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1992 
Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1992 
Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public Employees  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1993 
Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1993 
MOTIONS  

Hours of Sitting  
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1993 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1993 

 


