
























































May 23, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1763 
 May 23, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from Regina, 
from throughout the city of Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The communities that the people have signed from are mostly 
Esterhazy and Moosomin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise too 
today to present petitions of names of persons from throughout 
the province regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Watrous, Regina and throughout the province. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Canora, Melville, Watrous, and the majority are from Regina. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Signatures on this petition are all from the city of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 
Moose Jaw, Punnichy, Avonlea, Estevan, Weyburn, Balcarres 
— all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise again 
today to present a petition of names from people throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Stoughton, Redvers, Estevan, Weyburn, 
Midale, Arcola, Griffin, Lampman, Benson, just to mention a 
few. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 
to this Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, a lump of petitions that 
have come from the south-west area of the province. The 
petitioners pray, and the prayer of the petition is: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to close 
the Swift Current Care Centre and instead keep this 
important facility open and viable and provide for the 
needs of Swift Current and area residents and seniors. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s also signed with a note: “Thank you from the bottom 
of my heart. I have one, unlike Mr. Cline.” 
 



1764  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

And it’s signed by petitioners all across . . . from Swift Current 
and around the area, Mr. Speaker. And I present it to the 
Assembly. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 62 ask the government the following questions: 

 
To the minister responsible for SPMC, with regards to 
property leased by the provincial government: (1) what are 
the lease arrangements for the Saskatchewan Health and 
the Environment and Resource Management offices 
located on 5th Avenue in Humboldt; (2) how much is paid 
monthly to lease the aforementioned properties; (3) how 
much is the Government of Saskatchewan paying to lease 
the buildings that houses the rural farm service centre in 
Humboldt; (4) how much is the government paying to 
lease property in the town of Wakaw; (5) what are the 
addresses of the properties in Wakaw that are currently 
being leased by the government; (6) how much is paid 
monthly to lease the aforementioned properties; (7) what 
properties are being leased by the Government of 
Saskatchewan in the town of Cudworth; (8) how much is 
paid monthly to lease these properties in Cudworth; and 
(9) from whom are these properties in Humboldt, Wakaw, 
and Cudworth leased? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’m delighted to introduce a group of students from 
Wadena Elementary School. There’s 37 students here from 
grade 4. Their teacher is Denise Nelson, Tracy Walleen; 
chaperons Millie Enge, Cathy Gradin, Kathy Daviduk, and 
Keith LePouder; and the bus driver is Marcel Pelletier. 
 
I’ll be delighted to meet with them afterwards in room 255 for 
drinks and I hope you enjoy this afternoon here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to introduce 
two groups to you and through you to the Assembly today. I’ve 
already had the opportunity to meet with the group from the 
Kyle School, the grade 7 and 8’s there. Ms. Loftsgard, the 
teacher, is with them, and two parents, Susan Allport and Jay 
Sorensen. Had a wonderful discussion about how members in 
the Assembly behave. I warned them in advance that they 
should pay attention to our behaviour in question period, and I  

know they will. 
 
The other group that’s with us today is another group from the 
Rosetown School — we were joined by one yesterday — 
another grade 8 class from Rosetown, joined by teachers, Mr. 
Wiebe, Mr. DeBoice, Mr. Cline, and parent, Judy Anderson. 
We are delighted to have them with us as well and hope they 
have a good day here and a safe trip home, and ask members 
here to join me in welcoming these young people to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Shelly Wagner Elected President of Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association 

 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
recognize Shelly Wagner of Kelvington who was recently 
elected as president of the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association. 
 
Ms. Wagner is a practising pharmacist at Davidson Drugs in 
Kelvington. She was first elected to council in 1992. Ms. 
Wagner has served on the education, investigation, and 
pharmaceutical care steering committees. She also represented 
the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association as an observer 
during meetings at the national association regulatory 
authorities. 
 
During her one-year term as president, she confirms that 
pharmaceutical care and alternative reimbursement will remain 
a priority of the association for the benefit of patient care in 
Saskatchewan. She also believes that the association’s survival 
is dependent on change, with education as a priority. She feels 
it is imperative that programs are provided to help change the 
association’s mind-set from technical service, such as 
dispensing, to cognitive services such as consultation. 
 
I would ask members of this Assembly to join me in 
commending Ms. Wagner’s commitment to her profession and 
to the health of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Regina Transition House Spring Fund-raiser and National 

Council of Women Meeting 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
a moment to acknowledge two important events taking place in 
our province today. 
 
This afternoon and evening there’s an important fund-raising 
event for the Regina Transition House. Once again, the friends 
of Transition House are hosting their annual Spring Soiree 
fund-raising event. 
 
It isn’t only an important source of financial support for this 
group, but it also supports Transition House to meet and 
network with like-minded people. Transition House is 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

dedicated to the elimination of violence against women and 
children by providing a safe and supportive environment for 
victims of domestic violence. 
 
You can support this worthwhile project by purchasing a $25 
ticket and attending the Spring Soiree this evening. This year’s 
event is being held at the home of Rhonda Hill and Lowell 
Monkhouse at 3248 Albert Street between 4:30 and 7:30. 
 
I am also pleased to announce that the National Council of 
Women of Canada is holding its annual general meeting in 
Saskatchewan for the first time since 1987. The meeting is 
being held from today through Sunday at the Delta 
Bessborough Hotel in Saskatoon. 
 
The NCWC (National Council of Women of Canada) is a 
federation of 26 national organizations, provincial and local 
councils. Here in Saskatchewan there is a provincial council, as 
well as local councils in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 
 
This non-partisan, grass roots organization coordinates groups 
that work on issues of common concern. These two events are 
important examples . . . 
 
The Speaker:  I’m sorry, the member’s time has expired. 
 

National Women’s March Against Poverty 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to welcome 
a caravan of committed women arriving in Saskatchewan 
tomorrow as part of the National Women’s March Against 
Poverty. 
 
These women hope this march will highlight some of the issues 
they feel are contributing to poverty across Canada. Some of the 
issues these women would like to call attention to include job 
creation and preservation of social safety net programs. 
 
I think that it’s important that all governments take time to 
listen to the concerns and issues that these women are bringing 
forward. I would also like to commend the Saskatchewan 
women who are participating in the fight against poverty. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contributions of Kelran Microbiologicals 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s always a pleasure to stand in the House and acknowledge 
individuals and businesses that are making a difference in the 
lives of people in my community and in our province. Today I 
have one such example of a business that’s creating jobs locally 
and contributing to the economy of Prince Albert. 
 
But those aren’t all of the reasons why Kelran Microbiologicals 
is a community leader, Mr. Speaker. This new company, which 
has done business in Saskatchewan for the past year, has chosen 
our province as its head office and has announced that it will be 
donating equipment valued at $13,000 to Camp Easter  

Seal. These items will be used in the implementation of 
programs undertaken by Camp Easter Seal for the physically 
and mentally challenged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Randell Toporowski 
and Kelran Microbiologicals for demonstrating their confidence 
in Saskatchewan and for being good corporate citizens in 
helping a worthwhile cause. Mr. Speaker, we’re all well aware 
of Camp Easter Seal and the good work that it does in this 
province, and Mr. Toporowski should be congratulated for his 
assistance in this regard. 

 
Future of Geriatric Unit in Moose Jaw 

 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in this 
House I delivered a number of letters from people in my 
constituency concerned about the fate of the geriatric unit at 
Providence Place in Moose Jaw. Those letters represented only 
a fraction of the people who wrote expressing their concerns to 
the Minister of Health. 
 
To date, the minister received over 1,800 letters from Moose 
Jaw and area and another 600 letters from the Assiniboia area. 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure the minister that I will deliver 
hundreds more such letters to him. These 2,400 or more people 
still await the minister’s response. This waiting has led 
concerned people to believe that the minister intends to cut the 
geriatric centre by allowing continued uncertainty to force 
members of the geriatric team to leave in search of a more 
certain future. This tactic is an evasion of responsibility, and 
will not be tolerated by concerned residents. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Minister of Health to quickly 
respond to this outpouring of support for the geriatric unit and 
make it clear to everyone now whether he intends to provide 
this valuable service with the funding his government promised. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian AIDS Memorial Quilt 
 
Ms. Lorje:  The Saskatchewan AIDS Network, as this 
legislature knows, has launched an AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome) awareness campaign. One very tangible 
and emotional recognition event took place in Saskatoon over 
the past four days. AIDS Saskatoon and the Persons Living with 
AIDS Network of Saskatchewan hosted a Saskatoon display of 
the Canadian AIDS Memorial Quilt. 
 
The display began on Friday evening with a touching ceremony 
during which the names of AIDS victims were read publicly. 
The panels of the national quilt were on display until last 
evening, at which time, during the closing ceremonies, eight 
new Saskatchewan panels were added. 
 
The purpose of this display was twofold: first, to increase 
public awareness of AIDS in Saskatchewan; and more 
significantly, the Canadian AIDS Memorial Quilt is a visible 
means to provide a safe environment to individuals to 
acknowledge their personal loss and grief. 



1766  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

Each panel is made by friends and family of an individual lost 
to AIDS. The panels measure 6 feet by 4 feet, the size of a 
cemetery plot. Eight panels are combined to make a section, 
combining panels from different parts of Canada and the United 
States. Sadly, there are currently enough panels to cover several 
football fields. 
 
During the four days, over 2,000 people visited the quilt in 
Saskatoon, bearing witness to the presence of the absence of the 
AIDS victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as moving as this quilt is, there are far too many 
Saskatchewan panels, too many national sections, too much 
suffering, far too much loss. We all need a greater awareness of 
AIDS to prevent needless early deaths. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Job Training Programs 
 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, JobStart is a program that 
matches those seeking a job to employers seeking workers. I 
want to report on two successful projects in my part of the 
province. The member from Cumberland may want to sing 
along with me. 
 
In La Ronge this is a bridging program that is providing 
upgrading and work skills to women previously on social 
assistance. The trainees are now working at the La Ronge 
family service centre and the La Ronge Band home care. The 
first program worked so well that 15 new trainees are halfway 
through a similar program. 
 
In Prince Albert four trainees are receiving work-based garden 
training from the University of Saskatchewan. They will be 
employed at a new retail outlet in Prince Albert. This project is 
unique because it involves credit training provided by the 
university. Both of these projects are good examples of how 
JobStart and Future Skills help train unemployed people. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Makwa Sahgaiehcan’s Community Justice Committee 
 

Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, the Makwa Sahgaiehcan First 
Nation has taken an important step in solving some of their 
problems through a creative and alternative solution. In doing 
so, they’ve also set a role model for others to learn from and 
follow. In conjunction with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), this band has established a community justice 
committee that will deal with first and second offenders of 
minor crimes. 
 
I wish to commend the six volunteers who are on the 
committee. They are, elders, Rita Mitsuing and Harry 
Blackbird; band counsellor, William Ratfoot; young offender 
coordinator, Vincent Kytwayhat; youth worker, Marion 
Mitsuing; and student, Lorinda Alexander. 
 
The community justice committee has five functions: to manage  

a diversion project in cooperation with the RCMP; to facilitate 
sentencing circles; to develop programing for young offenders 
and youth at risk; to take a proactive role in crime prevention; 
and to develop a Cree justice plan for Makwa Sahgaiehcan First 
Nation. 
 
The diversion project takes minor crime out of the court system 
and puts it into the hands of the community. The offender is 
accountable to the community and must come up with a way to 
make restitution and restore harmony. It is not easy to have to 
answer to one’s own community, but in the process of 
committing minor offences, many young people are calling for 
help. Having to face the victim and the community gives kids a 
chance to get leadership and direction. 
 
I congratulate the Makwa Sahgaiehcan First Nation for 
establishing their community justice committee. They are 
showing wisdom and courage in trying new and hopefully 
better methods of handling young people at odds with the law. 
I’m sure we will hear many positive stories from them as they 
fulfil this exciting and challenging task. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Funding 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s another day in 
this House and once again we can report on another public 
meeting involving people who are concerned about health care. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, about 600 people attended a meeting 
in Central Butte last night to discuss the government’s lack of 
commitment to health care. They called on the district board 
and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), the provincial association, to begin standing up 
to the government. They also discussed the issue of health 
premiums as possibly the only way to ensure that they have a 
system they can rely on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before this meeting ended, a plan was presented on behalf of 
more than a dozen communities and municipalities in the health 
district establishing what services they need and the fact that 
they will not settle for less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister examine this document and, for 
once, make the right decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out 
something the member didn’t point out, which is that this was a 
public meeting called by the district health board. And one of 
the things this government has done is to create district health 
boards which have at least two public meetings per year, which 
allows the public to be consulted by the district health board 
and allows the kind of sharing of information the member is 
talking about. We encourage that kind of meeting, Mr. Speaker, 
and the boards are holding them. 
 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

But when the member was talking about the meeting  and 
perhaps the member and his party was represented at the 
meeting  I wonder if they got up at the meeting and advised 
the people at the meeting that one of the problems we have in 
the health care system is that the Liberals have cut funding to 
our health care system in Saskatchewan by $50 million this 
year, and including hundreds of thousands of dollars which 
equates to a cut in the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek district, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I wonder if the member got up and said that. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, I bet he didn’t. I bet he didn’t say that the 
Liberals are the cause of the health care funding crisis that he 
wants to fix with premiums and two-tiered medicine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, what the people did say there 
was that it’s a provincial duty to fund health care in this 
province. No matter who’s cutting where, it’s up to the 
provincial government to fund the provincial health system 
adequately for the people; otherwise they’re going to go to 
extreme measures and do what they need to do and ensure that 
they’ve got some services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister does not appear to realize that his 
government’s under-funding of health care is creating a 
tremendous amount of anxiety. The Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek 
Health District is using $150,000 of their surplus each month to 
make ends meet. They will begin running a deficit by the end of 
August. 
 
The health district CEO (chief executive officer), John Borody, 
says that this government, and I quote: “has tight control on us 
because they’re the ones that pay the bills.” 
 
Mr. Minister, quit passing the buck. It is the role of you and 
your government to adequately fund health care in this 
province. Mr. Minister, when will you begin to take 
responsibility for your actions and provide appropriate health 
care funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’ll take responsibility for our actions, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s clear that that member will not take 
responsibility for the actions of the Liberal Party. Because what 
that member just said was that the Liberal Party and the federal 
government in Ottawa has no role to play in health care. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that is not the way that Canada has been run for 
the last 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We have in this country a medicare system 
that was started in this province and was continued across the 
country in the ‘70s by the Liberal Party when it was more 
enlightened. And what that member is saying, Mr. Speaker, is 
that national medicare should not be something that the federal 
government should support. And we reject that notion, Mr. 
Speaker, just as we reject what the member said a few weeks  

ago, which was that people should have to pay for their health 
care. 
 
What people have to understand, Mr. Speaker, is the true 
agenda of the Liberal parties. They are not supporters of the 
public medicare system  they never have been  and they’d 
dismantle it if they had the chance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Joseph’s Hospital Funding 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, sooner or later this government’s 
going to have to take some responsibility for what is happening 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it looks like Estevan is the next victim on the 
government’s health care chopping block. Staff at St. Joseph’s 
Hospital, which was opened in 1990, were told yesterday they 
are facing another $1 million cut. This means that half the beds 
will be closed. They are losing their paediatric unit. Supervisory 
and support positions are being axed. The operating room will 
be closed 26 days more than its present 10-week closure. 
Patients will be forced to eat meals that are frozen and reheated 
on the weekends. And the list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the Southeast 
District Health Board has been forced to make these cuts 
because the government stubbornly refuses to reinstate funding 
to our health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that today 
the Leader of the Opposition gets up and says that we’re 
under-funding rural districts, because yesterday the Liberals 
were up in this House saying that we were under-funding 
Regina, which got an increase. You can’t have it both ways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But when the member talks about cut-backs and less funding 
for the health districts, I say to the member that the member and 
his party should accept some responsibility for the fact that the 
Liberals have cut health care spending in Saskatchewan by $50 
million, which translates into a cut to Estevan, which we have 
mainly back-filled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the member wanted to be completely straightforward about 
this matter, Mr. Speaker, the member would say that the St. 
Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan has lost hundreds of thousands of 
dollars  I believe over $700,000  in Alberta financing 
because they were providing services to Alberta people, which 
has been discontinued. That’s the source of the problem down 
there. And the other source is the Liberals in Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, traditionally in the province of 
Saskatchewan, when our citizens have been in trouble, the 
government has come through to see them through some crisis  



1768  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

situations. We are getting to that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, front-line workers are struggling to cope with this 
government’s cuts, but they seem to be fighting a losing battle. 
The government stands back and refuses to listen to the people 
who are most affected by these cuts  that’s the patients and 
the staff. Instead the government quietly meets with health 
boards and gives them ultimatums to make these cuts. 
 
Several sources have told us that they have a meeting in 
Estevan this evening with the Southeast District Health Board. 
If the minister is planning on attending, I would expect him to 
be prepared for less than a pleasant reception. The front-line 
workers feel very strongly about the cuts, and they plan to talk 
to the minister directly about that. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, will he please listen to those 
front-line workers today, and give them some hope that he will 
step in and stop this trend in destroying our entire health care 
system in this province, which they pride themselves in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, we pride ourselves in the 
health care system as well; and our solution to any problems in 
the health care system are not to privatize health care and go to 
a two-tiered system as those members advocate, and not to say 
that the national government should play no role in health care. 
 
And I want to remind the Leader of the Opposition that the 
largest expenditure of our provincial government is on health 
care. We are spending the same amount on health care, Mr. 
Speaker  it’s about 35 per cent of our budget  as we have 
in previous years. That’s not the problem. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, has been a lack of commitment from 
the federal government, which has traditionally supported 
health care. The member will not acknowledge that. The 
member wants to say that somehow what is going on in Ottawa 
is the fault of this government. And I say to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, that he should accept some responsibility for what the 
Liberals are doing to health care instead of taking what I think 
is a somewhat less than straightforward position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health is 
indeed correct. You’re not only hurting rural health care, you’re 
hurting urban health care as well. The Regina District Health 
Board is struggling with a $13 million funding shortfall because 
of this NDP (New Democratic Party) government. A number of 
measures have been announced to make up for this shortfall, 
including the closure of the Martin Luther Nursing Home. In 
this case, 22 frail and elderly people have been told they will 
have to move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have demonstrated how this government could 
save at least $9 million by scrapping the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. This saving could keep almost 300  

long-term care beds open in the province. Will the minister 
make a commitment on behalf of his government to quit 
wasting money on union friends and direct it to the proper care 
of seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I’ve informed the hon. member 
opposite this government is not in the position of wasting 
money. This government utilizes the funds that we have at our 
disposal to carry out the programs that the people of 
Saskatchewan expect of us. 
 
It’s not our fault that the federal cousins of the official 
opposition cut back millions and millions of dollars from 
education, health care, social services, within the province, 
within all the provinces, without any consideration for their 
national responsibility. We have been a government who has 
corrected the situation that was left by the Tory administration, 
a legacy of debt and mismanagement. 
 
The public policy and management of this government is 
second to none. We’re preparing for the future. We want 
systems in Saskatchewan that our children and our 
grandchildren can enjoy; they’ve been accustomed to enjoying 
in the past. We will keep on the track of good public policy. 
And we’d ask the members opposite to quit their doom and 
gloom, to tell the true story of Saskatchewan’s future, and not 
spread the negative stories out there that they want to create for 
their own political gain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association met with cabinet members this 
morning to discuss concerns regarding the CCTA (Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement). They also provided 
government with a number of alternatives to this policy, which 
has clearly created a playing field on behalf of union 
contractors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government promised a review of this 
agreement would be completed in time for the ’96 construction 
season. The season is under way and the review is not complete. 
Will the Minister of Labour tell this House when the current 
review of the CCTA will be completed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
continues to try to misunderstand or is incapable of 
understanding that there is a necessity to work cooperatively in 
this economy in order for things to function well in 
Saskatchewan. And as the Minister of Labour has said, it’s our 
objective to work to keep industry and the workers that support 
industry in a cooperative working relationship. 
 
And I want to say, unlike the members opposite, the members 
of the construction association this morning expressed a very 
strong interest in sitting down at a table to discuss the issues of 
mutual concern between working people in Saskatchewan and 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

the construction industry. And I wish the members opposite 
would join in that same positive spirit to find ways of building 
this economy, instead of attacking every positive venture that 
happens. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  The question was, when will the review be 
completed, not a lecture on something we and everyone in this 
province already knows. In fact your own department knew it; 
they said that you were going to spend an extra 30 per cent 
because of your unthoughtful policy on CCTA. And at the same 
time this is happening, there’s a lack of funding for long-term 
and acute care beds in hospitals. 
 
Will you take responsibility for your actions and apologize to 
the people of Saskatchewan and scrap this policy while there’s 
still time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the members of this side of 
the House, I think are quite proud to take responsibility for 
actions, and the members opposite ought to take some lessons 
in good governance and consistent position-taking. 
 
You had asked the question earlier about when the review was 
complete. I think I gave you this answer two weeks ago. But in 
case you’ve forgotten, let me remind you that we had begun the 
review, and we have shared the information from the review in 
discussions with the parties to the agreement. As the member 
opposite knows, there’s a five-year agreement between the 
unionized contractors and the building trades unions and the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we’re going to maintain that 
agreement until it’s renegotiated. 
 
In the meantime, the construction association — positively, and 
to their credit — said we would like to discuss the issues that 
arise in this agreement with you as well. And they’ve met this 
morning, as I indicated we would. And their response to the 
circumstance was that they understand the need for us to have a 
positive, working relationship in this province. 
 
And may I say yet one more time, if the members opposite 
would only come to that view, Saskatchewan would be unified 
in a positive direction and there would not be a small group of 
10 who insist on doing everything negative, from dumping their 
leader to criticizing every positive . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-term Care 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Health as well. Mr. Minister, 
something isn’t quite adding up here. Every health district in 
the province is cutting back. Budgets are being slashed. 
Hospitals and nursing homes are closing. Beds are being cut. 
Jobs are being lost. Yesterday we learned of a $4.8 million cut  

here in Regina which will mean further bed closures and job 
losses, and another 8 million coming in the near future. 
 
Mr. Minister, one would think with all the cuts we have seen to 
date that we would have an actual saving on the bottom line of 
health care spending in this province. But it hasn’t. Your 
department continues to spend as much today as it did in the 
past. Mr. Minister, where are the savings? Where is all the 
health fund going since it obviously isn’t going into patient 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the fact that the 
member and the other members of the Conservative Party have 
problems with numbers. That’s well-known to most people in 
the province. 
 
But I want to say to the member that one of the things we’ve 
done in this province, which I think is the right thing to do, is to 
redirect some of the spending. The member is correct that 
spending has been taken out of some sectors of our health care 
system, but it’s been redirected, Mr. Speaker, into other areas 
like home care, for example. 
 
And the point I tried to make to the House yesterday was an 
example from Prince Albert, where they have fewer long-term 
beds than they had before, so they’re spending less on 
long-term care. But they have no waiting-lists for long-term 
care, and they have, I understand, seven empty long-term care 
beds. 
 
The reason is that they’ve redirected some spending to 
community care and home care, and that allows their seniors to 
remain independent in their own homes for longer periods of 
time. And that kind of redirection, I think, Mr. Speaker, is a 
very positive development in our health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, I’m 
not sure the public across this province will buy that kind of a 
statement. The fact that they have seen legitimate and realistic 
cuts and yet they are wondering where the money is all going 
. . . 
 
My question, further question, to the premier. Mr. Premier, the 
great myth of the NDP is being dispelled. Every election your 
party sends all of its candidates into every seniors’ home in this 
province and you tell the seniors, vote for the NDP because the 
Conservatives are going to come in and shut down your nursing 
home and throw you out on the streets. 
 
Mr. Premier, what’s happening today? That’s what’s 
happening. However in this case, it’s the NDP shutting down 
the nursing homes, not the opposition. Just this week nearly 100 
elderly people lost their homes  70 in Swift Current, 22 at 
Martin Luther Nursing Home in Regina. 
 
Mr. Premier, the NDP myth of protecting health care and 
protecting seniors is dead. Will you finally be honest with 
Saskatchewan seniors? How many more nursing homes are you 
going to close? How many more elderly people is the NDP 



1770  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

going to kick out of their homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the policy of health 
renewal, as has been described by the Minister of Health, is a 
policy which we believe is on the cutting and forward edge of 
what is required in Canada and it is approved by the people of 
Canada who are knowledgeable in the health care area. They 
know this is the wave of the future. They know this is what is 
required to preserve and to protect it. Notwithstanding the noisy 
interruption from the member from Arm River, he knows this to 
be the case as well. 
 
But the member opposite asks, where in the world has all the 
money gone, and how come it doesn’t add up? Why doesn’t he 
get up and tell this House that $860 million a year, each and 
every year, of the taxes collected in the province of 
Saskatchewan go to pay the interest on the public debt racked 
up by you and your administration instead of to the home care 
and to the health care system of the province of Saskatchewan? 
Why don’t you tell them that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve just 
seen again this tactic that the NDP continue to use of promoting 
fear in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier didn’t even acknowledge that they are spending as 
much today as they did yesterday, and yet look at the reduction 
in services. 
 
Time and time again this NDP Party has gone throughout this 
province at election time and told people, do not vote anything 
but NDP because we’re the protectors of health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well do the people at Central Butte or the people at Swift 
Current or the people at Estevan or the people at Canora believe 
that, Mr. Speaker? I doubt not. Mr. Premier, why will you not 
now stand and take responsibility for your actions? And don’t 
blame the federal government. 
 
Your minister for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) just 
gave you a $50 million surplus yesterday to pick up that $50 
million you lost. Mr. Premier, take responsibility. Don’t blame 
somebody else. It’s your problem, your decisions, your choices. 
You answer the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how the 
official opposition  the Liberal Party  says don’t blame the 
Liberals in Ottawa for cutting back $50 million. It’s interesting 
how the Conservatives say, don’t blame the Conservatives for 
having $860 for every man, woman, and child leave this 
province every year to pay off the bankers of New York and 
Hong Kong and Paris and London instead of being used to 
finance the health care and education system. Don’t blame us. 
 
He says, don’t deal with the facts; somehow ignore those facts. 
He acknowledges himself that the amount of money that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is spending on health care is  

roughly the same amount  in fact I think it’s gone up  than 
we’ve been spending over the past two years. 
 
What are we doing? The Minister of Health has indicated we 
are saving medicare by redirecting its thrust; making sure that 
people are staying at home; that they practise the wellness 
model; and that the development of health care is the direction 
of the future. 
 
Now this is the opposite of the Tories and the Liberals, who 
believe in two-tier health care, who believe in deterrent fees, 
who believe in premiums  as the member from Arm River 
just talked about today  who believe in a system-for-the-rich 
health care. That’s their approach; it’s not our approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following on that I 
don’t know what I can say hardly. 
 
My questions this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are directed towards 
the minister responsible for the union-preference tendering 
policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, you met with the Saskatchewan Construction . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. I will ask the Leader of 
the Third Party to direct the question to a minister in the context 
of the portfolio that he holds. I’ll ask the Leader of the Third 
Party to direct in the context of the minister’s portfolio. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Direct my questions, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 
responsible for CIC. 
 
Mr. Minister, you met with the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association this morning and you finally came to the 
conclusion that the construction association should have been 
included in the original agreement cooked up between the NDP 
and the union leaders of this province just before the last 
election. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are now saying that the meetings between you 
and the construction association, the building trades, are going 
to work out a new policy. Obviously this will delay the 
announcement of your new policy which you had originally 
scheduled for the end of this month. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the existing union preference policy remain 
in place until a new agreement is reached? And why did you 
wait until now to include the construction association in these 
discussions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I believe I gave the answer 
to the official opposition a few minutes ago, but I guess the 
third party wasn’t bothering to listen at the time, so may I repeat 
the answer. We announced the review of the Crown Tendering 
Agreement a long time ago and have spoken with 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

everybody, received input from all the parties to the agreement. 
 
As I’ve said before, it’s a five-year agreement signed between 
the unionized contractors, the building trades, and the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Issues were raised and before I 
brought forward a report, I had a brief meeting at another 
meeting with Manley McLauchlan, the CEO of the construction 
association, who indicated they would be interested in joining 
this discussion. To me that’s a very, very positive indication by 
the construction association that we all have a common interest 
here in Saskatchewan. And I think the members opposite should 
stop criticizing people who want to engage in a positive 
discussion and encourage it. 
 
What we’re going to work towards, and I cannot commit this 
result now, but what we’re going to work towards is a process 
by which those who have an interest in the construction 
association . . . in the construction in Saskatchewan, i.e., the 
construction associations and the workers, sit down together 
with a facilitator . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, there’s 
one very obvious problem with your plan — that the 
construction association and the building trades are not on an 
even footing here. The unions already have their agreement, so 
they’re under no real obligation to give anything up. They’re 
bargaining from a position of strength while the construction 
association is coming to the table at a distinct disadvantage. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you are serious about working out a legitimate 
compromise between the two sides, will you tear up the existing 
union-preference tendering policy and start from scratch so that 
both sides  both sides — are on equal footing at the 
negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, at risk of getting involved in 
describing what scratch is, as designed by the members 
opposite in 1982, the member opposite ought to know why 
starting from scratch is a very difficult thing to do, because the 
members opposite created a divisive situation in Saskatchewan 
between business and labour that will take years to heal. 
 
And I want to say that in the process of healing, the discussion 
today was a strong indication by the construction association 
that they would like to move towards a healing. I think the 
member opposite ought to be ashamed, first for creating the 
division originally, and for now disputing the nature of the 
resolution of the rift that was created. 
 
I can say that I’m very encouraged by the fact the construction 
association does want to sit down at the table. Our officials will 
be meeting with the building trades to see if they will all sit 
down together and examine the issues that divide them. In the 
meantime, as the member opposite knows, there is an 
agreement and that agreement will stand until renegotiated. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to 
make a statement of interest, I hope, to all members. 
 
The Speaker:  The Premier has requested leave to make a 
statement. Perhaps if the Premier would advise the Assembly 
very briefly of the content of his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I intend, if I 
get leave, to make a very brief statement respecting the 100th 
birthday of Mr. Leslie W. Lee, a former member of this 
Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Leslie W. Lee Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks 
to all my colleagues in the legislature. At first, Mr. Speaker, 
members on this side of the House had intended to make a 
private member’s statement. But I think, and this is 
acknowledged by the members’ agreement to give me leave, 
that a 100th birthday deserves more than just 90 seconds which 
is accorded by a member’s statement. 
 
This afternoon in Saskatoon, Mr. Leslie W. Lee is celebrating 
his 100th birthday with family and friends. 
 
Mr. Lee was elected to this legislature on June 15, 1944, as the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) member from 
the constituency of Cumberland. Current members may be 
interested to know that he was elected with 58 per cent of the 
vote, and he received a total 357 votes. 
 
He was of course, Mr. Speaker, the first member from that area 
of the first government of the then premier, Tommy Douglas, 
which as history records, was the first social democratic 
government in Canada, indeed in North America; and a member 
who in his single term saw the beginning of a society of which 
it is ours now as heirs. 
 
To our knowledge, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lee is the sole surviving 
member of that historic government. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lee 
is still quite justifiably proud of some of his individual 
accomplishments. 
 
In his day in the North, most of the school buildings, for 
example, were built of logs, and not in very good shape. These 
were replaced. And then the Douglas government provided one 
meal a day for every student. Each school was provided with a 
range, and it was the teacher’s duty to prepare the noon meal 
for the students. For many, that was the main meal of the day. 
 
And Les Lee was instrumental in bringing peace to the northern 
trap lines. Les has said that under the old system, trappers used 
to  how shall I describe it somewhat delicately, Mr. Speaker 
 be somewhat unpleasant to each other on occasion in order 
to settle disputes along trap lines. So he helped bring in  



1772  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

regulations which protected the lines and which allowed them 
to be an asset that could be sold and of course restored harmony 
to the area. 
 
Like a lot of the people of that period, Mr. Lee has an 
interesting background. He was born in Fergus Falls, Minnesota 
in the United States and came to Saskatchewan in 1921, and he 
took up his occupation as a trapper and as a prospector. 
 
Like some of us in this Assembly, Mr. Lee did not want to be a 
politician. He was forced to take the nomination in 1944. And I 
think that’s the correct word to use in this case because he so 
strongly believed in his party at that time, the CCF, but there 
was no one who was prepared to take the nomination for 
Cumberland. So he felt that he was forced to do so. And we see 
this in all political parties from time to time, and these are the 
kinds of contributors to the political democratic process that I 
think we can all be very proud of. But as I said, he did not want 
to be a politician. And in 1948 to prove the point, he declined to 
see re-election when there was another candidate who did stand 
for nomination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, perhaps that’s why Mr. Lee has 
lived to be 100 years old. 
 
Les Lee lived for the past several years in Choiceland. His wife 
of nearly 50 years, Jean, died last July, and he now lives in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, few of us can boast of being present at the 
creation of some momentous events that have truly changed the 
course of history. Les Lee was at the right place at the right 
time. 
 
I know all members will want to join with me, first in thanking 
Les Lee for his many contributions to Saskatchewan life in 
general, in and out of the Legislative Assembly, and secondly, 
and perhaps even more importantly, in wishing him continuing 
good health on this very, very important and significant 
birthday of his. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Osika:  To make some comments on behalf of the 
official opposition with respect to the Premier’s presentation. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier. If I 
may, could I add also our sincere congratulations. And I very 
much appreciate . . . this is very encouraging and reassuring to 
us, all of us, I’m sure, that after going through the meat-grinder 
in this Legislative Assembly that we have the potential of living 
to 100 years and beyond. 
 
I again want to express sincere congratulations and join the 
Premier in wishing Mr. Lee many, many more happy years. 
Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  To join with the other members to wish the 
same. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Joining with the Leader of the Opposition and 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, we certainly as 
well would like to wish Mr. Lee all the very best. A hundred 
years is quite an accomplishment, certainly when part of it has 
been through the political process. Anyone who has been 
through the political process I’m sure realizes that it is indeed 
challenging and I’m sure at that time, dating back to that time, it 
must have been even more significant of a challenge to be 
involved in public life, particularly coming from the North, as I 
understand Mr. Lee did. 
 
So we would certainly want to join with all members of the 
legislature in wishing him the very best and look forward to 
many more years for Mr. Lee in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Question 102 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Table the answer to question 103. 
 
The Speaker:  Question 103 is tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I also table the response for question 
104. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 104 is tabled. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just a second, please. I had difficulty 
finding my paper but I remember that we are going to convert 
that question. 
 
The Speaker:  That motion for return (not debatable) is 
converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Extended House Hours 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  By leave of the Assembly, we’ve 
agreed, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to stand item no. 1. I 
don’t need leave for that. But I will need leave to move a 
motion, the contents of which I think all members, including 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

the Table, have been made aware of. So I’ll ask for leave to 
move the motion. 
 
I’ll stand the motion on the order paper and ask for leave to 
move another. 
 
The Speaker:  The government motion is stood and the 
Government House Leader has requested leave to introduce a 
government motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Melville: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1), this Assembly sit this 
evening from 7 p.m. until 10:30 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1430) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I’m pleased to have with me the 
deputy minister of Justice, the deputy Attorney General, Brent 
Cotter; Mr. Doug Moen, who is the executive director of the 
public law and policy branch; Tammy Pryznyk, who is the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister; and Elizabeth Smith, 
who is the director of the administrative services branch; and 
Mr. Richard Quinney, who is the executive director of the 
public prosecutions division. 
 
There are other officials at the back as well who will assist as 
necessary. Thanks. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. I recall some of the discussions we 
had earlier in dealing with your estimates. I would like to pick 
up from that point, and I may just reiterate or at least go over 
some of the things I recall we previously talked about. 
 
One of them was the review of your department by independent 
attorneys from Calgary. I just wanted to follow up on that with 
respect to . . . I believe that was a prosecutorial department that 
was going to be reviewed. 
 
I was wondering, the question I have . . . that it’s the 
prosecution’s department that’s under scrutiny with this review, 
but there perhaps are other departments within your area of 
responsibility, within the Justice department, that may require  

some review. Is that under way, or are there any thoughts given 
to things like the . . . in other departments  land titles, legal 
aid, or any of those. Are they in fact being reviewed for their 
administrative processes and efficiencies and the like? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I think what I can say is that there 
has been an ongoing review throughout the Department of 
Justice and the present review of the prosecutions branch is 
another step in that process. 
 
We did look at the land titles system and we were actually in 
the process of looking at some automation questions around 
land titles. That has taken place. 
 
There was a previous review in the registry systems around the 
personal property registry. We’ve looked at things like the Film 
Classification Board. We’ve looked at some of the things 
surrounding the consumer legislation and the various 
administrative parts of that. 
 
So I think what one can say is that there is ongoing review in 
the Department of Justice, and the present review with the 
department of public prosecutions is a continuation of that 
ongoing policy. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The internal review is 
evidently conducted by people from within your own 
department, or are they from other departments, other 
government agencies within the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Sometimes we do it from within. So that 
when we reviewed the victims’ program for example, that was 
done from within the department. But we also reviewed the 
corrections department; that was done from without. And the 
land titles review, that was done outside of the department. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. The reviews that are done from 
outside of the department, no doubt at a cost allotted or funding 
provided by your department, will those reviews that are funded 
by your department, by the taxpayers’ money, will those 
reviews be made public, such as particularly the one regarding 
the review of the prosecution department  will that in fact be 
made public, and/or will any of the others that are being 
conducted by outside entities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there are two parts to your 
question. The cost of the review, that will be made public; and 
it was my announcement when we entered the review that the 
review report would be made public as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you very much. I appreciate that. 
 
We’re still awaiting, and the public is still awaiting, some 
response with respect to the review being carried out regarding 
the Latimer case. Is there any progress to report in that respect, 
and will that be made public, and when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the simplest way to answer that 
question is to say that decisions surrounding that case are 
imminent. 
 



1774  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. This has been going 
on since last October, and it evidently is costing taxpayers 
additional monies while this review is under way. The response 
that it’s imminent, is it imminent within the next month? Within 
the next 6 months? 
 
I have to ask you that question because it has been going on for 
some time. We have a public prosecutor who is suspended with 
pay. And these are questions that the public raise from time to 
time  what is going on, what’s happening, and why isn’t the 
Justice department telling us what they’re doing, if they’re 
doing anything, about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the best way to respond to that 
question is to say that this matter is being reviewed very 
carefully because of many of the implications of the review. 
The definition of imminent is, within the next month. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Forgive me if we’ve 
bounced around a little bit here. I want to go on to something 
different, something that’s near and dear to our heart that we 
recently discussed, and that’s court-house closures. I wonder if 
those cities that will be losing their court-houses . . . can you 
tell me, Mr. Minister, how much of a savings it will be to your 
department for closing down the Melville and the Kerrobert 
court-houses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  On an annual basis ongoing, the closure 
of the court-house in Kerrobert and in Melville will result in an 
annual saving of $132,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again I expect . . . and 
perhaps you can just refresh how the Melville’s court usage 
stack up against perhaps other centres of similar size — the 
question being that the city of Melville will be one of the only 
cities in the province of Saskatchewan without a Court of 
Queen’s Bench. And that does raise some concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the simple answer is Melville will 
continue to have Provincial Court, where there is a high use. 
But yes, the Queen’s Bench will close, and those matters will 
be heard in Yorkton which is just down the road. 
 
The comparison of where they fit, I think practically there are 
some figures that I think we’ve provided to you before, and I’m 
not sure which items or which concerns you have about some of 
the statistics there. Perhaps you could clarify that? 
 
Mr. Osika:  I guess I wasn’t looking at any specific place, 
just a city of comparative size or a community of comparative 
size. And I’m not sure whether that would be a place like 
Melfort, would be fairly close to the size of Melville. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think what happened with the 
Melville situation is that we had two Court of Queen’s Benches 
very close to each other compared to other parts of the 
province, and that we looked at the usage in both of those areas 
and realized that this was an area where we could work with 
one Court of Queen’s Bench and easily cover the numbers 
involved. 
 

And for a comparison, I mean there are comparisons, but some 
of them have to do with distance. Some of them have to do with 
other factors. Kerrobert had 345 proceedings commenced in a 
year. Melville had 355. Then if we look at Melfort, it had 568. 
And so I mean, you know, you have to look at the various 
things that were there. But one of the factors that we did look at 
was the proximity of those two sites and realized that it would 
be possible to have them serviced quite well from one site. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. May I ask if the 
residency of the Court of Queen’s Bench judge in any of those 
locations had anything to do with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The only centres that have resident 
Queen’s Bench judges now are Prince Albert, Yorkton, North 
Battleford, Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, and 
Estevan, and then Melville. All of those places, the usage was 
substantially higher than that of Melville. And so Melville, on a 
comparison with all the other places where there is a designated 
residence, was clearly at the bottom. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Melville was a place where there was a 
requirement for the judge to reside? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, in the designation there is a judge 
who is designated for Melville. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, forgive me if I sound like I’m 
being insolent, but in the event that a judge refuses to reside in 
one of those communities, is there . . . are there options or is 
there . . . When that requirement is asked or determined, 
demanded  whichever; I’m not sure  are there any 
recourses either by the court or by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present situation is that if there is a 
concern about the residence of a judge or the inadequacy of 
service to a particular judicial centre, that matter is referred to 
the Chief Justice and the Judicial Council of Saskatchewan, 
who has the ability to deal with any kinds of concerns. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you again. You mentioned, I believe, that 
the savings for closing down the Melville court-house was 
about $130,000. What would the savings have been for 
Kerrobert? And correct me if that figure of 130 was wrong; I’m 
sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. When this question was asked in the 
legislature previously, about Kerrobert, we had a figure of 
between 83,900 and 85,100 which would be the annual savings 
related to the Kerrobert court-house. The figure that I gave to 
you previously included both Kerrobert and Melville  that 
was 132,000. So the difference is about, I think 47,000 to 
$48,000, is the annual saving on transferring the Queen’s 
Bench responsibilities out of Melville into Yorkton. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. In the whole scheme of things, that’s 
really not a significant amount. And as we go into some of the 
hardships perhaps that will be imposed as a result of that and 
the costs now that will have to go to the users of those  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

facilities, the end may not in fact justify the means. 
 
However, having said that, towards what will that measly 
$132,000 saving go to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think, as you’ve probably heard 
day in and day out, as we’ve heard today about health care and 
the fact that we have to find money in health, education, and 
social services, what happened was all of the other departments 
were asked to take a very careful look at absolutely everything 
that they did to make sure that there would be enough money to 
cover these other expenses where there weren’t sufficient funds. 
 
And I would have to say, as a new minister, that one of the most 
painful tasks was to go through everything and try to weigh 
whether this should be ended in Kerrobert and Melville so that 
we could offer up some of this money to provide funds for the 
health care system, the education system, and the social services 
system. 
 
And so what we have here doesn’t seem like a lot of money, but 
it’s these little pieces of money throughout the whole of 
government that is what our budgeting process was all about. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The court-house in Kerrobert being closed 
down, what will the closest location be now for people that 
need to use the services of that type of facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well for Provincial Court services, there 
are presently Provincial Court services in Kindersley, Unity, 
Wilkie, Biggar, North Battleford. As far as Queen’s Bench, I 
think facilities . . . Queen’s Bench work will be covered out of 
Swift Current, Saskatoon, and Battleford, which is where the 
Queen’s Bench court is. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. That involves some distance then for 
both the bar and/or clients of members of the bar in that 
location, which would again increase the costs of doing legal 
business in those communities. And that is a concern. 
 
As I understand it, and with all due respect to the attorneys, 
they charge by the hour. And this now increases the time that is 
eventually charged back to the clients. And I guess, Mr. 
Minister, that is always the concern. And I appreciate what you 
said about where we need to save. But again, it seems that that 
cost unfortunately is passed on to the very taxpayers who can 
least afford any additional costs for government services that 
are provided anywhere in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I appreciate your understanding of 
some of the difficulties. I think one of the . . . You asked 
previously about reviewing how things are done. There’s been 
an ongoing review, for example, in litigation, civil litigation, 
and the use of the Queen’s Bench court. 
 
And quite a number of years ago, there were introduced the use 
of fax machines, so that people could actually issue their 
documents from the court by way of fax. So that meant that you 
didn’t have to take all your documents to the court-house, get 
them stamped, and then take them back again. There are 
methods through the rules whereby a lawyer in Macklin or 

some other place that’s quite a number of miles away from a 
court-house can actually issue documents. They can file 
documents that way. 
 
It is also possible for the, sort of most common court 
proceeding, which is a chambers motion where they argue in 
front of a judge, whereby that can be done by telephone. And 
that rule has been in use for many years. And I know I used it 
over the years as a quite effective way of dealing with a case in 
a cost-effective and time-effective proceeding. 
 
And it really comes down to asking questions about how much 
are we willing, as the community, to pay to have access to a 
building where there are some people, throughout all of 
Saskatchewan. And we will be continuing to ask hard questions 
about that, because there are many times people say, we want to 
solve our problems but we don’t want to solve them in that 
way. 
 
And so we’re going to have more questions about this, but it’ll 
. . . Right now we think that there are some quite effective ways 
for litigants to be involved and use the court system, that allow 
them to have access, even though they may live 100, 200 miles 
away. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. That probably covers the next 
question I was going to ask with respect to all other services 
other than criminal court proceedings that folks might want to 
have access to, such as small claims complaints, small claims 
court. Is that also included in what you just covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the small claims wouldn’t be 
because that’s part of the Provincial Court, although I think 
there are some methods whereby you can do that. But you have 
to remember that small claims can be heard at Kindersley and 
Biggar and Wilkie and Rosetown and those places around 
Kerrobert. And you know, possibly those kinds of things can be 
dealt with at the places where provincial courts now sit. So that, 
I think, is covered by our present system. 
 
Just on a previous point but related to this. You asked about 
access to Justice. Well when we reviewed and reorganized the 
personal property registry system and automated it, the net 
effect was that people could go into their local credit union or 
bank or wherever and get a search on a car to find out if 
somebody had borrowed money against it. It used to be that you 
had to go into a central registry in Regina by mail or some other 
way to get that information. Well with the automation of the 
personal property registry, we now have access in thousands of 
places as opposed to a few offices that were there before. 
 
And so I guess what I would say is that with some patience and 
with some understanding, with some of the technology, we may 
actually end up with access in peoples’ homes on many of the 
kinds of things that traditionally you had to go to a government 
office to get the information. 
 
And that’s the kind of thing that we’re looking at in the future, 
which goes way beyond the kinds of discussions about is there 
a court-house there or is there an office there where we can get 
some help. 



1776  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

So we’re looking at these things, but we’re having to use new 
eyes and new ways of doing it. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The costs of all those services, once again, and 
understandably, I expect, will be passed on the people that 
require those services. Is that correct? That will then be added 
on to whatever professional fees that are required to obtain that 
type of information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I can best answer that 
question by using the example of the personal property registry. 
It used to be that if people wanted to find out this kind of 
information about a car that they were going to buy, they might 
go to a lawyer and be charged $50 plus a search fee for the 
lawyer to find that information. 
 
Now, like I say, one can go to the bank and pay the $5 or $10 
that it costs and get that information right there. Or if the bank 
is helping them to buy the vehicle, the bank may even have 
some arrangement, pay the fee themselves. The net effect is 
faster, quicker access for less cost. 
 
There are some other things that may happen around some of 
these things that we’re working at towards the future with the 
land titles automated system that will also change the cost of 
doing some of the transactions. And we’re looking at all these 
things and trying to make sure that people have access to the 
justice services that they need. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That sounds to me like 
there may be some other very ambitious innovations in the not 
too distant future, so that leads me to my next question, sir. Are 
there any other court-house closures being planned by your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Not at this time, no. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Good afternoon to your officials and to you, Mr. 
Minister. In listening to what you were telling the Leader of the 
Opposition just a moment ago, I don’t know if my imagination 
was running away with me or not here, but I would like you to 
just clarify a couple of the remarks you made. 
 
And when you’re talking about people accessing the court 
system . . . and in fact you mention you had done some 
transactions. Was it through telecommunications, telephone, 
etc.? Am I sort of hearing right then in assuming that in not too 
long a time, any cases regarding criminal charges in fact will be 
done through telecommunications also, or is that something that 
is completely apart from other kind of cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I can say that there are some 
very interesting examples in Canada, including Saskatchewan, 
where if one is making an application to appeal the matter to the 
Supreme Court of Canada, one requires leave to have the appeal 
go ahead. And those leave hearings are done by, I guess what 
it’s called, interactive video where you talk to a video machine. 
They see you and hear you, and you can see the judges in 
Ottawa responding. 
 
So that’s one service that is, I think, available in Saskatchewan.  

It’s not that common. I know in Ontario and I think now in 
Calgary, Alberta they are using video remand for criminal cases 
where, instead of taking a person who is to appear before a 
judge to be remanded in custody again while awaiting trial, for 
example, they do those hearings by way of televideo  I think 
that’s the term  where the person stays at the correctional 
centre, the judge is in the courtroom with the defence counsel 
and with the prosecutor. The person sitting at the correctional 
centre has a screen with four images in it  himself, the judge, 
his lawyer, and the prosecutor. And it saves time. It also saves 
the transportation for the person in jail. 
 
These things, I think, now are done with the consent of the 
person who is the accused. 
 
But I guess what I’m saying is that there are applications of 
some of these new technologies which will change our 
understandings and our use of even the criminal justice system. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, then and 
what becomes sort of the final trial for someone? Are you 
telling me that in fact the defendant in that trial may not be 
present at his own trial, in a sense, except through some video 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s possible. I think at the present time 
the trial would always have the accused present. But subject to 
the, I suppose, the consent of the accused, it could be held 
without that person there. 
 
But basically now all trials . . . there are many proceedings 
within a criminal proceeding where now we require somebody 
to bring, usually the police or a constable or peace officer, to 
bring the person from the correctional centre to the court-house. 
And those are costs, both to justice systems to sometimes the 
local police. Anything that we can do to make it fair for 
everybody but also look at some of the costs, well we’re 
looking at some of those possibilities. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, again my 
imagination is kind of running ahead a bit. I’m wondering then 
how in a trial of this sort . . . the jury involved in trials as such, 
what role . . . where would they be with this video or 
telecommunications system? How would they take part? How 
would they be able to . . . where would they be present? Or 
would that also be through telecommunications at their homes, 
or what goes on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think practically, if it was a jury 
trial, you wouldn’t be able to use this system. Although in some 
jury trials already, one may end up with videotape evidence of 
an expert, for example. But you know, where they bring in 
information or they actually will do evidence by telephone with 
an expert, so that the judge and the accused and counsel and the 
jury could hear somebody testify over the telephone  that 
kind of thing already does happen. 
 
Another example of some of this use of technology, which I 
think you would be quite interested in, is some of the issues that  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

we discussed previously about child support. When there are 
interprovincial hearings relating to child support, some of these 
are now done with that kind of interactive video, which then 
saves costs for both parties because they can stay wherever they 
are, and the matter can then be heard without incurring the costs 
of travel or counsel travel. 
 
So things are changing and there are some experiments. They 
don’t always work, but some of them do work, and I guess we 
have to be looking at these things as well. 
 
One of our . . . the factors for us in Saskatchewan is that a lot of 
this equipment is quite expensive and we don’t have a lot of 
money for capital expenditures. So if and when we do get 
involved in this, it would most likely be in some way where we 
would lease time or services in some other way rather than set 
up a whole system, like they might in Ontario or even Alberta. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m not 
going to ask you a question, I’m just going to comment on the 
use of telephones for witnesses or so on. I can see where there 
could be trouble with that because there’s no affirmation of any 
kind or guarantee that the person on the other end of the phone 
is in fact the witness. Or what’s going on . . . there would have 
to be someone, you know, someone there to . . . I can 
understand that with some sort of video associated with it, but I 
can’t understand it just through telephone. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if I could just switch gear a little 
bit here. Is it appropriate at this time for me to be asking 
questions about the Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre? Is 
that under your authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That is the responsibility of the Minister 
of Social Services, and all the young offender corrections 
facilities . . . is the Minister of Social Services in charge of that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was just wondering 
because most of the questions during question period were 
relayed to you as Justice minister on that. And I presumed that 
you would be the person to ask about this place and any 
questions associated with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well perhaps just for future reference, the 
way matters are dealt with: we, as the Department of Justice, 
are responsible for the court system, which includes the courts 
that deal with young offenders. So that when a sentence is sort 
of granted by the judge, then the person goes into custody, into 
a young offender facility. All of those facilities are administered 
by the Department of Social Services. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you could just bear 
with us for a moment, I believe our leader has got some further 
questions as soon as he’s finished his conversation here. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Excuse me, I 
apologize for . . . Enforcement of maintenance orders, I just 
wanted to ask you a question on that. I was somewhat surprised 
to see that the budget has dropped in that area. I would have 
thought that since there was a move towards legislation to 
bolster that particular aspect of the system . . . that there would  

be a decrease? I would have thought there might have been an 
increase in that particular area. Is there any specific reason for 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well there’s a very minor decrease in this. 
And actually what the decrease is related to is that the federal 
Minister of Justice contributed towards the cost of some of our 
new telephone systems. And so that shows up then in the 
budget as a contribution that they’ve made to help us purchase 
this new telephone system, which will be an efficient one. And 
I think there was a member’s statement about that and also 
some affirmation of that about two months ago in the 
legislature. 
 
There’s the same number of staff. And I think the other thing is, 
as we get more experienced, we get better at it; we can do even 
more work with the same number of people or even with a 
slightly fewer dollars. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With all due respect, I 
expect you and I, as time goes on, will get better as well, sir. 
 
Under the legal service subvote, I notice the budget for civil law 
has been reduced by nearly $200,000. Can you please, Mr. 
Minister, tell me what services are covered by this particular 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I can respond to this question 
with good news. With the government reorganization and sort 
of examining everything that we do, there are less requirements 
for the civil law services. And the civil law are the lawyers that 
work with Mr. Bogdasavich, who’s the director of civil law, 
and provide legal advice to all of the government departments 
on request. 
 
Well as there are fewer people in many of these departments, 
there’s fewer people that think up weird and wonderful legal 
questions to be asked or answered and that we’ve therefore 
been able to reduce the numbers of staff lawyers in that 
department by two and a half positions. What does happen, 
though, and we recognize that there are times when civil law 
requirements will go up and down, and so over the next while 
we don’t think we will need as many legal services. 
 
The other thing is that we have some . . . as people gain in 
seniority, they’re able to handle more difficult questions with 
greater efficiency. We also have expanded the use of some of 
the automated systems, more use of computers and more use of 
some of that kind of computer searching that all law firms use 
now. And that’s meant that we’re using less money in this area. 
 
Mr. Osika:  So less money in the civil law area but it’s 
increased in the criminal prosecutions area. Is there . . . Can you 
indicate the reason for that? Is it perhaps that we’re expecting 
. . . I’m sorry. The question I had for you, Mr. Minister, was, the 
budget for public prosecutions, in the prosecution area, has 
gone up by about 300,000. Is that an offset from one to the 
other? Were there fewer civil law attorneys and they move over 
to prosecutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The fact is that one of the lawyer  



1778  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

positions from civil law was moved into prosecutions. But that 
doesn’t account for the full amount. What we have seen is that 
over the last number of years that we’ve been over budget in 
what we’d predicted for prosecutions, so therefore we’ve tried 
to move up their budget and try to provide them with more 
support. 
 
As we all know, in Saskatchewan we’ve had some quite 
difficult cases to deal with over a number of years and it’s our 
goal to provide as full a support as we can for the prosecutions 
department. This is a bit of a step up in that. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, just a little bit on that note, 
dealing with criminal prosecutions. Recently I’d raised a 
question in the House regarding early parole, and I was just 
wondering if you could briefly just explain to the House, at this 
point, just exactly what your policy is regarding early parole. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the best way of answering 
that question is to talk generally about the purpose of our 
correctional systems We always need to remember that the 
provincial correctional system deals with all of those people 
who are sentenced to two years less a day, or less. 
 
And many times the way that people end up in whatever 
difficulty they end up with, where they’re charged, involves 
some kind of a personal problem, whether it’s a psychiatric 
problem or a health problem, a substance-abuse problem. And 
many of our sentences that are given by judges include the 
possibility and the hope that some kind of help could be 
available for people. And the whole correctional system is 
geared to deal with the assessment of individuals and making 
sure that they get the most appropriate incarceration. And when 
you’re dealing with people like this on a broad base, we end up 
trying to set policies that will deal with that. 
 
We also recognize that there are situations when the most 
appropriate place for a person is in a treatment centre, and some 
of those treatment centres are within our correctional centre, so 
they stay within the correctional centre, but not all of them are. 
 
I think the question about the early release program is more 
related to, well what kinds of people do we need to keep locked 
up in our community? And that’s something that we’re 
continuing to evaluate all the time. It’s the most expensive way 
of keeping people in the system, is to keep them locked up. I 
think we all recognize that, but we also don’t want anybody out 
in the community who is a danger to the community. And I 
think it’s pretty clear that that concern is always uppermost in 
how we deal with the people. 
 
When we look at Saskatchewan’s, you know, incarceration rates 
being quite high, we end up having to look at a number of 
factors. Clearly one of the factors involves the number of 
aboriginal people that are caught in the system. And we are 
working very closely together with the federal government and 
with the first nations and with the Metis groups within 
Saskatchewan to try to address some of these things. 
 
There are no magic wands or simple answers, but there are 
some things that we can do together. And some of them have to  

do with things like early release programs where we might 
release people into healing lodge situations, community 
situations where some other things can be done that will help 
these people. 
 
But we’re working on many things, and we’re looking to see 
what we can do. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate your 
comments and the concerns that you expressed with respect to 
the parole system. Do you anticipate any cost savings with 
respect to that type of an early parole program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m not sure if you can talk about 
cost savings, in that we hope to spend the money, as a 
government, in places that are more positive than just locking 
people up. So there might be some cost savings that way, but on 
the other hand we’re wanting to make sure that whatever dollars 
that we do have actually fulfil what the community wants, 
which is to have people be productive members in the 
community. And how one does that is not always 
straightforward. Sometimes it’s pretty clear that they just need 
to be locked up, and we’ll do that. 
 
Mr. Osika:  And, Mr. Minister, I agree and concur with you, 
and perhaps people must be told or somehow the message has 
to get out that people are responsible and will suffer the 
consequences of their actions. I thank you for those comments. 
 
Still under the legal services, Mr. Minister, the salaries under 
this particular budget item are set to climb nearly half a million 
dollars this year, I believe. That appears to be what’s happening 
and I wondered if you could tell me what accounts for that 
increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The explanation is that within 
prosecutions we have hired some new staff, which would 
account for about 200,000 of the increase. Some of the people 
in the prosecutions department had been operating on contract 
jobs and it was an arrangement, I think about a year ago, a little 
less, to turn all those contracts into salaries positions, and that 
meant an increase of about $81,000. And then in the actual 
recording of the costs for the salaries that are paid to lawyers, 
some items had been recorded under a different code number, 
and when everything was reviewed it made sense that it should 
be showed under legal salaries. So there was a transfer from 
code 2 to code 9 of $211,000. So I think that accounts for the 
number that you are concerned about. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I should have 
clarified in my question that it was related specifically to the 
salaries, and I thank you for that. 
 
Under that same item, with grants, there’s a considerable 
reduction. What would the grants cover? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The reduction, I think of $200,000, is 
directly related to a reduction in one-year grants that went to 
some communities in Justice, and they were a one-year grant 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

and it’s not continued this year so there’s a reduction of 
$200,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Chair:  They last appeared before the committee on 
April 29. I’ll invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Today with me is Faye Rafter, acting executive coordinator, and 
Joan Pederson, assistant executive coordinator. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 
minister and her officials again. 
 
I reread the information on our discussion that we had in April, 
and I have a number of questions again. And today I received 
this annual report. I’m wondering if this . . . This one is ‘94-95. 
This is the last one, is it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, that is the most recent report. 
 
Ms. Draude:  We discussed last time the budget that was 
$975,000, and you’d received about 935,000. You said the 
$60,000 was . . . that there was $60,000 less, and it was 
basically because of the advisory council. Was all of that money 
that was cut back because of the deletion of the advisory 
council? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The reductions included 39,000 from 
the advisory council and a 35,000 decrease in accommodation 
because of anticipated lower lease costs in new space, new 
accommodation, for the Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Have you moved now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No, not yet. 
 
Ms. Draude:  And the decrease from last year had nothing to 
do with cheaper costs last year then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This is our projected budget that will 
have the decrease. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Okay, so there . . . Madam Minister, I was 
looking at . . . last year we had looked at the expenses. You 
were supposed to get 975, and you actually got 935, so the 
difference there was the money you actually spent last year. 
And you’re saying that 35,000 of it, or 39, was the advisory 
council. The rest couldn’t have been space because you haven’t 
moved yet. What is the difference? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, the difference there is 40,000 and 
that was the advisory council portion of the money that was not 
occurring during that budget period. 

Ms. Draude:  Could you tell me how many were on this 
advisory council and actually why it was cut? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It was 12 people, and it was largely in 
discussion with them that the conclusion was reached, because 
they felt there are so many people today working on the range 
of issues that have been of concern to us. I don’t think just 
because we’re women but because we’re women who are 
involved in various matters in the community, that there were 
many people doing more substantive work than they as an 
advisory council were able to do. And they felt that really they 
were not able to do much more than replicate work that people 
were already doing. And it struck us all that we needed to 
rethink what the best way was to bring women’s views into the 
decision-making process. 
 
Now what government has done in many areas is set up 
interdepartmental committees which also have a community 
component. So for example, there’s a community strategy on 
action on violence and so there would be community people 
represented. They would meet with an interdepartmental group 
of government people. And that way you’ve got people working 
more directly in the areas of concern to them. 
 
And I think the Women’s Advisory Council view is that those 
women were more able to directly represent themselves into 
that process than as a separate, standalone advisory council. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean that we wouldn’t find reasons to pull 
women together to consult on things in the future. It was just 
that that process as structured was not, if you want to put it this 
way, adding value to our knowledge or our ability to act on the 
matters that concern them. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So, Madam Minister, then basically we . . . the 
advisory council was disbanded and you actually have more of 
a type of consultation process now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes. I think that would adequately 
represent the way that government is doing that kind of 
consulting now with the community, is that people are actually 
on committees with interdepartmental people and what not and 
the views are represented directly. 
 
As well, the Women’s Secretariat, who are very connected to 
women’s organizations throughout Saskatchewan, also 
participate in those interdepartmental committees, and if there 
are matters that affect a particular segment of women, they will 
also seek out further information and discussion with the 
women who would be most knowledgeable about those things. 
 
Ms. Draude:  And now with the consultation process as 
opposed to the advisory council . . . you are paying the people 
on the advisory council. Will you be paying people on the 
consultation . . . that are being . . . consulting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think that individual departments 
would be picking up some expense cost, just related to, you 
know, a meeting room, maybe a lunch, something like that.  



1780  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

Perhaps if we’ve asked people to come specifically for 
something that’s primarily of concern to us and not something 
that they’re working on already in the community, we might 
support some limited travel costs or what not. 
 
But for the most part, we don’t have much budget for that, so 
we would use it very frugally and sparingly and try to give 
small bits of assistance so that women around the province that 
are meeting could also meet together, have their discussions. 
And they quite often send us a report back of the work they’ve 
done. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The monies that would be paid to the 
consultation group, whether it’s . . . even if it’s just rental or 
office rental space, will that monies be coming out of your 
communication budget then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The monies come out of the general 
administration budget. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m worried, Madam Minister, that if we can 
cut the advisory council because it was redundant after awhile, 
maybe they’re going to look at the Secretariat in the same way. 
That concerns me, so I am hoping that the consultation process 
will ensure that the needs of women across the province are 
actually brought to the front of the Secretariat. And I feel that 
that was probably the advantage of the advisory council. So if 
it’s more haphazard that this group get together, do you feel 
confident that we’re still going to be able to have everybody’s 
best interests met by the Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Haphazard wouldn’t be the word I 
would choose. I think the process as it exists now is more 
accountable because women who work in transition houses and 
children’s counselling, etc., are actually dealing with the areas 
of government that are responsible for that legislation and for 
that programing. 
 
Part of what I see the role of the Secretariat as being is hooking 
people up to the appropriate place in government so that their 
views are represented in the policy and legislative process. 
 
So for example, a recent example would be when we were 
having some discussions about a farm Internet in terms of 
information to rural areas. I raised the concern with the director 
whether women’s information would be part of that Internet 
because many women are involved in farming and have 
particular needs, particular perspectives, in relation to farming. 
So we followed up and took measures to make sure that that 
linkage would be there. 
 
So that would be the kind of thing. We would not always 
provide something directly ourself, but we would make sure 
that people got hooked up to the right place. 
 
Another example would be immigrant women who are 
concerned with some of the shifting immigration policies in 
Canada. And so we would hook them up with working 
committees within the government so that they can represent 
their views directly to those committees. 
 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I noticed the other day when 
we discussed it, we talked about hooking up more frequently. 
Could you be a little more definitive on what you mean by 
hooking up with different departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well for example, we would meet with 
a group or a group of individuals  they don’t necessarily have 
to be an organization  who have decided that they don’t feel 
that some important needs are being met. We would sit with 
them to analyse specifically what those needs are, and then we 
would try to determine whether or not there is an existing place 
in the government that is responsible to respond to those things. 
And if in fact there isn’t a place that’s responsible to respond, 
and if we think that it falls within the realm of what one would 
consider a governmental responsibility, we would then seek the 
mandate to establish a body that could respond to the particular 
concerns that were being raised. 
 
For example, we’ve had some engagement prior to The Labour 
Standards Act with domestic workers. And that would have 
been a process of getting the domestic workers’ organization 
hooked up to the labour standards review process, so they could 
represent their concerns. 
 
And also the Women’s Secretariat, acting as both a facilitator 
but also a bit of an internal advocate, in the sense of making 
sure that things don’t get lost in the big shuffle. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. You discussed women in 
farming a few minutes ago. And at last opportunity, we 
discussed the fuel tax rebate. And I’m still quite upset about the 
fact that women are still being discriminated against in this 
point. And I’m hoping that you have something that is actually 
a definite objective or some point that you’re going to be able 
to make to ensure that this isn’t going to proceed this year. 
Have you made any steps towards overcoming this problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The entire taxation area is handled by 
Finance. And certainly over the years, whether it’s been matters 
of maintenance enforcement, whether it’s been pension sharing, 
those kinds of things, there has been slow but real progress on 
all these things, and no doubt the matter you raise is another 
one that I would believe that Finance is looking at. 
 
And always when you make these changes there’s always two 
issues. One of the issues is, is it right; and the other issue is 
always, can you afford it? And so if a policy decision is made 
that something is right, you then develop a financial plan of 
how you can move towards it. Because whether the discussion 
is pay equity or whether it’s this particular issue you raise, 
there’s no doubt that a case can be made for fairness. 
 
But there’s also the corresponding need to ensure affordability. 
And my goal is always to make progress in the right direction 
and you can’t always do that as quickly as you’d like to. But 
Finance would be the particular place to get more detail on that 
matter. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good afternoon, 
Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

Madam Minister, I’d just like to take you back to the comments 
that you’ve just made in regards to . . . I guess we could start 
with the farm fuel tax rebate — as we see it, a very unfair issue. 
And as we see it, it’s a women’s issue. It’s simple as that. 
 
If Finance and the economic realities of things should affect 
men and be in favour of men having certain sort of 
considerations, then it should be that way for women that have 
got ownership also, or part ownership, in a farm, and in fact 
incur the same expenses as their partner. 
 
So we see that as . . . it’s getting to be a women’s issue more 
than anything, because it won’t be addressed by anyone else. 
It’s simple as that. So I would think that we should go hand in 
hand on these kind of things and try to effect some changes. 
 
I was reading Judy LaMarsh’s book the other night in fact, Bird 
in a Gilded Cage, and she made some comment about they had 
a long ways to go in 1930 and they’ve come a little bit ahead, 
and we still have a long ways to go. But if different sectors of 
our society have come along, so will women. 
 
And I think that women certainly have got a great strength 
nowadays, and also a common sense approach to things that 
will hopefully lead them to some further equity. I guess that 
probably that’s one of my major concerns in this day and age, is 
certainly with farm women, with pay equity, with things like 
that. 
 
Now I know that members probably in this House, from every 
party, don’t have the same views on this kind of thing, but I 
know that there are loads of women out there who have got the 
same skills certainly as men, and are not being paid equally. 
And so I think that we have some work to do in that area. 
 
I’d like to switch a little bit right now to some of the statements 
in the annual report, the Saskatchewan Women’s Secretariat. 
I’ll refer you to the page; it’s page 13 on harassment prevention 
in Saskatchewan workplaces. 
 
Madam Minister, if someone comes to you, for instance, with a 
complaint about sexual harassment in the workplace, and if in 
fact they have gone through government departments and so on 
and they just haven’t been able to effect some help with these 
kind of things, which role would you play? How could you help 
them? What would . . . how would you direct them in this area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, there’s really two levels on which 
we respond to those things. One is the policy level where, if it 
seems that the responses aren’t sufficient, we would work with 
the various departments and agencies that are responsible. 
There’s actually quite a few different bodies that play a role in 
this issue. There’s everything from occupational health and 
safety, Human Rights Commission, workers’ comp . . . there’s 
quite a range of agencies that play a role. But our role is a 
policy and legislative role. 
 
The direct service role resides primarily in the community. So 
we would be inclined to refer women to the appropriate 
community resources as far as first line of information. It’s no 
different than a lot of other service provision areas. A lot of  

community organization do front-line work in those areas. 
 
But we do meet with women who feel that the system is not 
working as well as it could, to, I guess, prevent them from being 
double victimized in these kinds of situations. And certainly we 
had such a meeting just recently where we developed about a 
14-point list of actions to take as far as seeing if we can 
strengthen the ability for women to get the information they 
need when they need it and to be clear on what processes are 
there to have a situation like that examined and some kind of 
resolution brought to it. 
 
But like I say, the front-line contact would generally be done in 
the community by a community organization. Aside from that, 
the officially mandated bodies like occupational health and 
safety, like Human Rights, would be the places where people 
would go through formal processes to get those issues resolved. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, if 
someone has gone through occupational health and safety, 
through Human Rights, and those kind of things, and they really 
have not been successful in obtaining the kind of help that they 
believe that they have a right to and that they need, how then 
can you help them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think we’re the first jurisdiction 
anywhere that has included sexual harassment and actually 
racial harassment in our occupational health and safety code as 
a workplace hazard. 
 
And we are not yet into full implementation. We still have to 
approve the regulations pursuant to that legislation. And after 
the regulations are approved, there will be a committee set up in 
each workplace who will establish procedures within the 
workplace. So I guess we’re still at the, a little bit, falling 
between the crack stage. We haven’t still gotten to the point 
where the legislation that was enacted is fully implemented. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I’ve encouraged the women I’ve met with that, once we’ve 
got that in place, we could have training workshops with 
employers that fall under the legislation, with shop stewards, 
with a variety of people, so they can understand the process, 
because there’s no point having legislation or a process unless 
you understand it as well. 
 
So our goal will be to make sure that as many people as 
possible understand it, that the Women’s Secretariat is available 
to do training on that topic, to assist workplaces in 
understanding how to create a harassment-free workplace, and 
also to plug some of the other holes as far as making that . . . I 
mean I look at it a little bit like filling out a UI (unemployment 
insurance) claim; there’s a lot of trick questions. And if 
someone doesn’t talk to you first about, this is the process 
you’re entering into; these are the kinds of questions, you may 
find yourself getting more into a problem rather than into a 
solution. 
 
So I do think there is a need for a first line of information. But 
we are working on a systematic approach to working with the  



1782  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

new legislation and to making sure that there is enough people 
who are informed, to understand how to link people up. 
 
We also produce a wallet card which, although it’s not specific 
just to harassment, helps link women with a range of services in 
the community to support a number of problem areas. And you 
may actually want to get some of those for your constituency 
office. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thanks again, Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, when I looked at the Secretariat, I was excited to have 
the opportunity to be the critic for this area. But when we . . . 
after our discussions the other day and reading the information, 
I see that your department is really trying to be all things for all 
people when it comes to women. It’s sort of like we try and be 
at home and at work and our communities. We’re still trying to 
do it even to the Secretariat. 
 
And I think that’s the real problem. We don’t have an 
opportunity, or your department doesn’t have an opportunity, to 
have the focus that it needs to have to make a real difference. 
The department has a very proud mandate, but because of the 
lack of specific objectives and because of the steadily 
decreasing budget, it isn’t allowing the Secretariat to undertake 
some of the very pressing needs of women. 
 
Under the direction your government is taking, I was hoping 
you would give the people across the province, women across 
the province, an opportunity to believe that issues could be 
resolved and actually make a difference in their lives, and I 
guess I’m not really seeing that this is happening. 
 
When I talk to women across the province . . . and to be fair, 
maybe I don’t talk to the women that you’re talking to. But if I 
talk to rural women and native women and low income women, 
and if  and I stress if  they’ve heard of the department, they 
don’t know what it does. In lots of cases they think it’s nothing 
more than a tea party for rich women, and I hate saying that, but 
that’s basically the way they are thinking. I don’t say I agree 
with them, but I’m telling you what other people are telling me. 
 
And you have a tremendous opportunity to make a difference, 
but it’s going to require a focus and a direction and more 
money. And I’m saying more money is the last option because I 
know that it’ll just be fed bashing. 
 
The needs of Saskatchewan women are very great, but we’re 
missing the boat. And I think that what we’re having is a 
department in name only because we’re trying to do so many 
different things. Could you tell me specifically what you think 
we could do for women in business or, for example, native 
women that’s actually going to make a difference to their lives? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well that is a load; there’s no question. 
I’d like to think that as well as initiating a lot of substantive 
policy discussion that needs to be had in government, we’ve 
also done a lot of very practical things. For example, the new 
labour standards legislation substantively affects women and 
families by improving working conditions and benefits for 
part-time workers, providing protection for domestic workers, 
but also strengthening maternity and other family-related  

leaves. 
 
Now that would be of relevance to any employed person in the 
province, rural or urban. Certainly rural people may tend to be 
more self-employed, but my understanding is that there’s many 
farming wives who also work off farm, and so that would 
therefore be of significance to them. 
 
The new occupational health and safety legislation, by your 
own comments, is important because sexual harassment is an 
issue in the workplace and in many places, and women do need 
to have the protection of a society that sends a clear message 
that violence against women and sexual harassment aren’t 
tolerated and are not appropriate. And so that would be of 
relevance to all women. 
 
Employment equity has created a substantial increase in the 
number of women represented in all the boards and 
commissions and agencies of government as well within 
executive government, which means that women are having a 
stronger role in policy making. And really once you get into 
those jobs, to a degree, what you make of them depends on your 
ability to assert yourself on the process. It’s not much different 
than being elected. There’s no magic wand; it’s your ability to 
assert yourself onto the process, to a degree. 
 
In sexual harassment prevention we do have a training and 
education program. Child care, it’s involved subsidies to low 
income parents and over 1,000 new, licensed spaces. As well, 
the number of spaces for teen parents has increased. Many of 
these teen parent spaces are out in small communities; they’re 
not just in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
The Victims of Domestic Violence Act I thought to be very 
significant for all women, because prior to The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act, women had to basically pack their bags 
and the children and run in the middle of the night. What The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act does is it gives women 
property rights. They can stay in the home and the abuser has to 
leave. And I think that’s a significant step up, that you’re not 
just thieves in the night. You have a right to where you live and 
the children have a right to continuity in their lives. And it’s not 
in all cases that it would be the male parent who is the abusive 
parent, but it certainly tends to be the dominant experience. 
 
In terms of health, there’s been a province-wide toll free 
information line on sexual and reproductive health that’s 
available to anyone. The breast cancer screening program has 
been expanded. The Women’s Health Centre at the Regina 
General Hospital, and about 20 million spent for home care 
expansion and support for family care-givers. And that’s very 
important to women, because if you’re a woman and someone 
falls ill in the family or there’s an elderly parent, nine times out 
of ten a good portion of the care will fall to you. 
 
So the new home care programs and the respite care and those 
kinds of thing, I think are very important to women. And those 
are certainly available in all the smaller communities around the 
province. 
 
Funding for child maintenance orders has increased, and we’re  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

doing a better job of making sure that parents share in the 
responsibility for children that they’ve collectively produced. 
And I think that would be of benefit to all women. 
 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code has prohibited 
discrimination. One of the things people don’t realize  it is 
also based on family status and the receipt of social assistance. 
So you can’t discriminate against a woman because she’s a poor 
woman and a poor parent of a family. 
 
I think none of these are small accomplishments. And as far as 
the aboriginal women in particular goes, I’ve upped my efforts 
a lot in the last year, meeting with aboriginal women around the 
province to really get a fix on what their concerns are. In some 
cases I’ve taken their concerns to their elected representatives to 
tell them what the women in their communities are telling me. 
And actually the aboriginal women receive some core funding 
from Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, to be able to organize 
themselves to put their views forward within their communities 
that they work in. 
 
I could actually continue on. The farm-stress line which 
although we’re not directly responsible for, is certainly another 
avenue that’s available to women in rural areas around the 
province. And according to the counsellors that I’ve spoken to 
on that line, people do make quite a bit of use out of it. 
 
So I don’t think these are small achievements and I do think 
they affect women substantially and I’m actually quite able to 
hold my head up on these particular matters. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, you’re saying exactly . . . 
you’re saying it much better than what I’m trying to say. You’re 
doing so many different things. You’re responsible for so many 
different issues and every issue seems to be a women’s issue 
because it’s something that you basically have to work with. 
And it seems to me that to try and do this all through one 
Secretariat that’s so terribly under-funded doesn’t seem to be 
making sense to anybody. 
 
I’m hoping at the end of the next four years that you no longer 
have to fight to maintain your budget. It should be the largest 
budget in the government because you have to do so many 
things. 
 
But unless you actually can do something that we can put our 
fingers on rather than just hook-ups and all this linking and this 
type of thing, all the specific things that you’ve mentioned, you 
don’t get credit for. I don’t know how to say it in any other way. 
I’m trying to . . . I just wish that the essence of it and the 
importance of it all could be brought forward. 
 
I want to talk specifically about some of the budget that you 
have. I understand your total communication budget is only 
$50,000. Can you give me a breakdown of how you spend 
$50,000 to do all these jobs that you’re trying to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Largely we spend that money on 
educational materials related to the areas that we’re working on. 
For example, one of our goals for the coming year, and possibly 
longer depending on how long it takes us to do the work, is  

family friendly workplaces that try to take some of the pressure 
off of families by finding ways to accommodate the workplace 
to the reality of people’s dual responsibilities in life as parents 
and family members as well as workers. And there has been 
some materials produced for that. 
 
One of the decisions the Women’s Secretariat made along the 
lines that you’re saying of limited resources was the fact the 
educational materials would likely travel a long way in getting 
the word around on a number of things, and certainly I’ve had 
people who counsel in technical institutes and what not tell me 
that they make good use of the materials that we develop. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, do you make funding 
available to women’s organizations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The role of the Secretariat is not to 
replace the functions of the other departments of government. 
It’s to be a policy window, an advocate for systemic and 
structural legislative change. But the purpose is not to take over 
the functions and nor would I want to do that because I think 
you would be much further marginalized if it was: well you’re a 
woman; go there. The women go everywhere in the government 
and should expect to receive services everywhere. We just deal 
with those particular matters that don’t seem to be getting 
enough attention. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I want to zero in 
for a minute again, Madam Minister, on a few things. First of 
all, how very much I admire yourself and the work you’ve been 
trying to do  trying to do and doing well, in fact. 
 
The other thing I want to suggest is that I want to make an 
equation to the Women’s Secretariat and its function as part of 
government. I don’t think it should be part of the government of 
the day. I think it should be . . . there should be an all-party 
committee for the Women’s Secretariat and we should then in 
fact have people from every party. Unfortunately the Tories 
don’t have any women, but should that ever happen  which is 
unlikely . . . but anyway at this point, anyways, I would like to 
see an all-party committee set up for this. 
 
I think, simply because we definitely have a different way of 
doing things and we’re much more direct in our approach at 
things. And I think we have a common sort of sense of 
responsibility and other qualities that would lead us to helping 
things like the child prostitution situation in the province. And I 
think we would get action a lot quicker than men would; it’s 
simple as that to me. 
 
And so there are areas like that that I’m really very concerned 
about. And I’m wondering whether or not the Women’s 
Secretariat, as it is right now, has got any ability to influence 
government. If in fact you can in fact suggest policy or drive 
home some points that in fact would influence policy making in 
this area — this horrendous area of child prostitution — and the 
abuse and use in violence of children’s bodies, particularly 
young girls. I understand there’s only 15 per cent of child 
prostitutes, or 11 per cent, something like that, that are young 
men and the rest are young girls. 
 



1784  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

So I think we have to take the bull by the horns and start really 
moving on this, and I’m wondering if you have any influence in 
any way on this matter. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again these are comprehensive 
questions. And I appreciate your concern over all these things. I 
do think it would be worthwhile to have all-party discussions 
and I see no reason why we can’t do that when we’ve all got a 
little more time. 
 
One of the things though I do believe  and I say this often 
when I meet with people in the community  is that yes, 
you’ve elected me, but I can’t do it all. And it takes all of us 
working in our respective organizations, in our respective 
places, in our respective parties, in our respective community 
associations, to create the attitudinal changes and the social 
changes that will make these problems less likely to happen. 
The stronger parenting, the stronger community awareness of 
the other people who live in the community  that creates a 
safer community environment. It’s not a thing that’s going to be 
solved just by government. 
 
And so I think it’s important that we have those discussions, but 
then we branch out from those discussions to create that change 
in all of our various organizations. Because legislation is 
important from the purpose of protecting people, but legislation 
will not change the thinking in a society. So it’s really important 
that we all take that awareness and take it back to our homes, 
our workplaces, our organizations, and help to get that critical 
mass developed so that everybody will share the view that that’s 
an important issue to deal with. 
 
There is some support for the reduction of prostitution efforts. 
But of course we’ve got issues to deal with there, like adults 
who think that’s okay, people who view other people as a 
commodity. So there’s a large range of attitudinal and other 
issues we’re dealing with. And some of it, obviously the results 
will be at both the federal and provincial level on the legislative 
and punitive end of things as well. 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
the Ombudsman for our province is a woman. She is having 
some difficulty with, in fact, feeling the autonomy that she 
needs to have is there. And not because she’s a woman; just 
because of the way things are structured. 
 
I’m wondering if I could ask you to be so brave as to give your 
comments on whether the Ombudsman’s office, from a 
woman’s point of view or from anybody’s point of view, should 
have an all-party committee to determine and approve the 
budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’ve certainly never heard this view, 
that the Ombudsman’s office isn’t independent. And they do 
report to the legislature, which is an all-party committee. The 
Ombudsman’s report is tabled here in this legislature, and this 
Committee of the Whole is the all-party committee. So I do 
think that that happens. And I’ve certainly never had the 
Ombudsperson or anybody else suggest to me that that office  

doesn’t have sufficient independence. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
I’m not too sure of whether or not you’ve had the opportunity to 
read the Ombudsman’s report this year. But I would invite you 
to do so because I think you would be much clearer on some of 
the difficulties that that person is experiencing. And it has 
nothing to do with women or men; it just seems that the way 
it’s set up is causing some difficulty. So there definitely is a 
problem of independence, I think, in that. 
 
So I would thank you, and I will turn this questioning back over 
to my colleague. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 
notice with interest you said that the Women’s Secretariat 
would increase sensitivity to within government as we go 
through the various kinds of policy development. Does that 
mean that new Bills and amendments go through the Women’s 
Secretariat before they come to the House? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, the items that we would be asked 
to comment on would be the ongoing working committees that 
we’re on which is substantial  about 24, I think  but also 
specific areas that there would be a need for us to comment. For 
example, when there was discussions with the federal 
government about the Canadian Health Social Transfer 
changes, the Women’s Secretariat was part of developing the 
guidelines for what should be considered in that discussion. 
 
Right now with the discussions about Canada Pension Plan, the 
Women’s Secretariat is forwarding the analysis that should take 
place to make sure that women are not further disadvantaged by 
changes to the Canada Pension Plan, being that for whatever 
reason we live longer and need support much further into life 
and often have less of an economic base on which to build that 
pension for the future. 
 
And so in fact, next week I’ll be attending a federal women’s 
ministers meeting in Winnipeg, and that’s partly where the 
agenda gets set. There’s a federal agenda that we commonly set 
and then provincial agendas where strategic plans are developed 
within the provinces. But we try to hook some of our work to 
the federal agenda so that there’s a momentum right across 
Canada for particular kinds of work to get done. 
 
So my answer I guess in long would be that we don’t look at 
everything but we do participate in most significant policy 
discussions. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair, I’m on my feet to request leave 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Today in the Speaker’s gallery we have a fine group of some 37  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

grade 5 students from Vickers School in Prince Albert. I believe 
they drove up today. They took the four hour drive. And as this 
is part of their studies about government, I welcome the 
students, and I want to welcome their teachers: Dave Monette, 
Linda Franc-Vickers, and Elaine Olexson. And I look forward 
to meeting with these students in a few moments, taking a 
photo, and also answering their questions about the proceedings 
in the House. 
 
So I ask all members to welcome this group from Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, whenever you discuss all the different tasks that you 
have in front of you, I just can’t help but be amazed how many 
things that you’re suppose to be doing. And it just leads me to 
believe that we can’t do a . . . I shouldn’t say we can’t do a 
good job of everything. But it seems it would be difficult to do 
a good job of everything you’re expected to do when there’s so 
many of them. 
 
Has there been talk of joining your department with 
Intergovernmental Affairs or something where you can get 
more of a profile and more money and more help  something 
where you actually can make a real difference? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Certainly over the year, one of the 
things we will be doing is looking at whether there’s any way to 
organizationally strengthen our responses in this area. We did a 
little thinking about it last year. It’s kind of like the advisory 
committee problem. It’s trying to figure out really what the best 
way to do it. What we’re doing right now might not be a 100 
per cent, but it works not badly. And so I would be reluctant to 
change it unless we had a pretty solid idea of how the new 
creature would be an improvement. 
 
Quite often organizational specialists have found . . . even with 
all the restructuring that’s going on everywhere, specialists who 
work in that area have found that sometimes you don’t need to 
change structures. You just need to change working 
relationships, and we spend too much time sometimes moving 
people and furniture around and not enough changing the 
relationships. So that’s partly how the interdepartmental 
committees came about: rather than merging whole 
departments, just get people working differently. And some of 
that will solve some of that problem. 
 
But it is something we think about, and perhaps when we have 
our first all-party rap session on this, we can discuss whether 
there might be a better way to do it. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, maybe until the Minister of 
Labour decides that pay equity isn’t just a women’s issue, 

 maybe we should just divide the money in half and have a 
men’s secretariat, a Women’s Secretariat, and no Department of 
Labour, and that could save some money  divide it in half 
then. 
 
I’m just wondering how many policy analyst positions do you 
have within the Women’s Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Three. 
 
Ms. Draude:  One of the last questions I have for you is, do 
you have any specific plans for anything you can do to assist the 
needs of rural women? Within business or within their farming, 
is there some specific mandate that you’ll be working on this 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again I would suggest that that might 
be an area we could pursue a bit more in discussion. It’s always 
been difficult for all the reasons that rural life presents a few 
more challenges because people are further. Travel is more 
expensive. 
 
One of the ways we’ve come up with recently that might be part 
of the solution to that is use of the Internet for those people who 
are equipped. But a lot of farms are moving in that direction. 
 
Another solution is the SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Network Corporation) link-ups. For International Women’s Day 
there was a rural SCN link-up. And although it didn’t last very 
long, the women were very excited, who participated in it, and 
quite enjoyed that ability to link up without actually having 
travel great distances from their community. 
 
So this may be something we could consider doing again that 
would make it easier for people to talk to each other without 
having to be away from home for a long time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I believe probably most of 
the women in your caucus see the need, and your department 
probably was saved because different men in the department 
felt that it would be a backlash if you cut the whole department. 
I think it would be a tremendous backlash, and there should be. 
 
But I do believe that there has to be a real focus on something 
that we can . . . either with money or with focus of making a 
difference so that we can tell people that this is what we’re 
standing for. 
 
Madam Minister, I have one more question from my colleague 
here. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I must say it’s 
been fun in the past having a conversation with yourself on the 
role of men and women in society. So we’ll continue that 
conversation as time goes on. 
 
Madam Minister, I would just want to know and be pleased to 
find out whether or not you have some input from the group 
called SWAN; it’s the Saskatchewan Women's Agricultural 
Network. And if so, what kind of issues have they brought to 
your attention, and how do they feel that you would have been  



1786  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

able to support them or help them out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  At this particular point, it would be a 
lot like the relationship we have with a lot of organizations 
around the province. We have an open door. They contact us if 
there’s something they want to discuss. Certainly they’re 
concerned about child care issues, the violence issues, and so 
the initiatives in those areas would be meaningful. 
 
I spoke actually at their annual conference in Saskatoon this 
year as did the Minister of Agriculture. So we had an 
opportunity for some informal discussion there. Probably one of 
the reason we hear a little bit less is just by the very 
self-sufficient nature of rural communities. But there has been a 
long-standing concern about child care and how to best provide 
it in areas where people live increasingly far apart, and it’s not 
an easily solved answer. 
 
But we do set goals. Just to get back to something that’s been a 
theme running through both of your questions, we do set goals, 
again both in relation to the federal goals which in this last year 
have been to establish economic indicators for women’s 
well-being, to look at women in restructuring, women in 
business, and financial primary type of information for women. 
And as a result of our commitment to that national agenda, we 
recently produced a booklet on all the various supports and 
avenues there are for women to participate in small business. 
 
And on the provincial level, I would say that in the last year 
we’ve been making efforts to have a much stronger relationship 
to aboriginal, immigrant, and farm women, as well as the 
business agenda. So it is a broadening out. 
 
And you’re right; it is difficult to serve that many masters. But 
we try to pick a strategy for what we’re working on for the year, 
get it done, and then the next year reassess it. If we’re not 
finished, finish it, or if it’s not as relevant, move on to new 
areas where success seems possible. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I have one question, 
and I presume it might take you a little time to answer it. And 
after that time, our colleague from Moosomin will be asking a 
few questions of you. 
 
Madam Minister, in regards to child care in rural areas . . . and 
there’s enough controversy on this, goodness only knows. But 
I’ve had some inquiry from the Yorkton area about people 
concerned that . . . or parents concerned that as they’re at work, 
the children that do come home from school are coming home 
from school at 3:30, 4 o’clock, somewhere in there, and the 
parents are not home till 5 or 5:30. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now they understand that there is danger and their kid is either 
roaming the streets getting into trouble or in fact having 
someone take advantage of them or whatever, or just they don’t 
want them sort of at loose ends all over the place, especially the 
young children. 
 
Now apparently in that community there is a child care home  

approved for that, but I understand that the numbers of children 
that can be taken in are up to eight. Is that correct? Do you 
know whether or not that’s true? I’ve heard it’s seven or eight 
and that they can’t get approval for any more. And in fact they 
don’t have another place there. They don’t have another place 
where these children can be taken in for that hour or two or 
whatever it may be for their safety. If you have some knowledge 
of this, I would appreciate a comment on it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  My detailed knowledge of the day care 
regulations is sketchy. I would only say that one of the ongoing 
debates in the whole child care area is how much standard is 
required, and how much to give parents leeway to pick 
whatever kind of care they choose to pick for their children. 
You know, in the cut-off of where government ceases to be 
responsible for assuring that there are safety standards, health 
standards, etc., in the child care, you really would be best put to 
ask those questions specifically of Minister Calvert. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I intended to do that. 
I’m just really very afraid that I won’t have enough time to ask 
him all the questions that I have coming for him. But I thank 
you, and I will turn over the questions to anyone else that may 
want to present some to you. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, and your staff, I’ve been listening very inquisitively 
and with a lot of interest to the debate that’s taken place this 
afternoon. I’m just a little afraid that since the questions coming 
from the opposition members happen to be two of the female 
gender in this Assembly, and Madam Minister and her staff, I 
may appear like a real male chauvinist this afternoon. But 
there’s some very significant questions to ask and to raise. 
 
And one of those . . . I just had to take in the comments you 
made about child care. And first of all let me say that the 
community of Moosomin, there were a number of women in 
that . . . or individuals had been approached about a child care 
program. And I believe that program is off and running. Now I 
don’t believe your ministry really had any involvement in that 
program, but I think the people in Moosomin who put that 
program together  and I believe they worked in some cases 
with Social Services and some assistance there  are certainly 
pleased to have it. 
 
But at the same time there are many people across this province, 
women in particular, who have become somewhat offended 
when we talk about child care, and we forget about one sector 
of our society. And I just want to raise that issue for the women 
who chose to be homemakers and chose to be care-givers . . . 
and recognize the fact that I don’t know if we can replace the 
service that they offer in our society in providing for young 
children and families. 
 
And also a point that we noticed on the census form this year, 
the first time it’s ever been there, is there was, I believe, a 
question that addressed the value of work that women who 
would stay at home to, if you will, the choice of theirs to stay at 
home and provide a home environment, look after the family, 
and not go out and work. The value of their work in the home 
so far for many years has been forgotten. And I think, Madam  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

Minister, we need to keep this in the back of our mind as well 
that there is a role to play for women in that area. 
 
I do have a concern as well, and I come back to a point brought 
forward, I believe, by the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
talking about . . . I look at the Women’s Secretariat. I see the 
expenditures here, and I’m almost reaching the point . . . and I 
think the member mentioned maybe splitting the funding. I 
don’t know if we’ve split the funding, but I think there are 
many men across this province who are beginning to think the 
pendulum has swung so far, we might have to get a men’s 
secretariat in motion just to bring the pendulum just a little 
closer back to the centre again. I’m not sure about that. 
 
But the thing is, Madam Minister, you talked about the fact of 
equality. And I listened to the Minister of Health when we 
talked about the new boards, the structure of the boards, and the 
reason that there are still four appointees so that we can 
guarantee that there is representation from all the sectors of our 
society, and specifically women on boards. 
 
Well I look across this province and I look at the board 
make-up of many health boards through the years, and I 
specifically note that in many cases a lot of members on many 
of those health boards through the years were women. So I 
think even society itself recognizes there is a place for women 
on boards. 
 
So while this isn’t a specific issue that relates to you, I do have 
a concern with the fact that we use . . . your government uses 
these lame duck excuses for their board appointees all the time 
rather than open and accountable boards, even having a 
committee of the legislature appoint board members. 
 
I have a question for you though, Madam Minister. Where was 
your department, Madam Minister . . . you just made a 
comment a moment ago about women in this province. And I 
think it’s general knowledge across the nation that women in 
many cases tend to be the lower income earners, especially if 
they’re single parent families or if the spouse happens to pass 
on when they’re a young age and doesn’t leave them in a 
position where there’s a lot of income. 
 
I actually have had a lot of women come to me, women who are 
in their later years of life, as their spouse has passed on and 
because there wasn’t really anything built up in the past, or they 
struggled through life, didn’t have a lot to live on. 
 
And I would like to know where your department was when 
your government discontinued the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
This was a pension plan, Madam Minister, that I think . . . and 
I’d be surprised if your department and certainly members of 
your government caucus didn’t receive letters from people right 
across this province, asking why you scrapped the program that 
was actually put in place and would have been addressing in the 
long term, the needs of these low income individuals in our 
society, specifically women, that would give them something to 
look forward to when they retired. 
 
And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, if you could respond to 
that, and ask where you were when that program was scrapped. 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I have a quick run-down of some of the 
points you raised. For the first time the federal census will be 
keeping track of unpaid hours of work that is done, and I think 
primarily this has been at the urging of women who feel that 
what you don’t pay for you don’t value. And so it’s an attempt 
to put a value on the unpaid work that is done many times by 
women. And so the federal census will be doing that. 
 
But when you talked about the need for a men’s secretariat, 
Chief Justice Bertha Wilson made an interesting comment 
during the aboriginal commission. And she said what’s 
important when you’re making change is not necessarily that 
the opportunities are equal but that the results are equal. 
 
And the comparison I would use is for a person in a wheelchair 
to go up those steps, what would make that an even result is 
that they would end up at the top of those steps the same as I 
would, but how we would get there might be different. 
 
And so equality is not all merely in having the same door 
opened. Sometimes there’s other things required. In terms of 
women on health boards, that wouldn’t surprise me because one 
of the ghettoization problems that women have had in society is 
that they’re primarily seen as care-givers. And it’s good that 
they be represented on health boards, but not just relegated to 
the role of care-givers as a single opportunity that they might 
have. 
 
As far as the lower income earners go and the pension issue, it 
is I think unfortunate that the program that was started under 
the previous Conservative government was not affordable, 
because it was a good program. But it was not an affordable 
program because all of the matching money came directly from 
taxpayers. And I guess you’d have to square that circle as to 
how you were going to pay for it. 
 
I think it’s worth raising the issue again in the context of the 
discussion in the CPP reform  the Canadian Pension Plan. 
Because a plan like that would probably be more sustainable if 
shared out across the federal level. And certainly when I lived 
in the North and what not, I met many women who were 
trappers, fisherwomen, and what not. And they had never in 
their lives contributed to a pension nor would they have enough 
money to put into one. Even if somebody else matched it, they 
just would not have the surplus income to do that. 
 
So really the best solution for most people is a universal Canada 
Pension Plan, and that’s why this pension discussion will be so 
important. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, might I remind you, we 
do have a pension plan in this province already that is 
unaffordable  a pension plan that has an unfunded liability of 
almost $3 billion basically, better than $3 billion; a pension 
plan that affects a few people across this province, most of 
them public sector people. And, Madam Minister, that pension 
plan is going to cost the people of Saskatchewan more money 
than the Saskatchewan Pension Plan ever would have cost. 
 
The realities are, Madam Minister, even if it had some 
problems, some minor changes . . . and people would have  



1788  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

accepted that, would have addressed some of those concerns. 
And so I don’t think it is a good enough excuse to say, well we 
had to dump it because it wasn’t affordable. The realities were 
it was brought in by a former administration . . . wouldn’t look 
to continue with something that may in the long run be a benefit 
to the people of the province. 
 
So I for one, I’m sorry, cannot buy the fact that it was 
unaffordable when we’ve got a major public pension plan right 
now that’s going to be a major cost to governments down the 
road. Your ministry in the beginning, starting with your 
government, as members retire and draw on that plan . . . and 
should the Premier retire before the next election, he’s going to 
be one of the first individuals who’s going to benefit from that 
unfunded pension liability. 
 
And Madam Minister . . . And we’ve got the member from 
Regina South chirping away again. I enjoy it when he gets into 
the debate. 
 
Madam Minister, you made a comment about a number of 
services, and I’m not exactly sure. You were listing a number of 
services to either the member from Humboldt or the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena. You mentioned about the availability 
of 1-800 sex line, the farm stress line, and abuse program. And 
I just don’t remember all the programs. 
 
But does your department administer . . . are you involved in 
these programs at all, Madam Minister? Or are they just 
programs available through other services and areas? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We don’t directly program. We’re a 
policy, information and, on some level, advocate within 
government. But we don’t do direct program delivery. We do 
provide some training in areas of new legislative development 
and what not, so that people know how to implement the 
legislation. But we’re not a direct service body. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 
clarification, because I wasn’t exactly sure if you were actually 
providing those services. My understanding was that they’re 
available in other government agencies and covered there, and 
that you’re not really directly involved in the funding of them. 
 
Madam Minister. we talk about women. How many deputy 
ministers or women in deputy minister roles have we got in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  At this particular point at that particular 
level, there are none. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I think that’s unfortunate, Madam Minister, in 
view of the fact that there’s been a lot of proposals brought 
forward, or suggestions brought forward that this is important. 
 
But, Madam Minister, I guess when I look at that, and I’m sure 
that maybe in your position as a minister of the Crown, even the 
Premier’s position, the fact that there aren’t any today, at the 
present time anyway, maybe just eats a little bit away at it 
because of the fact that that’s one of the things you’ve been 
promoting for so long. 

What about women heading Crown corporations? How many 
women are heading Crown corporations in this province? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There’s a number of women in senior 
levels of the Crowns, but none heading the Crown corporations. 
 
One of the tasks I’ve certainly set myself as minister is to make 
some effort to bring forward names for consideration. Because 
one of the difficulties is that often when jobs are available . . . I 
hope I don’t make any of my women associates angry when I 
say this, but there’s two parts to a job. One is the job being 
available and the other one is believing that you are a person 
who might do that job. 
 
It’s not much different than the decision I made when I ran for 
office. I had never considered myself as a person who might run 
for office. And sometimes in those instances you had to actively 
encourage people to recognize that they have the skills, they 
have the ability, and what’s holding them back. 
 
So it’s sort of a two-part thing. Sometimes you need to make a 
little extra effort there to equalize the result. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I certainly agree with you, Madam Minister. And 
I think for all intents and purposes many of the women, if not 
all of the women across this province, would like to feel that the 
reason they received a certain job or got a certain job was 
because, number one, they saw a job offered and they made an 
application because they believed they could do the job  that 
they were qualified. And at the end of the day that job was 
given and awarded to them based on their qualifications and 
their ability to perform their duties, or perform that job, fulfil 
the roles of that job rather than the fact of their female gender. 
 
And I think that’s very important, and it’s maybe time we 
recognized that and acknowledged it even more. 
 
The fact that you’re here today is an indication that the people 
in your constituency felt that you had the qualifications and the 
abilities to represent them in this Assembly. And on many 
occasions I have to admit that you’re doing an excellent job, 
and we appreciate that. 
 
However, Madam Minister, of the $901,000 that you’re 
spending in Women’s Secretariat, how much money really is 
tied up in administrative procedures and how much money 
actually goes into real services that benefit the people of this 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I would say that if it were not for some 
of the work done by the Women’s Secretariat, there would be a 
great deal of services and money that would not end up in a lot 
of people’s pockets. And you can’t look at a policy non-service 
delivery organization in the same way that you would look at a 
service delivery in terms of per cent of administrative costs, 
because we are a policy body; we’re not a service body. 
 
And where we would have impact is on things like maintenance 
orders, on things like the inability to kick a single parent family  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

out of a place where they’re living, the need for pension reform 
to make sure that senior women are adequately provided for. So 
the money ends up directly in people’s pockets by virtue of the 
changes that are made, but it would not be part of our budget to 
transfer it there. 
 
It’s really very difficult to measure this kind of an activity in 
that way. You have to measure it by the substantiveness of the 
changes involved. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, just one final comment 
before I take my place. I think, Madam Minister, when we look 
at the expenditure . . . and I realize the expenditure in Women’s 
Secretariat isn’t that large, but at $901,000, it’s a significant 
amount of money. We’ve seen over the last number of days, 
Madam Minister, men and women across this province 
becoming very distraught over the amount of services being 
offered in health care, and certainly education is another area 
that I’m starting to have people raise concerns. 
 
Proposals have been put forward; they’ve been rejected. In 
health care specifically the issue . . . and many of the 
individuals we’re dealing with who are calling us are actually 
widows or older individuals who are very concerned about the 
services that they have had and maybe began to take for granted 
because they were there. They were being taken care of, and 
now they may find they’re going to have to look elsewhere for 
some of the services they need and require. 
 
While I realize this 901,000 will not meet all the needs, I guess 
I come to one point, Madam Minister. I think it’s time for 
governments, your government included, to really assess how 
they’re spending the money and the importance of maintaining, 
if you will, departments or directorships versus cutting 
departments and looking at providing a need that meets the real 
need out there of, say, the women in our society. 
 
And I guess my final comment would be this. At the present 
time, I do not know if the people of Saskatchewan are really 
benefiting from the Women’s Secretariat. I believe a lot of 
women in this province could certainly receive the same 
benefits from many of the ministries that already exist and all 
the programs that are being offered there. And that the dollars 
in this program . . . even as the Premier commented today, he 
could pay his interest for one year just by looking at this 
department. And then use that other $900,000 to provide 
services to meet the real needs that people are looking at in this 
province. 
 
So while I acknowledge there are some areas that you certainly 
offer a service, Madam Minister, we certainly could provide 
services that . . . the bottom line for people is what really meets 
them at home today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I do feel the need to respond to that. 
You’re no doubt familiar with the term levering, and sometimes 
a small expenditure can lever many other dollars. And for the 
900,000 that might be spent in us working on issues of 
maintenance enforcement, for example, we would lever a large 
amount of money out of errant fathers’ pockets to go towards 
the support of their children in the province. So it would be  

900,000 very well spent, because if we divvied that 900,000 up 
amongst all the women who were not receiving adequate 
maintenance support, it wouldn’t go very far. 
 
The 900,000 is well spent when it assists in new labour 
standards legislation that require people to receive pro-rated 
benefits. And if we divided that 900,000 up between all of 
those workers it would not create much result, but if used to 
lever those appropriate benefits from the pockets of their 
employers, then it probably is money well spent. Because if you 
can’t make a living by working, then I would challenge 
someone to ask me how else you’re supposed to do it. 
 
And I think if you could look at it that way, yes, other 
departments may think of these things if we didn’t exist, but the 
fact that the inequality has persisted over so many years would 
suggest that they don’t always. So I guess a government needs a 
soul as well as services, and hopefully we provide a little chunk 
of that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Madam Minister. And while we may 
agree to differ on some of our views and observations and the 
services, I want to thank you for your time and the of presence 
of your officials in the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  And I’d like to thank all the members 
for their excellent and thoughtful questions. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The men should 
enjoy this, but you know, a woman’s work is never done, and I 
do have couple more questions that have come to mind, and 
actually some comments. 
 
The member from Moosomin has just stated that he would hope 
that women should get the job of . . . jobs out there or 
management positions, etc., because of qualifications and their 
abilities and so on. And we will all certainly hope so too, but 
we know that this is not the case. 
 
It is simply viewed out there that men . . . they’re used to 
having men in those positions and there is quite a way to come. 
And I think that this is also an attitudinal change and it has to 
be coming from some of the males in our society if in fact his 
hope and his wish that this comes to pass, will be. 
 
I just want to make one last comment about the situation of 
rural women, and again it refers to the member from 
Moosomin’s comments. And you know, women are valued, 
parenting is valued, it really is. But it’s a pretty lonely life. And 
I think that if in fact we do cherish and we do value the 
parenting skills and the women that choose to stay at home and 
to become home builders, community builders, and worth 
builders in children, you know, it’s only going to come about if 
they understand and they know they’re valued. And so that has 
to come from those spouses that are with them and the 
communities around them. 
 
We have to up the profile, I guess, of the importance and the 
value of parenting and how very important it is that children are 
nurtured and that they feel that they have a place of importance 
and worth so that their energies that they have, you know, can  



1790  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

reach out and turn to everybody in society and to end up 
contributing and feeling good about themselves. That doesn’t 
happen unless we have good parenting. 
 
Now it’s really incumbent upon the men in our society then 
and/or the other spouse, whoever it may be, if in fact the father 
is at home as the primary care-giver, for the woman to give him 
that encouragement. But I think that’s been a major problem 
with women in the past  everybody wants to feel that they’re 
valued and they’re important, and if they’re not told this, it 
can’t just be assumed. 
 
So that’s one way I think that men could help and it wouldn’t 
cost any money. So I thank you, Madam Minister, for your 
comments and your help today. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 91  An Act to amend The Summary Offences 
Procedure Act, 1990 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 
1996. 
 
The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 prescribes the 
procedure to be used for administering the charging of offences 
created by provincial legislation. It also prescribes the court’s 
powers and duties respecting provincial offences and the 
enforcement of fines resulting from conviction. 
 
Pursuant to this legislation, over 100,000 tickets are issued each 
year for contravention of provincial regulatory statutes. Most of 
these tickets are for offences related to driving. However, a 
broad range of activities is regulated which can lead to 
offences. Some examples are the sale and use of alcohol, 
fishing and hunting, the use of provincial parks facilities, 
corporate behaviour regulated by The Securities Act, and the 
use or abuse of the environment. 
 
This legislation is used on a daily basis by peace officers, court 
staff, judges, and municipalities. It is changed every few years 
to respond to requests for additional clarity or to deal with new 
issues that have arisen. 
 
Suggestions for improvements to the summary offences 
procedure come not only from persons who administer the 
legislation on a regular basis. On occasion, a citizen affected by 
the outcome of a case brings to the attention of the Minister of 
Justice a change that can improve our judicial system. For 
instance, a recent change to the regulations allows peace 
officers issuing a ticket to require a court appearance in any 
case where the commission of an offence results in the injury or  

death of person. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In these circumstances, the individual 
would not have the option of simply paying the amount shown 
on the ticket. Previously a court appearance could be required in 
these circumstances, but the administrative procedure to 
achieve this was cumbersome. 
 
This change was made in response to requests from a person 
who feels that the system was deficient in its handling of a 
particular case. The change to the regulations is one small step 
to improve these kinds of situations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It may appear to be insignificant, however 
it demonstrates not only that we are listening and we’ll make 
improvements to the legislation to make it as fair as possible, 
but also that individuals can make a difference in our legal 
system. 
 
One amendment I am introducing at this time will allow judges 
to specifically order restitution as a sentence. This will give 
judges the ability, in appropriate situations, to order a person 
convicted of an offence to repay persons whose property was 
lost or damaged as a result of the commission of the offence. 
 
Currently, people who have suffered property losses due to an 
offence are able to initiate a small claims action to repair or 
replace their property. However, if it is a case where the judge 
thinks restitution is a proper remedy, this amendment will 
enable a judge to spare the victim from taking this additional 
action. This amendment is modelled on a similar restitution 
remedy which has been added to the Criminal Code and which 
is expected to come into force this year. Our new restitution 
remedy is not expected to be widely used. However, we think 
that it should be available in appropriate situations. 
 
Another amendment will allow judges to issue distress warrants 
for seizure of the goods of a corporation where the corporation 
has outstanding fines. In fact this enforcement remedy is also 
expected to be used rarely. Generally, most corporations pay 
their fines, and we have a low level of outstanding corporate 
fines. Nevertheless, effective enforcement remedies should be 
available. 
 
From the public policy point of view, fines are an inexpensive 
method of penalizing an offender. At the same time, fines 
generate revenues which can be used to offset some of the costs 
of providing the administrative services to deal with 
contravention of provincial laws. Failure to make effective 
efforts to collect outstanding fines can call into question the 
credibility of the court process and the justice system. The 
amendments I have just described are consistent with the 
objective of having the person or corporation convicted be 
accountable for his, her, or its actions. 
 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

Another amendment I am introducing will prevent 
municipalities from using provisions of The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 to bypass the usual summary offence procedure with 
respect to traffic offences. The availability of photo-radar 
technology makes it possible to obtain evidence without an 
officer being present to witness the offence or serve the ticket. 
 
A provision in The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 allows 
municipalities to set a fine to be paid by a person who has 
contravened a designated by-law offence and avoid prosecution 
for the offence. This provision is typically used for parking 
offences. The person who receives a ticket can pay a reduced 
amount to the municipality and not be charged with the offence. 
 
This amendment will ensure uniformity and consistency 
throughout the province respecting procedures and 
consequences which apply to speeding and other moving traffic 
offences. 
 
Two other amendments are being added to increase consistency 
with Criminal Code provisions. 
 
The first is our definition of prosecutor. The present definition 
involves extra paperwork to appoint agents in situations where 
a Crown prosecutor does not conduct all or part of the 
prosecution. The extra procedural step in our present legislation 
does not exist in the Criminal Code or the provincial offences 
legislation of most other provinces. The change to the definition 
does not change who will prosecute offences, and no change in 
practice will occur. However, the extra red-tape aspect of the 
definition is removed. 
 
The second change that will ensure consistency with the 
Criminal Code is a change to reference section numbers of the 
code that will change when the new federal sentencing Bill 
comes into force. This is expected to occur in September 1996. 
 
Finally, a minor amendment will clarify the rule relating to 
when judges may order that a person will be incarcerated for 
failure to pay a fine. The rules set out in the legislation are not 
being changed. However, there appears to be some lack of 
consistency in interpretation; thus any ambiguity which may be 
giving rise to this inconsistency is removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act seems to be 
mainly a housekeeping Bill. Therefore I would just like to speak 
briefly on some of the changes and their implications before it 
passes on to committee stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the amendments proposed in this Bill are 
making small changes to existing legislation. In the case of 
section 4, the changes are necessary because the Criminal Code 
is changing and our provincial laws are borrowed directly from 
the code. The renumbering of the sections in our provincial Act 
must mirror the renumbering in the Criminal Code. Obviously, 
Mr. Speaker, we have no objection to these types of changes.  

They will have little effect on the average person, which is who 
we are in this House to represent. 
 
Other simple changes outlined in the Bill may have a small 
effect on municipalities, however. For example, the Bill 
expands the definition of peace officer to include by-law 
enforcement officers appointed under The Rural Municipality 
Act. Since it already includes officers under the urban and 
northern municipality Acts, this does seem like a logical 
amendment. 
 
It’s nice to see that this government can make a change that 
actually benefits rural municipalities. Usually all we have seen 
from this government is hit after hit on our RMs (rural 
municipality), which of course, Mr. Speaker, brings up another 
proposed change in this Bill. 
 
This is a section which prohibits municipalities from offering 
discounts on speeding tickets. Mr. Speaker, apparently this 
government is worried that communities will buy photo-radar 
machines and issue a lot of speeding tickets and offer discounts 
to people who will pay them within an early time frame. From 
my understanding, the government doesn’t want discounts 
offered by municipalities on speeding or other moving traffic 
offences. Mr. Speaker, the municipal representatives we have 
spoken with resent the government’s attempt to clip their wings. 
 
So many of the Bills introduced in the House this session have 
shown that the government wants to take control away from the 
municipalities and put it back into their own hands. 
Unfortunately, even when municipalities protest, the 
government doesn’t listen and these changes go ahead anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t want municipalities using speeding 
tickets as a cash cow either. Speeding is a serious offence that 
can cause accidents and claim lives, so it should be prevented in 
the name of safety, not in the name of profit. But it would be 
unfair to assume this is what municipalities are planning to do. 
It shows that this government has very little faith in local 
governments. And I think that’s a sad statement of this 
government’s faith in the people of Saskatchewan. Once again, 
the government seems to be saying that they know best and that 
no one else can be trusted. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe our local governments can be 
trusted and will be acting in the best interests of their people. 
Maybe the government is scared that the municipalities will 
need to raise money because they won’t be able to withstand the 
deep funding cuts imposed on them by the NDP government. 
Maybe the members opposite know that municipalities are 
staggering under these cuts and trying desperately to survive. 
Maybe that is the reasoning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one section of this Bill that we feel is 
particularly positive. That’s the section that will allow judges to 
make people pay restitution to victims of provincial offences. 
 
How many stories have we heard about break-ins or car thefts 
or vandalism, where the innocent owner ends up carrying the  



1792  Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

costs? This is especially true in crimes committed by younger 
offenders. The court gives them a slap on the wrist while the 
victim is forced to forgo a vacation to pay insurance 
deductibles. I don’t think this acts as a deterrent to the offender. 
They are not forced to realize that they have significantly 
affected the lives of their victims. Instead of taking personal 
responsibility for their actions, they are allowed to slough it off 
as society’s problems. By no means is this fair, Mr. Speaker, 
and I am happy that this government has realized this and taken 
at least this small step to try to change it. 
 
As I understand it, this Bill will let judges order the offender to 
cover the cost of restoring or replacing property. This will even 
be enforceable when the property is sold to an unknowing third 
party. That’s great news, Mr. Speaker. It’s about time our 
society stopped punishing the victims and started punishing the 
criminals. It is what people have been telling politicians for 
years. It’s about time that someone listened and made a positive 
move on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, there are several other small changes 
in this Bill and we will have some questions for this 
government when it reaches the committee stage. However at 
this time we see no reason to hold it up. Our concerns will be 
better addressed at that later time. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1763 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1764 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1764 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1764 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................1764 
Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................1784 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Shelly Wagner Elected President of Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association  

Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1764 
Regina Transition House Spring Fund-raiser and National Council of Women Meeting  

Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1764 
National Women’s March Against Poverty  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1765 
Contributions of Kelran Microbiologicals  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1765 
Future of Geriatric Unit in Moose Jaw  

Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1765 
Canadian AIDS Memorial Quilt  

Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1765 
Northern Job Training Programs 

Langford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1766 
Makwa Sahgaiehcan’s Community Justice Committee  

Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................1766 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Health Care Funding  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1766 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1766 

St. Joseph’s Hospital Funding  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1767 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1767 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1768 
Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................1768 
Wiens ...............................................................................................................................................................................1768, 1770 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1770 

Long-term Care  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1770 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER  
Leslie W. Lee Celebrates 100th Birthday  

Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1772 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1772 



 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable)  
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1772 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS  
Extended House Hours  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Justice  Vote 3  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
Osika ................................................................................................................................................................................1773, 1777 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1776 

General Revenue Fund  
Women’s Secretariat  Vote 41  

Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
Julé ..............................................................................................................................................................1780, 1784, 1785, 1789 
Draude .............................................................................................................................................................................1782, 1784 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1786 

SECOND READINGS  
Bill No. 91  An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990  

Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1791 

 
 
 
 


