



















































Hansard: May 13, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1629 

 May 13, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The Department of Social Services were 

last, or pardon me, were before this committee two previous 

occasions, April 3 and May 9, and then again this evening. I 

invite the minister to introduce his officials before we open up 

the questioning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’ll be 

assisted tonight by Mr. Neil Yeates, who is the associate deputy 

of Social Services; behind Neil, Mr. Vic Taylor, assistant 

deputy of the Department of Social Services; directly behind 

me, Mr. Phil Walsh, who is the executive director of income 

security; and to my left Mr. Richard Hazel, our executive 

director, family and youth services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 

minister and his officials this evening. 

 

Mr. Minister, we left off the other day talking about some of the 

income security and support totals and the variance in what has 

been supplied in the past and what is supplied in this budget. I 

was I believe, speaking to you about the SAP (Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan) and FIP (Family Income Plan) and SIP 

(Saskatchewan Income Plan), and I would like to particularly 

zero in a bit on the Saskatchewan Income Plan for seniors at 

this moment if we could. 

 

When I look at the budget, and I recognize that I guess we 

would qualify them as poor seniors and the benefits going to 

them, the total amount for that as I read it is $14 million. And 

I’m kind of wondering, Mr. Minister, with increased drug costs 

and living costs, etc., seniors seem to be — or a good portion of 

them that I’ve talked to — seem to be having difficulty. A 

number of them are talking to me about not having the money 

for the drugs that they need in order to ensure that their health 

remains stable. 

 

In particular, I’ve heard a couple of stories from my 

constituency about seniors not being able to afford the drug 

costs, and they have actually entered the hospital or come to the 

hospital stating that they needed some care, and obviously they 

did, because diabetes and high blood pressure, etc., were 

plaguing them. And when asked how come they weren’t taking 

their medication, they did mention that they did not have the 

money for the medication. 

 

And so I am really quite concerned about those great number of 

seniors out there who don’t have the proper drugs that they need 

to ensure their health is intact. And I’m wondering, you know, 

if in fact the funding for poor seniors has remained the same at 

14 million — if you could verify that, and if you could  

explain to me how you think that seniors will survive increased 

drug costs and costs of living. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, to the member’s first 

question, yes the amount is the same in this budget as last, 

around the $14 million figure for the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan. The member will know that the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan is directed to seniors with very, very low income and it 

triggers automatically through a combination of federal benefits 

and so on. 

 

The question about drug coverage, I can inform the member 

that if a senior qualifies for the Saskatchewan Income Plan in 

our province, there is some special drug coverage for those 

seniors. Under the plan, they are required to provide a 

semi-annual deductible of $100 and then a consumer 

co-payment of $35. So there is that extra level of protection for 

those very low income seniors. 

 

I think we all recognize that drug costs are a significant cost of 

providing health care today in our province for everyone. 

Tomorrow I’ll be meeting with a relatively large group of 

seniors out in Fort Qu’Appelle, and I know one of the issues 

that they have asked me to address has to do with patent 

protection for prescription drugs. And I think we know that that 

has caused significant increases in drug costs. And so that’s an 

important issue as we discuss the costs of drugs for seniors and 

for everybody. 

 

But I can report to the member that any senior who is eligible 

for the Saskatchewan Income Plan benefits, does receive the 

supplemental health coverage for drugs. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, on the 

same note, I notice that there is going to be a combination of the 

payments for seniors under OAS (Old Age Security), and GIS 

(guaranteed income supplement), and SIP and I also recognize 

that OAS, I believe, and GIS were taxable incomes, whereas 

SIP was not. 

 

Now in this combination that’s happening — if I understand 

correctly — one, these are combined into one total payment. I 

am wondering whether or not our seniors will become taxable 

for the SIP with this arrangement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our understanding is that the 

OAS and GIS in fact are tax exempt. But we can assure the 

member that, with the combination of the payments into one 

cheque, there will be no change in the taxation level of the SIP 

benefit. 

 

What we’ve tried to achieve here is: one, some administrative 

saving and some reduction of duplication and ease for the 

senior by putting these benefits into one monthly cheque 

because they all are based on the same application. We, in 

cooperation with the federal government, believe this is a much 

simpler method by which to deliver the benefit. And it does 

save some administrative cost. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m a little  

  



1630  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

bit concerned about the problems associated with health reform 

as they affect our seniors. 

 

Again in my constituency, I’ve had a senior that was in the 

University Hospital for four months. And she was discharged 

about a month ago and has since spent one week in the 

Humboldt hospital. She’s now at home and she is going to see 

her doctor, you know, I guess occasionally. The problem is that 

she can’t be home alone and she needs someone there with her. 

 

Now home care does provide six hours a day for her two days a 

week. And the fact is that she needs more home care than that. 

So when she talked to the home care co-ordinator — or her 

family did — about this, they suggested that she go to the 

nursing home. We have one in Humboldt and we also have one 

close by in Meadow Lake. And so the point is that she can’t 

afford it. She can’t afford to go there. It’s going to cost the 

family or her quite a lot of money. And she believes that home 

care . . . and she knows that home care will also cost her a 

certain amount of money, but she believes she can afford this. 

 

Now this question I have revolves around some, I think, pretty 

grave problems regarding home care for the seniors and for 

disabled in our health district. And I have mentioned this to the 

Minister of Health — and I know that it’s under his auspices — 

but I also ask you to comment on this, and to see if maybe you 

can talk to the Minister of Health, to please do check into the 

home care situation and home-based services in the Central 

Plains Health District to ensure that home care to our seniors is 

readily available, especially when they’re in serious condition 

as this woman is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’ll be glad to pass the 

member’s concern on to the Minister of Health. I know that she 

has raised the concern before in the House. I heard some of her 

comment — I think it was yesterday — addressing this same 

issue. And I will be . . . I’m happy to pass that concern along to 

the Minister of Health. 

 

We have as a government, as the member will know, focused 

much of our effort over the last number of years in trying to 

build that base of community-based services, including home 

care as well as institutional care. There are some miles yet to 

go; there’s no doubt about that. 

 

And I know that a number of the seniors’ organizations in our 

province are looking at some other options that might serve the 

needs of individuals who perhaps do not require the institutional 

care but might require a greater level of care in their own home, 

personal or otherwise. 

 

I do want to remind the member though, in terms of the 

institutional care, in terms of the nursing home care, the 

resident rates are based on pension income. And so there should 

be no circumstance where one is unable to afford, if it’s 

required, that higher level of care in the institution. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 

like to just go now, if I can, to child care. And I note that there 

is to be a one-time $1 million increase in child care capital 

grants for facility upgrade. How many child care facilities are  

there that will be eligible for those grants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I just want to inform 

members that we’ve also been joined by Mr. Bob Wihlidal from 

the department, whose entry was perfect because he was able to 

provide the exact number for us. And the exact number of 

centres which will be eligible for the facility upgrade money 

will be 130. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. What will be the criteria for dividing 

up that money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we’re still yet in sort of the 

finishing touches of developing all the criteria to share with the 

centres, but essentially it will follow this kind of priority. We 

have some centres in the province where the current physical 

plant has been in some ways grandfathered in light of new and 

changing regulations. And so the first call on the money would 

be any major upgrades or any renovations that would address 

any issues that are outstanding in regard to meeting code 

regulations and day care regulations around window size, floor 

space, and that sort of thing. 

 

We then would be looking at the kind of perhaps more creative 

options that centres may come forward with — creation of new 

play areas, that sort of thing. We would also be looking at a 

willingness to provide for equipment — equipment needs 

within the centres. And then in some circumstances it may be a 

major upgrade of the centre — expansion. So it’s that sort of 

continuum. But we’ll put first on the list, I think, those who 

have some upgrading needs to meet regulation. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When will the facilities 

actually be notified by you about the criteria that they must 

meet? How soon will that happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we hope to have all the 

information out to the centres within the next few weeks — a 

month at the latest, the officials tell me. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to know, Mr. 

Minister, will in-home child care centres be eligible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair, the answer is no. It’ll be 

the centres only. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 

recognize or took note of the fact that Social Services 

participates on an interdisciplinary committee, co-chaired by the 

Children’s Advocate and provincial coroner, which was 

recently established to explore the development of a common 

database and to examine the full scope of child deaths in 

Saskatchewan. And in regard to that, I was wondering when 

was the interdisciplinary committee given the mandate to 

explore the scope of child deaths in Saskatchewan? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, in February of this year, 

earlier this year. We think it was February — late January, 

February. 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I was wondering about that, because 

I’m also wondering if you can tell me why there wasn’t a news 

release issued from the department on this topic. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Because, Mr. Chair, essentially this has 

been an internal process — the department working with many 

other departments of government or other officials, in this case 

the coroner and the child advocate. They were involved in 

many, many processes, this being one. It’s not something we 

would typically, or I think traditionally, announce by way of a 

news conference. This is not to diminish the importance of 

what’s being undertaken here, and I know the member’s interest 

in the area. But at this point it has been internal with these very 

significant players — the Children’s Advocate, the coroner, the 

department, and other agencies of government or other 

departments. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you could 

qualify for me, or clarify for me I guess I’d say, how many 

people, besides the Children’s Advocate and the provincial 

coroner, sit on this interdisciplinary committee and who are 

they exactly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we do not have the actual 

names here with us tonight. Participating, as we’ve identified, 

would be the Children’s Advocate, the provincial coroner, 

representatives of a variety of government departments — 

Justice; likely Health; the Department of Social Services. We 

can provide the member a list of the actual names and their 

relationships, their areas of responsibility, very quickly. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Yes, I would appreciate that, Minister, and I thank 

you. I’m curious to know, how soon after a child dies does the 

coroner notify Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just to be . . . just to clarify, the 

notification process to the department will only occur when the 

coroner is aware that there is a connection between the child or 

his or her family and the department, or where he thinks there 

should have been or should be a connection. And so the time 

line is almost entirely dependent on the coroner’s decision. It 

may be relatively immediate, or it may be somewhat delayed if 

there’s a matter of an autopsy and that sort of thing. But the 

decision is the coroner’s, and it will only occur when the 

coroner believes that there is a connection between the child 

involved and the department. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order, order. I wish to remind 

members that laptop computers are allowed in the Legislative 

Chamber but subject to the following restrictions: (a) they’re 

permitted for use in the Committee of the Whole and 

Committee of Finance only, so they’re properly used now; (b) 

they must be programed to operate silently. 

 

Such is not the case with a laptop in the Chamber at this 

moment. The owner of the offending laptop will know who I’m 

speaking of, and I just wish to draw their attention to (b) they 

must be operated silently. And I ask that owner, that hon. owner 

of the laptop, to program said laptop to operate silently or to not 

bring that laptop into the Chamber. And I thank the member for 

following that particular rule. 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, once the 

coroner does determine all of his findings from the autopsy and 

so on, is there a time period — I would think there would be a 

reasonable time period — within which he must notify the 

minister if in fact there is some connection with Social 

Services? And I’m just wondering what is the usual time frame 

that you get reports from him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our officials report that in . . . 

and these are not a large number of cases, but in the cases where 

we’ve had this experience, that the notification from the coroner 

has been relatively immediate. In almost all of the cases, if there 

has been an involvement with the department, the department 

will already be aware of the death or of some of the 

circumstance. But in our experience, the notification has come 

from the coroner on an almost immediate basis. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 

explain what the procedure is from that point on, from the time 

that you are notified? What is the procedure that follows? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, depending on of course the 

location in the province, the first thing that would happen is that 

once notification was received — and again I repeat, it’s often 

that the department or the region is aware of the circumstance 

— the first thing that would happen is that the regional office 

would conduct a review of the circumstances as they know 

them, of their involvement with the family or the child, and then 

that would be forwarded then to our central office, with 

recommendations perhaps. 

 

The central office would then again review the information and 

make a decision from that point, whether in their judgement an 

independent review should be conducted. So that would be the 

point of decision on the independent review. 

 

If the coroner has ordered an inquest, that may be considered as 

the independent review — the coroner-ordered inquest. Then 

what we do is make report of all of this to the child advocate, 

Children’s Advocate, and to the provincial coroner. So that’s 

the process. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 

just like to refer to child protection services for a moment or 

two. Can the minister tell me if there ever has been an extensive 

review of child protection services in Saskatchewan? And if so, 

when was it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the last extensive review of 

child protection services in our province — although I must say 

we’re always in sort of a process of review — but the last 

major, extensive review was in the mid to late 1980s, which 

resulted in the redrafted and renewed Child and Family Services 

Act, which came into effect in December, 1990. So that 

followed quite an extensive period of review, consultation with 

the community, leading up to the Act in 1990. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, according 

to information received from your department, I note that the 

average case-load per child protection worker in Saskatchewan 

in 1996-97 is approximately 26 families. Now that’s down  

  



1632  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

slightly from 1995-96. Can you explain why there is a 

decrease? Are there more caseworkers employed by Social 

Services or are there fewer children receiving care? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The answer, Mr. Chair, to the question is 

both. Yes, we have increased the number of staff doing child 

protection over the last number of years and have adopted some 

new case management models; so that the actual number of 

children receiving services of the child protection workers has 

fallen somewhat. Essentially what is happening, cases are being 

closed when we believe it’s appropriate that the case be closed. 

So the answer is both — we’ve increased the number of staff 

and there has been some decline in the actual numbers of cases. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 

like some clarification again too in the correspondence I got 

from your department or that we requested in regard to this. It 

states here that in 1996-97, there were 26, and then the word 

“families” is behind that, per caseworker. So I’m wondering, I 

guess the question I would ask you is how many . . . are there a 

specific number of children each child protection worker has? Is 

it looked at as a . . . a case-load, is that looked at as one child? 

Or how many children in need of protection does a caseworker 

have, or what is their case-load? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, because we believe that the 

core here is the family and the household, we tend, in our 

reporting mechanisms, to count families not children. And so 

the number of cases per worker is the number of families that 

each worker is dealing with. And in some families there may be 

one child. In some families there may be two or three children. 

But we don’t isolate the child from the family in trying to deal 

with their circumstance. 

 

I can tell the member that currently, as of March 1997, there are 

2,746 families being cared for with the protection workers. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 

tell me if your department offers any special training or 

education courses to Saskatchewan medical professionals or 

teachers on identifying child abuse victims? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, while we do not actually 

provide training — literally we don’t go out and conduct 

seminars — we do on many occasions provide resource people 

to those who are providing training, whether it be for teachers 

or for medical people. We have resource people who assist in 

this regard, and we have some developed printed materials that 

we offer. And we’d be very happy to provide some of those to 

the member if she’d be interested in looking at them. 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Yes, I would appreciate that. If you could forward 

that to me, it would be of interest to me. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would just like to ask a couple of questions 

surrounding foster homes. I’m wondering if Saskatchewan’s 

social workers I guess, use or . . . do they visit foster homes 

unannounced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, both announced and unannounced; 

both planned and unplanned. 

 

Ms. Julé:  So that . . . you know I was referring to foster 

homes, so I’m wondering if there are any other circumstances 

where unannounced visits would be carried out by a 

caseworker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, both in child protection 

and in foster homes, yes. The answer is yes. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Again in reference to foster parents 

and foster homes, I note that the foster parents association as of 

April 1 were under the understanding that they really are in 

need of respite care. They say they have no respite care at all 

and many of them are under a great deal of stress because of 

having teenagers from the streets and many of them I guess are 

dealing with teen moms, especially those who are going back to 

school, etc. 

 

And what I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, is, is your government 

beginning to have a look at the need for respite care in foster 

homes and possibly I would say . . . I guess you’d call it a paid 

break, maybe two weeks a year or something like that, for 

respite care. That would certainly be of help to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, since becoming minister I’ve 

had the opportunity on a number of occasions now to meet with 

the foster families association or their representatives, and have 

had the opportunity to discuss some of these issues with them. 

As the member will know, in the most recent provincial budget 

we addressed at least partially some of the issue around the 

rates for the foster homes. And this was seen I know by the 

association as a very significant issue for them. So I was 

pleased in this budget we were able to provide an 8.7 per cent 

increase in the basic maintenance rates. 

 

We are now working with the association on a number of 

issues. And one of them is the respite policy. And so we are 

endeavouring with them to develop a strategy that could be 

workable for all around the respite issue. Because I’ve heard 

from them, and I know you recognize the same concern, that the 

fostering of children is not an easy task and can be very 

demanding, particularly giving some of the youth that we are 

required to place in fostering homes. 

 

And so we felt this year that the most significant issue was 

around the basic rates, and we’re now working towards a respite 

policy along with some other initiatives. 

 

If I can just say, Mr. Chair, I’ve had some experience to visit 

some of our foster homes around the province. And one cannot 

visit a foster home and leave without being duly impressed by 

the level of commitment and generosity of these individuals 

who take young people — very often troubled youth — into 

their homes, and give them a home; give them love. They’re 

just doing I think a tremendous, tremendous piece of work for 

us. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I would agree that 

they are. However — I must admit that at this point I don’t like  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

to go by hearsay — but I’ve heard some stories surrounding the 

fact that foster parents are in such need of respite that they often 

hire younger children or younger teenagers in fact to try to deal 

with the troubled teens in their home, and oftentimes even with 

babies. And I don’t believe that they’re really that well qualified 

for that kind of care. 

 

And this apparently is happening because people do not have 

respite, and it is putting individuals in those homes in a certain 

amount of danger. And so I would really ask that you look at 

that, and providing some respite for them as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about high-risk youth a little. I 

noticed that Manitoba has recently done a comprehensive study, 

as you well know, on high risk youth in that province. The 

Education, Justice, Social Services, and Health departments 

worked together to identify children who have chemical 

dependencies, mental health problems, are in trouble with the 

law, are in the care of family services. 

 

Can the minister tell me if his department officials are working 

along with the Justice department in order to identify high-risk 

youth in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We are not, Mr. Chair, at this time 

involved in a specific or a structured review, as some others 

have undertaken. But if I may say, in the context of our 

inter-departmental committee that brings together the child 

action plan, much discussion and much sharing is done between 

our various departments, particularly around high risk children 

and youth and in the context of their families. We equally are 

. . . the officials of the department are equally and regularly in 

contact with our many community-based agencies that are 

involved with high-risk youth and families at risk. 

 

And so we have not, at this point at least, felt the need to create 

a formalized, structural investigation of youth at risk. We 

believe that under the interdisciplinary committee of the action 

plan and in our relationships with community-based 

organizations, we’re able to get a pretty fair sense of what’s 

happening to our youth in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that you 

recognized earlier in this session that I did bring up the desire 

for an all-party committee to be formed so that the Children’s 

Advocate could be commissioned by the entire legislature to 

look at some of the issues that all parties bring forward, and to 

be able to identify and to investigate all those areas where we 

believe investigation needs to take place, and then she could 

report back to the legislature. It seems to me that the child 

advocate’s office is willing to do a great deal of leg work for the 

ministers and the government. 

 

And once again, I know that these areas of high-risk youth and 

child prostitution and many others are in need of full 

investigation so that we know where we are in this province and 

really where to target some of our funding in a way where 

priorities, I would say, are met in a more expedient manner. I 

know that Manitoba estimates that high-risk youth cost the 

province about $7.9 million per year. Are there any comparable 

stats in Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I just want to observe to the 

House tonight that the Children’s Advocate in our province, 

which is in some ways yet a young office in our province, but 

even in its short existence, the Children’s Advocate has done a 

great service to this legislature and to the people of 

Saskatchewan and is regularly bringing to our attention the 

needs of children and youth, particularly children and youth at 

risk in our province. And I know that the member will have 

seen her most recent, her most recent report, which documents 

in a very helpful way, some of the issues that face youth and 

children in our province. 

 

And because we believe that the Office of the Children’s 

Advocate is doing some very, very good work for us, we’ve, in 

this budget year, provided more resources to the child advocate, 

knowing that she is doing I think, exactly what both you and I 

know must be done, and can be done, and is being done now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I thank you. I’d like to add a comment in this 

regard. And I would like to say that some other provinces are 

considering programs for early identification of families at risk. 

And so that families with high risk factors such as 

unemployment, low level of education, and lack of extended 

family would be identified before the birth of a child, so that 

early childhood intervention could begin. 

 

And in view of the many, many problems that we see out there, 

and in view of the fact that I know we all would like to see 

some of these problems alleviated, and in view of the fact that I 

know we both agree that early childhood intervention is in fact 

one of the most beneficial programs that we have, I would 

certainly recommend and encourage that possibly we do form 

an all-party committee of the legislature, to involve the 

Children’s Advocate more fully, and to ensure that our children 

have the best possible start in life they can and that we nip a lot 

of the problems that we’re now experiencing in the bud. 

 

I would just like to move on a bit to northern funding that 

Social Services has pledged. And I notice in the budget that the 

government pledges $200,000 for a one-time northern 

community development fund to support the development of 

community process in northern communities, which increase 

community ownership of social issues. So my question is, who 

will be getting those funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The resources, Mr. Chair, will be spent 

right in the North in northern communities. This is in some 

ways a small piece of quite a large picture. Only yesterday the 

Premier and a number of my other colleagues met with northern 

leaders in a dialogue process to look at many, many of the 

issues facing the North. 

 

These specific monies that have been targeted in our budget 

will go to those northern communities, to the community 

leaderships. We’ve not yet determined all of the criteria and 

how that will exactly happen, because we want to engage in the 

kind of process that was happening yesterday, which was the 

dialogue with the northern leaders, to see where these monies 

might be best put to use. The goal here of course, is to do as you 

described — to build a community development, reaching out 

to try and strengthen the independence of communities in  

  



1634  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

our North. 

 

The Department of Social Services spends millions of dollars in 

our northern communities, particularly through social assistance 

payments. And we know that if we can build those 

communities, build some of that independence in the 

communities, this will have real long-term, beneficial change. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in view of 

the great amount of revenue, and I don’t say this lightly, I 

believe that the province does have a great amount of money 

coming in to their general revenue, and we need not go through 

the reason that I’m saying that. But the government pledged 

$200,000 for this northern community development fund. And 

it . . . I guess in one glance it would seem like a lot of money, 

but it doesn’t go very far when you consider the needs of the 

North. 

 

We have some really intense problems happening in the North, 

especially with our young women. There’s a great deal of . . . a 

great number, rather, of young women between the ages of 15 

and 19 that are attempting suicide. It’s phenomenal, and it 

seems to me that we would need a lot of intervention here. And 

certainly a lot of prevention and all kinds of counselling 

services, as well as recreation services, and treatment centres, 

etc., to help. 

 

So why such a minimal amount, Mr. Minister, when the need is 

so great in the North? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, if $200,000 represented our 

total investment in trying to deal with some of the societal and 

social issues facing the people of the North, if $200,000 were 

all we were doing, I’d resign tomorrow. The fact of the matter 

is, as I said, this is but one small piece in quite a larger picture. 

Even within my own department, we have exceptional 

payments for social assistance in the North; we have prevention 

and support grants that are dedicated specifically to the North. 

 

If we look across government, we see special initiatives in 

Health, under drug and rehab, going to the North. We have the 

whole housing efforts which are happening in the North; 

infrastructure happening in the North. The 200,000 is a very . . . 

it’s not a small piece, I don’t want to minimize the piece, but 

it’s very targeted money for a very specific purpose. And that’s 

to look at trying to do some real community development right 

on the ground, in the North. 

 

But it’s just one small piece of a . . . Indeed we have an entire 

ministry now in this government that is given the challenge and 

the task of dealing specifically with issues that face the northern 

residents of our province. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if I could 

for just a minute, I’d like to revert to the question I previously 

asked you before this last one, and it’s regarding who will be 

getting the funds. And you did indicate to me that northern 

communities and leaders of those communities, as such, would 

be getting that in one way or the other. Is that correct? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, that’s correct. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I’d like to know what guidelines are in place then 

for them to apply for this funding? I’m sure they’re going to 

have to apply for it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We, Mr. Chair, very purposely did not 

write the guidelines before we began this more intensive 

dialogue with the northern leaders. And so we want to be 

working with them to establish the dialogue, to establish the 

guidelines. Best, I think, to get their very considered opinion on 

how this could be best utilized in the North rather than some of 

us sitting at the south end of the province and deciding on their 

behalf. So we’ve made those resources available, we’ve 

targeted them for that purpose, but now we want to sit down 

and are sitting down . . . as I said only yesterday, the Premier 

and my colleagues met with a large group of northern 

representatives to set some specific guidelines. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. So those guidelines obviously are not 

in place even though you said you sat down to specifically put 

the guidelines in place. When do you expect full dialogue and 

consultation to be done with these northern communities so this 

money can be applied? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We’re looking forward, because of the 

initiations of the discussions yesterday . . . It’ll take some time 

we know, for some of the northern communities and leaders to 

come to some of their own conclusions, but we’re expecting 

that we can have decisions by summertime, fall at the latest, so 

that monies can get into those communities. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 

ask you just one question and I’m not sure if it can stay at one 

question. But I’d like to ask you a question regarding the need 

for home care again, and it crosses over into Sask Housing. So 

I’m having some difficulty getting some accountability for the 

question of, if clients, if seniors, go into nursing homes — 

particularly I guess I’m specifically talking about a rural area 

here — if clients go into nursing homes there and they don’t 

have anyone basically to clean up their unit and that kind of 

thing, if they’re in need of help with that, who assesses these 

people? First of all before they go into the nursing homes, to 

determine what their needs are. And . . . well I’ll just leave the 

question there for a moment and then we’ll go on with another 

one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, because this is not in the 

responsibility of the Department of Social Services in any way, 

I’m here speaking from some general knowledge that I have. 

And that would be that in terms of assessment of level of care 

required, I believe each health district will now have its 

assessment process and people who will assess the individual 

and their circumstances and therefore determine the level of 

care required — whether it be community-based care, home 

care, or institutional care. 

 

But that responsibility now clearly falls within the district 

health board. It has for as long as, I think, the assessment 

process has been around, fallen under the purview of Health. It 

used to be in the old home care districts that would do some of  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

that assessment or in the acute care districts; but now each 

district will have its own process for assessing the need. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. There apparently again is some 

problems surrounding this, because we have an instance where 

people are in obvious need of more assistance in a nursing 

home and they’re deliberating there to determine whether Sask 

Housing should have some responsibility to determine that 

people go into this nursing home in the first place, if they can’t 

quite take care of themselves and clean up after themselves. 

Because that’s obviously the case, and still they’re there. So 

they’re asking for home care to come in, and home care says 

that they don’t have the responsibility for that. 

 

So this is why I mentioned that and I know that as Minister of 

Health that you must have dealt with some of those problems 

earlier. So I just wanted to make that comment. 

 

And I’d like to just go to a bit right now to child prostitution. 

And can the minister confirm that the $250,000 announced the 

other day in regards to the child prostitution problem is actually 

the $250,000 announced for youth outreach initiatives in the 

budget two months ago? Is it the same money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, there has never been any 

misunderstanding about that. The money was announced in the 

budget, and it is $250,000 for outreach, specifically to address 

the issues of children on our streets which, as the member well 

knows, involves many in the prostitution trade. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Will that money be designated to the 

existing outreach programs or will there have to be an 

application and a set of criteria again to be met before the 

existing places can get it? Are there new outreach programs out 

there in the province that are being formed and becoming 

available to the public maybe in different cities than there have 

been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We’re sincerely hoping and believe it 

will happen, that in the three communities where we know that 

the child prostitution problem exists, which would be Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, we’re sincerely hoping that we 

can find a consensus among the players in those communities as 

to where the money will be best provided. 

 

It may well be that an existing community-based organization is 

the best vehicle. Or if in the . . . within the discussion, and there 

is consensus that something new needs to be done, then we 

would certainly look at that. But we hope we can find — and 

we’re relatively confident we will — find consensus in the 

community on what should be best done with the funds. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are 

there any cities, to your knowledge, other than Saskatoon, 

Regina, and Prince Albert, that are dealing with the problem of 

child prostitution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We of course, I don’t think, could be 

absolutely definitive to say that there is no example outside of 

the three cities which I’ve identified, being Saskatoon, Regina, 

and Prince Albert. But from our people, from our department  

people in those communities and from law enforcement 

agencies and other community organizations, these three 

communities have been identified as having the problem of 

children on our streets engaging in sex for money or drugs. 

 

We will also have in our province other communities, and here 

I might identify both North Battleford and La Ronge, where we 

may have children on the streets, not engaged in the sex trade 

but yet finding themselves on the streets. And so that too is a 

concern. But the reporting mechanisms that we have and the 

understandings we have is that the problem tends to be centred 

in Regina, Saskatoon, and to a lesser extent in Prince Albert. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do you 

have some statistics on teenage pregnancies in the province and 

how many teen pregnancies we’re dealing with, I guess within 

the last year in the province, and how that compares to other 

years and possibly how it might compare to other jurisdictions 

across the country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I don’t have those statistics 

here. I recall that when I served in the ministry of Health, those 

statistics are available and were readily . . . are kept and could 

be made readily available. If the member wishes, we can get 

from the Department of Health, the numbers of teen 

pregnancies in our province. We know that over the last number 

of years, we’ve seen increase in that area. A number of 

initiatives have begun. 

 

Where my department will find itself involved is primarily in 

trying to assist the teen moms, usually, in continuing their 

education, in building a life after the child is born. So we 

participate, for instance are involved with some teen-infant day 

care centres now and have put some more resources there; so 

that we can endeavour hopefully to help the young moms, the 

teen moms, continue in their own education to look forward to a 

stronger life both for themselves and for their children. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

just go now to adoption services for a moment. And I notice 

that your government put out a news release of March 27, 1997, 

entitled “Saskatchewan expands post adoption services”. And I 

think we talked to some extent about adoption in estimates at 

the last session. And so I’m fairly happy that there is some good 

work happening in this area. 

 

I notice in your news release of March 27 that there is . . . about 

the third paragraph in that release, the statement: 

 

The final expansion means that for adoptions that occur 

after April 1, 1997, Social Services will be able to release a 

certified copy of an adopted person’s original birth 

registration. This will be available to be released to either 

the birth parent or the adopted person as an adult, without 

the consent of the other party. 

 

And then the following line says, “However veto provisions are 

available to both parties.” 

 

Is this not the case now? How have things really changed here? 

It seems like those two sentences, the last two sentences, are  

  



1636  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

contradictory. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Earlier this evening I had the 

opportunity to raise the issue of laptop computers and that they 

be programed to operate silently. Now I have just heard a laptop 

computer, and I ask the member who owns that laptop computer 

to remove it from the Assembly immediately. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just to be very clear about 

this, the changes which occurred April 1 of this year — so 

they’re only about six weeks old — only apply — only apply, 

they’re not retroactive — to adoptions that have occurred before 

April 1 of 1997. So the changes only occur to adoptions which 

have taken place in the last six weeks and in the future. 

 

And what will happen now is that unless there is a veto 

registered on the information at the time of adoption or at some 

future time, the information can be released to either party. So it 

does require mutual consent, but it does not . . . it would require 

now that a veto be placed on the records. And again I repeat 

that’s only for adoptions that have occurred since April 1, 1997, 

and in the future. 

 

(2130) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Minister. I just need to talk about this 

a little more. I still look at the line stating: 

 

This will be available to be released to either the birth 

parent or the adopted person as an adult, without the 

consent of the other party. 

 

So without the consent means that if I were a parent looking for 

my . . . the birth child, I would be able to have the birth 

registration and be able to find that child without the consent of 

the child as such. So why would you make the statement rather 

than just putting in, veto provisions are available to both parties 

under certain circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think the member points out that our 

news release might have been . . . the wording might have been 

clearer. It’s confused even the minister. This is my 

understanding of the circumstance. For all adoptions prior to 

April 1, 1997 is a different mechanism. After April 1, 1997, six 

weeks ago, unless there is a veto placed on by one of the 

parties, then the adopted person or the parent can request and 

receive the information without the consent of the other, unless 

there’s veto there. 

 

Now if there is mutual consent, then we would release the 

documentation for adoptions prior to 1997, April 1. So mutual 

consent would get those documents prior to April 1, 1997. 

Under the new system either party can request and receive the 

information unless there’s been a veto put on. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

skip over a bit to, I guess policy of Social Services regarding 

the placement or the homes that social service recipients stay in. 

I was wondering if Social Services ever does any investigation 

into the lodging that does house social service recipients on a 

regular basis, or if they do have any . . . if they do investigate  

into that at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Generally, Mr. Chair, the answer would 

be no. We consider the arrangement between a social services 

recipient and landlord to be a private arrangement between the 

two. So generally we would not go out and inspect on behalf of 

our clients. Now there may be circumstances which arise where 

in fact a worker is involved in a home situation and is involved 

in some of those accommodation circumstances. But generally 

we consider that to be one of the responsibilities of the client, 

and that’s to establish and arrange their own accommodation. 

And we would not generally have people out inspecting. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Are there certain standards that you require of the 

homes that social service recipients move into? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair; I want to differentiate. 

Those homes which we utilize as approved homes and so on 

have rigorous, rigorous standards. But for our social assistance 

recipients we do not have standards other than the common 

building standards, building codes of every municipality. We 

would not want to see, would hope it would never happen, that 

a landlord would provide accommodation that didn’t meet the 

codes of the municipality. 

 

But again I repeat, we believe, just as in your case or my case, 

we are responsible for our accommodation. And we do not have 

specific standards nor do we send out inspectors, other than in 

those circumstances where there is a demonstrated, real 

problem. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are you 

planning to do any kind of investigation for . . . I guess it would 

almost be on behalf of the landlords who are having some 

difficulty with social service recipients leaving their homes or 

their rental properties in disarray and really damaged? We have 

a number of complaints surrounding that, and I was just 

wondering whether or not it’s possible. 

 

I think the Liberal opposition did mention earlier on again in 

this session that it might be one avenue that Social Services 

could take — to have the properties inspected before the 

recipients move in and at the time that they would be moving 

out, to ensure that the place is in fact intact and is in as good a 

shape as when they moved in. Is there any plan on your 

department’s part for doing this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member puts her finger I 

think, on a problem. It’s this. The vast majority of those who 

receive social assistance are good tenants. The vast majority of 

landlords are good landlords. We have a few social assistance 

recipients who will abuse the property, the rented property, and 

there are a few landlords in our province who rent to social 

assistance recipients properties that they should not be renting. 

 

So we’ve got both sides of this equation, and the challenge is 

how to deal with it without sort of painting the vast majority in 

the centre, with some brush that’s not appropriate. As the 

member knows, we’ve made some changes very recently, or 

announced some changes that are upcoming, to the damage 

deposit and the structures around the damage deposit, which we  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

think will make both landlord and tenant more accountable, 

particularly on those extremes — the small numbers on both 

side of the extreme. 

 

I think as we work through the changes, we’ll want to be 

working with the Rentalsman. And there may well be some 

process of standardized assessment of properties that people are 

renting so that at the end of the tenancy it’s easier to judge — 

it’s easier for the Rentalsman office to judge, whether in fact the 

deposit should be paid or not paid, and so on. 

 

I want to emphasize that we have this problem, but I think it 

shouldn’t . . . we shouldn’t colour all landlords, or all recipients, 

with the same brush, because the majority are responsible. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Before I turn the 

questioning over to some of my colleagues, I would like to ask 

you for a complete breakdown in the department’s revenues, 

expenses, and in particular, in regards to the staff and their 

wages. 

 

And I would also be interested in getting any statistics on travel 

expenses that you may have. And further to that, employment 

equity stats — if I could get some of that for this current . . . or 

the past year rather, I would appreciate that. 

 

I think that’s all that I would like to ask for the moment, and my 

colleague from Melville would like to ask you a few questions 

at this time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 

going back to the housing situation, are there situations where 

Social Services pays the rental for accommodation directly to 

the landlord? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the answer to the question is 

yes. There may be circumstances where we will pay directly to 

the landlord if it’s been demonstrated that there’s been a real 

problem. Many of our rental cheques now are made out in joint, 

in joint name, both in the tenant’s name and the landlord’s 

name, so it has to be for both. And there are circumstances 

where we’ve paid cheques to recipients, in their name. 

 

So there is a variety but the answer to the question is yes, in 

some circumstances — it wouldn’t be many, I guess — but in 

some circumstance we pay directly to the landlord. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. In those cases 

would your department from time to time examine the 

accommodation to ensure that you’re getting value for your 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Not as policy, Mr. Chair, not as policy. 

We wouldn’t do it as sort of a regular policy thing, because we 

see it as a private arrangement between the recipient and the 

landlord. Now if an issue is raised, if the client raises an issue or 

the landlord raises some issues, there may be call for a worker 

to actually go and do the, sort of the home visit, that sort of 

thing. But it’s not something we do as policy. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I guess and I believe my colleague, hon. 

colleague from Humboldt, perhaps was alluding to the fact that 

under those circumstances . . . and again there have been from 

time to time concerns raised about the types of accommodation 

that Social Services was in fact paying for, which was less than 

adequate in their standards. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if it would not be prudent on the 

part of your department to perhaps in those specific cases, as 

you suggest earlier . . . from time to time visiting foster parents, 

announced and unannounced. Perhaps you might consider or 

would your department consider reviewing some of these 

accommodations, because in some areas they may need to be 

examined and perhaps the payments renegotiated for the type of 

facilities that unfortunately in some cases people who are less 

fortunate have to find themselves living in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there’s nothing that — well, I 

shouldn’t say this — but there are few things that disturb me as 

much, as I’m travelling around the province, when I find myself 

visiting individuals or families who are receiving social 

assistance and living in accommodation that, as you and I might 

describe, is just not fit. It’s just not fit. 

 

And as I said earlier, there are that small group of landlords 

who will try this. And if there are some mechanisms maybe we 

don’t have today that we should have, to root those kind of 

landlords out, I’d be more than willing to look at them. Now I 

know that given some news coverage and events that happened 

in the city of Saskatoon for instance, I think our municipalities 

are looking more closely at some of these properties too. And 

there are a number of, a number of agencies who visit property. 

There might the meter reader for the water department or the 

power meter reader. Others who enter property and I think now 

are . . . we’re becoming more sensitive to report very 

unsatisfactory living conditions to our municipal authorities, 

who have the power to go and placard and shut it down. 

 

And where it involves one of our clients, I think very often that 

there’s some damages awarded from that landlord to the client 

who’ll be forced then to move and find other accommodation. 

But I’m with you on this one. If there are landlords who are 

taking public dollars to house individuals and they’re not 

providing fit . . . Nobody’s asking for a palace, but the 

accommodation should meet the codes and they should be 

decent. If there are mechanisms that we haven’t found yet to try 

and root those out, I’d be willing to find them or try and find 

them. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I appreciate that, and I feel the same 

as you do. I guess that’s why I asked the question about paying 

rent on facilities that you may not even have any idea of what 

the conditions are. So I take it that at least you’ve taken note 

and perhaps might initiate at least those facilities that you pay 

directly for, that perhaps your department could take a look at 

once in awhile to ensure that you’re getting value for your 

dollar. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to ask another question, and it may 

very well not be within the purview of your department. But it 

deals with the Saskatchewan Association of Boards of  

  



1638  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

Addiction Services. Would that be totally separate from your 

department? You would not have any input into the addiction 

facilities provided by non-government organizations, whether it 

be through referrals or anything to deal with those 

organizations? And if the answer is no, I would appreciate that 

because I expect that that’s probably more under the Minister of 

Health’s purview. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The member is correct, and it does fall 

under the purview of the Minister of Health. And I know that 

this minister and all former ministers have had good 

relationships with the provincial organization representing 

many of the addiction facilities. So it’s something that I’m sure 

the Minister of Health will be very happy, and his officials, will 

be very happy to discuss with you. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I would 

now defer to my hon. colleague from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, our welcome to the officials as 

well. I have a couple of specific questions dealing with autism. I 

know that it’s under your purview that the children that are . . . 

individuals that have autism are often on social services or their 

families may be. And I’m wondering if there’s any specific 

department policy you have targeted to deal with the needs of 

children that have autism? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our relationship with the 

individuals and the families who suffer from autism . . . And if I 

understand the disease of autism, there’s quite a range of 

disability associated with autism, from some lesser disabilities 

to some very severe disability. Most of the children in the 

province with autism will likely be still with their families. But 

as they grow older into their teen years and into their adult 

years, very often they require much more intensive care. And so 

where our department would relate is through the provision of 

the group home setting, and many of the group homes that we 

have across the province will house autistic young people, 

teenagers, and adults. 

 

Now this is a cross too between of course the Department of 

Health and the whole health field that deal there. Where we’re 

involved is sort of that accommodation and care level at the 

group home. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I would like to 

thank the member from Kelvington-Wadena for just giving me 

an opportunity to ask a few questions and before she continues 

on. 

 

First of all though, I would like to introduce to you and to the 

members of the Assembly a couple of individuals who have 

joined us this evening, Mr. Lance Connel and his wife Darlene, 

and I’d like the Assembly to welcome them in the normal 

process. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I want to come back to a question  

that the member from Humboldt was raising and the member 

from Melville raised and just raise a couple concerns and 

questions in regards to housing. And the question relates to a 

matter . . . and I believe we’ve touched base with individuals 

. . . in welfare, my office has. But the question is based on a 

situation that arose in one of the communities of my 

constituency where an individual was renting a house, a social 

services recipient, renting a house. The house has now been put 

up for sale by the owner. It happens to be in a community 

where there is very little housing available, and as a result, 

housing prices have certainly risen. 

 

In fact in this case, this individual was actually paying a little 

more, taking some of the money that was allotted for living 

expenses and putting it towards rent. And I’m wondering what 

the department’s policy is in regards to helping people where 

they find themselves trying to rent in situations when the 

housing . . . because of a market trend that is certainly booming, 

and the prices have gone up. How do you address that? And 

what kind of reassurances I can give or we can give to this 

individual that they will certainly have their needs looked into. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our shelter allowances do 

vary community by community, trying to match our shelter 

allowance with the value of rental accommodation in the 

community. And we know that in some communities it’s a little 

lower; in other communities it’s higher. So as we are, we are 

always reviewing our shelter allowance and that sort of thing. 

We try and be in tune with local realities — not to argue that 

our shelter allowances are overly generous in any of our 

communities. 

 

With that said though, if the member, if there is a specific 

circumstance that the member would want the department to 

look at, my officials assured me that we’d have a look at any 

particular individual circumstance to see if there could be 

something done. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, and if you 

haven’t received this concern already we’ll certainly make sure 

we get it to you. It seems to me contact should have been made 

with your office, but in case that wasn’t followed up we’ll get 

that to you. 

 

Another concern that was just raised today, so I haven’t had a 

chance to really bring it to your attention, is an individual called 

who had been on or is receiving some EI (Employment 

Insurance) . . . or had been on employment income benefits or 

UI (Unemployment Insurance) benefits and back in . . . and also 

was receiving social assistance, applied for social assistance 

because the UI just did not cover costs. It was fairly low and 

she was taking some ABE (adult basic education) classes, 

upgrading her education. 

 

And she just informed me today that even though she’d been 

sending copies of her Employment Insurance income in with all 

the statements . . . you send your cards and you’re supposed to 

notify the department of the fact if you’ve got additional 

income and then they look at it and they determine . . . subtract 

some income if it’s over and above what’s the agreed limit. 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

The unfortunate part is while those cards, while those 

notifications were going in since February, just the other day 

apparently the department picked up on it and now wants an 

overpayment made back or certainly paid back, to her. 

 

Now it would seem to me that there should be some avenue 

whereby the department could certainly address a problem that 

arises such as this, especially if a person has been following the 

rules and guidelines and been informing the department about 

other, additional income. And I just would like to know what 

the response is. 

 

I guess I’ve basically indicated that in the past I’ve been told 

there’s nothing we can do. But I think if there was a mistake 

made at the department level, I’m not sure that an individual 

should be left to carry the bag, and all of a sudden out of a low 

income, end up having to pay back the set amount of 

overpayment. So I wonder if I could get a response to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the director of income 

security, who is with us here tonight, indicates that again if 

there are some information that the member could provide us 

about the specifics, that we’d have . . . the department would 

look at the circumstance. And so if you could do that we’d 

appreciate it. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m going 

to bring up an area that I have a grave concern about, an area 

that I’ve sent a letter to your office . . . an issue that I’ve had a 

chance to chat with you about. And it’s regards to the way 

Social Services works and deals with employees in cases of 

situations where there might be allegations arising . . . I think 

you indicated earlier on that social workers on many occasions 

. . . it’s very difficult when you’re dealing with clients. 

 

I’ve chatted with the former minister as well; the fact that there 

are certain circumstances where clients may become somewhat 

angry with the way their worker is dealing with them or giving 

them . . . responding to certain requests, and sometimes their 

clients may feel that the worker isn’t representing them fairly. 

 

And a case has just arisen where some allegations were made, 

and unfortunately I believe those allegations have turned into a 

criminal case. And the concern I have, Mr. Minister, is that if 

. . . I understand your department has released this individual, 

put this individual basically on the street without pay. And as 

I’ve said to you before, it seems to me that when an . . . if an 

allegation is made, or even if a criminal charge may be laid, 

there should be due process followed. And in our country, I 

believe that a person in our democratic country we live in . . . 

individuals are innocent until proven guilty. Now if your 

department is releasing people . . . 

 

We just see the . . . I’m not sure if it was the Regina city police 

or Saskatoon in the last little while, where there were 

investigations ongoing in the case of certain individuals, and at 

the time the headlines were: officer with leave, on paid leave, as 

a result of certain allegations, until the situation was certainly 

rectified and cleared up even if it went through court. At the end 

of the court process, officers are reinstated. In the meantime the 

person didn’t lose his job or didn’t lose his finances. 

And I’m concerned that if the Department of Social Services is 

releasing people who are working for them, you are basically 

saying that an individual is guilty until proven innocent. And I 

think that certainly is not what we should be saying. And I 

would like to know what you do when individuals . . . when a 

situation like this arises, and why you wouldn’t allow a person 

to work or even be on paid leave until a situation is addressed 

and how your department deals with this, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think, Mr. Chair, I want to make one 

thing one very, very, very, very clear. The decisions about 

hiring, the decisions about employment in the Department of 

Social Services or in any department of government, are not 

decisions made by the minister or the minister’s office, other 

than in the circumstance of the staff that surrounds the minister. 

I say that, not wearing my Social Services hat, but wearing my 

Public Service Commission hat. So that any decision about 

someone’s status of employment with government is not made 

by this room, by the legislature, or by politicians. And I think 

we should all be agreed about that. 

 

So there would not be a circumstance where this minister, or I 

hope any other minister, would order matters of employment to 

be done or not done or changed or not changed. 

 

Therefore we try and work on the basis of policy — policy for 

government, but policy which is also consistent I think, in the 

general employment sector of our community. By policy, my 

understanding is that within government if there are allegations, 

that this wouldn’t be within the Department of Social Services; 

if certain allegations are made against an employee that there 

will be a suspension, in some cases with pay and in some cases 

without pay. If there are criminal charges, the policy would be 

suspension without pay. 

 

Now the decision, the decision around whether there will be 

suspension with pay or without pay is made by the management 

of the department, and each and every one of these 

circumstances will be reviewed very carefully by that 

management and they will make that decision. 

 

I know the member and I have had some discussion about this. 

It is the decision of officials within government to hire and it’s 

appropriately their decision when it is the time to suspend or to 

terminate with or without pay. 

 

Now each employee of government — in-scope employee, of 

course — has the provisions of contracts and the protection of 

their unions and so on, but these are decisions made by the 

management. And in the case of allegations or charges, each 

case is reviewed very carefully and the decision is made by 

management. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think you will have to admit 

I wasn’t asking you what you were doing. I was asking what the 

policy is for the department. It seems to me there’s public 

service agreements out there and understandings. 

 

I’m very concerned that . . . well you’re the minister, and I’m 

not expecting you to overturn but I’m very concerned. As 

minister you should be setting some directions because there’s  

  



1640  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

issues that we’ve had differences of opinion, the way some 

social workers have dealt with situations in the past, and there’s 

a couple more that we’ll certainly be raising as we get into 

debate here. 

 

I guess as I said, Mr. Minister, I am concerned when . . . and 

you talked about the fact that there are situations where a person 

will . . . a choice is made as to whether they’re on paid leave or 

whether they’re just given leave without pay. 

 

Now when a choice is made to put a person on leave without 

pay and that person’s trying to live and all of a sudden finds 

himself without a salary, Mr. Minister, it puts an individual in a 

very difficult situation, especially when individuals out there 

working with society find themselves on many occasions 

working in difficult situations that they know could . . . an 

individual that they’re working with could certainly create an 

uncomfortable situation or circumstance. 

 

And I think the wrong messages are sent because someone may 

not be pleased with the working of a worker, if all of a sudden a 

worker finds himself in a position where they’re dismissed. And 

the individual I’m talking of certainly can appreciate and 

understands the process of not being allowed to work in certain 

cases as a result of certain allegations — understands that that’s 

the normal process. But it’s difficult when all of the sudden you 

find yourself without employment. 

 

And the concern, as I said before, is in those circumstances, Mr. 

Minister; it’s like departments — whether it’s Social Services, 

whether it’s Justice, or any other department, or whether it’s an 

employer — it’s almost like you’re putting an individual in a 

position of being guilty before they even have a chance for a 

proper review of a circumstance. 

 

(2200) 

 

And I would think that the appropriate actions would be that 

you would certainly sit down with any worker, and that if an 

accusation is made, it doesn’t matter who the person is, that that 

person then is acknowledged that there are certain problems and 

we’re going to have to ask you to refrain from working, but will 

certainly continue to pay you until we get to the bottom of this. 

I would think that would be the normal process, Mr. Minister. 

 

And so I guess I do have a concern when people are put in 

situations and especially when an individual may be forced at 

the end of the day, because of a cloud hanging over their heads, 

to then come to welfare to seek assistance just to exist. 

 

And so I still don’t know how a dismissal can come in before 

you’ve really come and looked at . . . reviewed a situation fully. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I want to just . . . I think the 

member knows, but just to put it on the record, that in these 

very difficult circumstances, and they’re not easy decisions for 

those who are responsible to make those decisions — they’re 

not easy decisions to make by any means — and in these kind 

of circumstances, whether it be in the Department of Social 

Services or the Department of Justice, Department of 

Agriculture, in any wing of the public sector, in these  

circumstances the decisions would not be taken by an 

immediate manager acting alone or anything like that. And in 

fact it will be done in these circumstances in consultation with 

the Public Service Commission. So it’s a broader 

decision-making body that happens here. 

 

After that decision has been made, whether it’s suspension with 

pay or suspension without pay, there are appeal processes. 

There will be, as I said, if it’s an in-scope position, there may 

well be some appeal process through the union. Or any member 

may appeal directly to the commissioners of the Public Service 

Commission — that appeal is open. And the decision can 

therefore be reviewed. 

 

As minister of the department, as minister responsible for the 

Public Service Commission, I must trust and I do trust that the 

people who are charged with this responsibility take these 

decisions very seriously, and at the end of the day will make 

what in their judgement is the best decision. And I do not have 

either the desire or the means to overrule their decision. It’s not 

automatic; it’s decided in each individual case on the basis of 

what these decision makers know. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, when those decision makers look at 

a situation, do they take the time to sit down and meet the 

individual and go through the circumstances with the . . . do 

they listen to the individual’s case as well? Do they take the 

time to review it, or do they just take someone’s accusation and 

run with it? Is there a review so a person has a chance to at least 

sit down and offer their side or their view of a circumstance 

before a final decision is made, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, there would be a review. 

Now if there’s a police investigation, of course that would take 

precedence. If there’s a criminal charge, there’s a police 

investigation — of course that does take precedence. 

 

But there would be a review that goes beyond simply having 

someone make an accusation or an allegation and then someone 

is immediately suspended. I mean I don’t know if a week goes 

by in my office that I don’t receive some concern from a client 

of the department somewhere across the province who may on 

that given day be very unhappy about their worker or a decision 

that’s been made in their circumstance, and may make some 

allegations about the worker. 

 

We try and follow up, but certainly no one is immediately 

suspended just on the basis of a simple allegation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, unfortunately I haven’t heard 

you acknowledge the fact that any individual is consulted and 

has a meeting with the board or whatever to have an 

understanding of the circumstances that the board might be 

dealing with. It sounds to me like decisions are made based on 

what somebody else would say about the circumstances, rather 

than sitting down with the individual that may be facing the 

allegations and all of a sudden is left on the sidelines without 

any input, any involvement, and then finding themselves 

without employment. 

 

I don’t think there’s anyone in this room would like to be in a  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

situation where someone may turn around and make an 

accusation against them and find themselves all of a sudden 

having their employment cut, simply because they didn’t have 

the opportunity to speak. 

 

We should be able to . . . there should be an ability to consult 

and to talk to individuals and to make sure that your department 

or the Public Service Commission has reviewed all the 

evidence, or taken an in-depth look into such accusations that 

may cause the department to look at an employment situation, 

before a final decision is made. And to sit down with the 

individual and to do some follow-up and to check and see 

whether there’s any reason to believe that anyone who would 

accuse an individual, such as yourself . . . or just the Minister of 

Justice this past couple of weeks ago, with the affair that took 

place in the hallway, Mr. Minister. 

 

Those circumstances you and I run into on a daily basis, where 

we try, I think, to make sure that we’re not leaving ourselves 

open for someone to take advantage and make some kind of 

false accusation. We would want to — I would want to — have 

the ability to have . . . sit down with someone, at least chat 

about circumstances, before decisions are made. Mr. Minister, 

wouldn’t that be appropriate? Wouldn’t that be proper, to 

follow up and at least check with the individuals involved rather 

than just jumping to conclusions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well it depends entirely on the 

allegation. If it’s an allegation of a criminal matter, then we 

believe that is the purview of the policing authorities to do that 

kind of investigation and that we should not be involved in 

trying to determine guilt or innocence in the situation of a 

criminal allegation. 

 

If it’s an allegation of some other kind of inappropriate conduct, 

that’s a different matter. But if there’s a criminal allegation it 

would be, I think, inappropriate for us to try and intervene in 

that circumstance. That is the role of the police. They will 

investigate and they will determine then, with prosecutors, 

whether charges should be laid. And that’s how it works. 

 

Mr. Toth:  It still comes back . . . Okay, that’s fair, Mr. 

Minister, that’s fair. But at the same time, while there’s an 

investigation, a paid leave would be certainly appropriate — 

that’s acknowledging there’s an investigation going on. But to 

. . . for a total dismissal before any, any accusation is brought 

forward or any opportunity to have a public review or hearing, 

is basically an acknowledgement, if you will . . . or putting an 

individual in a position where all of a sudden they find 

themselves . . . well you’ve basically declared that person guilty 

and you’ve taken away their method of employment that 

they’ve worked so hard to attain over the years. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, I don’t dispute the fact that if there’s 

investigation that certainly your department would allow that to 

take place. But I think it would be . . . it’s certainly 

inappropriate to dismiss someone because an accusation . . . 

There’s individuals in the room, if someone made an accusation 

against any one of . . . would they face the same circumstances, 

Mr. Minister? Be dismissed without pay? 

Or do you acknowledge that yes, there are circumstances here 

and we acknowledge that, but certainly there will be . . . until 

this is resolved there would be a period where there is leave 

with pay until these circumstances — whether it’s through the 

department or whether it’s through the Justice department — 

are addressed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just to review. Where there are 

allegations and there’s an investigation happening within the 

department, there may be a suspension with pay. But when 

formal criminal charges are laid, the policy has been and is that 

in the vast majority — I don’t know if I can be absolutely 

exclusive — but in the vast, vast majority of cases, if there are 

criminal charges laid, then a suspension is without pay. This is 

not dismissal. This is not dismissal. This is suspension without 

pay. So the member shouldn’t confuse the matter of being 

suspended without pay with dismissal. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is this is the policy, and I am 

comfortable with the decision-making process that goes on 

before that decision is made and with the circumstance where 

criminal charges are laid. 

 

Look at . . . when criminal charges are laid, each of us will — in 

our various and separate bodies, whether it be a community 

organization, a caucus, or a department of government — will 

have processes to be followed. In the circumstances of criminal 

charges in our department, the general rule is it will be 

suspension without pay. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s like there’s two tiers. 

Look at the Martensville case. There was a police officer in 

Saskatoon was charged in that case. His case was eventually 

thrown out of court. That police officer was on leave with pay. 

He didn’t have to go without pay while his case was coming 

forward. I find it absolutely astounding that the department 

would find then it’s . . . while they dismiss . . . because there’s 

an investigation going on, that there is no pay. 

 

And certainly it’s an issue of concern, Mr. Minister, that that 

would be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the House Leader 

is talking about the fact it’s a Justice issue. It will be addressed 

with the Justice minister as well. But I’m talking about Social 

Services policy right now, Mr. Minister. I’m talking about 

Social Services policy right now. If you want to be on leave 

without pay, then have to follow the same rule that everybody 

else does. 

 

Mr. Minister, sorry about that, got sidetracked here as a result 

of the Minister of Agriculture. But I just want to bring this 

forward on the basis, Mr. Minister . . . and right, there is a 

Justice issue here, and it certainly will be raised with the Justice 

minister as well, as to how we treat circumstances in this case. 

The unfortunate part is the Justice minister has no control over 

the Department of Social Services that chooses to dismiss, as a 

result of a judicial process, an employee without pay, and that’s 

the concern I have. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ll move on to some other issues, but I think 

it’s something that certainly needs to be reviewed and needs to 

be looked at, and we’ll certainly address it further with the  

  



1642  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

Minister of Justice. And I hope there’s, in the case of your 

department, there are a number of areas, a number of concerns, 

and I’ve addressed them with . . . at least I can say for the 

member from Saskatoon Haultain has been . . . when he was 

minister was quite straightforward and was quite easy to work 

with as well. And I hope that at the end of the day we find that 

you take your responsibility for the department as seriously as 

the minister from Haultain. And I think you do. I think you do. 

But this is certainly a very serious issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, another concern that was just raised, and I believe 

I brought this one to your attention as well. It’s in regards to a 

circumstance just recently with regards to a young couple who 

just had a little baby and ended up having the baby removed 

from their care. And I would have to say, Mr. Minister — just 

to refresh your memory a little bit — we talked about it. There 

seemed to be certainly a lack of communication between the 

hospital staff when this baby was born and some complications 

that arose. 

 

And also, Mr. Minister, there was a circumstance where the 

couple were then allowed to go home and were asked to take 

their child back to their pediatrician. The pediatrician 

mentioned that this child doesn’t seem to be gaining weight as 

quickly as other children do, and you should maybe feed it a bit 

more, which they proceeded to do. 

 

But all of sudden they find themselves with a social worker at 

the door, and this lady happens to be not . . . happens to struggle 

a little bit in some cases and found herself really in a fearful 

state — her husband wasn’t around — didn’t want to let the 

social worker in. The social worker called three policemen, who 

said we’ll break the door down if you don’t let us in. Then they 

removed the baby from the home. 

 

And I raised this question with you. I think in some cases, Mr. 

Minister, the Department of Social Services of . . . workers tend 

to take their authority almost a little too far without reviewing 

the whole case. And I think just talking to brother-in-law . . . or 

the brother of this young lady who had this baby tonight — I 

just followed up on it just to see how things were going — well 

things aren’t quite smoothed out, Mr. Minister. I think that 

some steps have been taken, and in this case I believe a worker 

has been transferred. And the couple are finding . . . actually the 

new worker is better, more understanding. The unfortunate part 

is the husband’s in the hospital as well with a nervous 

breakdown as a result of this. 

 

(2215) 

 

And so I guess what I would ask, Mr. Minister, what does your 

department do, or how does it address certain circumstances 

such as this that really bring circumstances like this . . . or with 

all circumstances like this to happen that put people under such 

duress? 

 

I’m not sure if the worker was feeling that they had to move 

her. I’m not sure what information the worker had, but it seems 

to me there wasn’t any consultation with the pediatrician. It just 

seemed that there was a lot of lack of communication, and it’s 

left a couple somewhat devastated, especially when they should  

be really happy over the arrival of a new child. 

 

And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, how your department 

looks at and tries to alleviate circumstances that arise, such as 

this one, that creates such horrendous circumstances for a 

couple looking forward to the arrival of a new child. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Here, Mr. Chair, I believe is one of the 

most — if not the most — difficult responsibilities of the 

Department of Social Services, and that’s the occasions when 

the department is called upon to intervene for the protection of a 

child. And I guess at the end of the day, there is always an 

element of a judgement call being made. 

 

Now if there are circumstances with, as the member suggests 

may have happened in this particular instance, where the 

communication has not been good, hopefully we can try and 

address that in that individual circumstance. But I know this is 

one of the most difficult responsibilities of the department. 

 

And my view is if there is an error to be made, we should 

always err on the side of caution. Always err on the side of the 

child. 

 

I think we talked earlier . . . I spoke earlier with the member 

from Humboldt about the number of family circumstances 

where there are protection workers involved. I think we were 

talking about 2,700 families involved. So it’s a large number. I 

think the vast, vast majority are appropriately handled by our 

workers in some very, very difficult circumstances. And I give 

just full credit to those workers who are called upon to do that 

kind of thing. 

 

But if the circumstance comes along where we missed on the 

communication or there is some inappropriate kind of approach, 

we’ll always try to . . . we’ll always try and deal with that. 

 

So I thank the member for his concern here. And again, if there 

is some individual circumstances that we should be doing a 

little more about, please let us know. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, because we did 

chat about this one and I know you’re aware of it. It just seemed 

that there certainly was some lack of communication. A lack to 

at least . . . I mean the failure to consult the pediatrician that the 

couple were certainly working with. And I guess, Mr. Minister, 

while we say well, there is so many cases where maybe you 

haven’t done enough, and a child is hurt or whatever . . . And I 

know those are tragic situations. And you’re trying your best to 

deal with them. 

 

But even for a situation where it’s gone the other way and 

someone’s really been hurt as a result of actions of a worker 

who thought they were working in the best interest of the child 

or a particular individual, even one person or one couple that’s 

hurt, that’s a sad experience in their lives as well. And so it’s a 

. . . I know it’s a balancing act, but I think in this case there are 

a couple hoops that could have been followed, and if a little bit 

more communication would have taken place with some of the 

other individuals involved, we may not have put the couple in  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

this circumstance. 

 

And I guess I raise it so that there’s some due processes taken; 

so that the other couples don’t face the same circumstances, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Thank you. I’ll now allow the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena to put some more questions. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, thank you. I have a few more 

questions on autism. I appreciated your response saying that 

there was a group home for people that have autism. Can you 

tell me what . . . is there an age restriction or what for the 

children or the people that are in the homes for autistic 

children? What circumstances allow them to come into this 

home? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there wouldn’t . . . there is not 

an age restriction. We try and work with the families and 

determine what the best supports for the child will be. So 

there’s not a specific circumstance of age, but it’s a 

circumstance of all the factors that will surround that particular 

family or that child that determines if it’s appropriate that the 

child should be in a home dedicated . . . a group home dedicated 

for the autistic. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How many group homes are there in 

Saskatchewan that are dedicated for autistic people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we’re not sure we have the 

exact number. We’ll have to get it from those who will know 

the exact number. And I’m not sure . . . there will be those 

dedicated for autism, but there may be other group homes 

where an autistic person may be part of a number of other 

individuals in that home. There are some that are specifically 

dedicated. We’ll get you the exact locations and number as soon 

as we can. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Does your department work with the 

Department of Education to provide extra teaching assistance 

within an ordinary classroom to help children with autism? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our community living 

caseworkers will in fact work with teachers, with educators, in 

kind of a case management model. We also . . . I should put this 

on the floor of the House too for discussion, is that I’m very 

pleased with some of the things that are happening in early 

childhood intervention programs around the province. And 

we’ve been able to increase the number of spaces in this year’s 

budget. And some of the children involved in the early 

childhood intervention will be children who are suffering from 

autism. 

 

I had a very happy visit just the other day with some of the 

leadership, the provincial leadership of the early child 

development. They brought me a lovely photo to hang in the 

office, some pictures involving children. And this too is a 

valuable tool for families with children with autism. 

 

But in specific answer to your question, yes, our community 

living workers will in case management of individuals be  

working with teachers and with other professionals in the 

community to try and build that well-rounded base of support. 

 

Ms. Draude:  In rural Saskatchewan there are of course 

limited opportunity to have teachers or teachers’ aides with any 

specific training to work with children with autism in their 

schools. I’m wondering if there’s going to be any emphasis 

placed on providing more trained personnel, or ability to have 

people with extra training to help children with these needs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think, Mr. Chair, that is more a 

discussion that the member may want to have with the Minister 

of Education if we’re talking about direct support to the 

schools. I know our community living division and our group 

homes, we are trying to build a network in communities across 

the province. And I know that network does exist and we’re 

always looking for opportunities to try and build on that 

network to provide supports for people as close to home as 

possible. And so I know I’ve travelled to group homes in many, 

many small and large communities across the province, but in 

terms of what resources can be put more specifically into 

classrooms, I think that’s a discussion better held with the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m not sure if the number of people with 

autism is . . . if that’s a number that you have available to you? 

Can you tell me how many people in the province do have it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We, Mr. Chair, don’t have the numbers. 

The community health nurses, the Department of Health I think, 

would have better statistics. I know it’s a condition that more of 

us I think, are growing more aware of. And I think as our 

information and education increase about autism, we may be 

able to recognize it earlier or identify it where perhaps it has not 

be diagnosed. 

 

I recall some months ago a David Suzuki program on television 

that talked about autism and reminded us that the earlier that we 

can intervene in a child’s life to begin what is sometimes a very 

intensive process of treatment to try and remedy autism, the 

earlier that we can begin, the better — hopefully preschool. 

 

That particular program indicated that if you can do some of 

that intensive work early on in life, you would see some real 

progress. But if left, it can mean a very debilitating disability 

for a lifetime. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I can’t appreciate what a person with autism 

has to go through but I understand that it’s just about as equally 

as hard on the family. And I’m wondering if there’s been any 

thought put to helping the parents go through any type of 

training or help that would help them deal . . . to keep the child 

in the family. And just one last question you can answer at the 

same time: Ontario has a summer camp for children with autism 

to allow the child to deal, to interact, with people — all children 

who have autism. Is Saskatchewan considering something like 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Some of the areas where we have been 

trying to concentrate, Mr. Chair, have been in the area of respite 

programs to offer parents particularly, respite care. I was part of  

  



1644  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

a happy announcement here in Regina not too long ago where 

we’re teaming Department of Social Services and Regina 

Health District and teaming with some community agencies to 

provide a respite registry, because there are respite resources 

but oftentimes parents are not aware of those resources. And so 

this respite registry will try and bring together the resources that 

are available with those who need those resources, as a kind of 

a coordinating office, a coordinating function. 

 

And I know in speaking to some of the people since that project 

began — it’s only . . . if it’s two months old, it’s about that 

much — already they’re having some real, some real success in 

matching people who need the respite assistance and those who 

are willing to provide it. 

 

We have had a tradition in Saskatchewan of supporting summer 

camping programs, that kind of thing. I’m not well acquainted 

with what’s happening in Ontario but I know for instance in our 

province for many years we’ve seen the good work of Camp 

Easter Seal and other like opportunities. 

 

We’re always struggling, I think, always struggling to find 

better and more appropriate ways, always of course restricted 

somewhat by budgets in what we can do. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Social Services  Vote 36 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1629 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1629 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1637 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1638, 1643 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1638 

 

 


