



















































Hansard: April 21, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 975 

 April 21, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens of Balcarres, Lipton, and Ituna, to present a petition. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition signed by citizens of the city of Regina: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, crimes of violence, the 

charge of attempted murder of a police officer; such task 

force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 

municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present a petition signed by individuals from Lac Vert, Naicam, 

and Watson: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murders of a 

police officer; such a task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach programs, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reverse the 

municipal revenue-sharing reduction; 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid the fight against youth crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of 

the Assembly, a group of visitors in your gallery, from my 

constituency. This is a group of young people from the Junior 

Adventist Academy in Saskatoon. 

 

I’d like to welcome the students, Jonathon Wood, Brennan 

Marcoux, Adrian Wood, Trevor Parmelle, Jason Lisk, Michael 

Raney, Matthew Cascagnnete, Christa Dobroskay, David 

Kartik, and Jonathon Sparks. These students, Mr. Speaker, are 

accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Wood, and by parents, Karen 

Dobroskay, Melodie Wood, and Phillip Raney. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these young 

people to question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to colleagues in 

the legislature, a valued family friend and adviser, my uncle, 

Ward Dixon, who’s sitting in the gallery opposite. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Congratulations to Sandra Schmirler Rink 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, with apologies to Ogden 

Nash: 

 

Saskatchewan has many fine curlers. 

The greatest, of course, Sandra Schmirler. 

She went off to Bern, a medal to earn 

And did so, did Schmirler the curler. 

 

I burst into rhyme, Mr. Speaker, because as the world knows by   



976  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

now, the rink of Sandra Schmirler won the ladies gold medal of 

curling Saturday in Bern, Switzerland. The curling displayed by 

the Schmirler rink was, frankly, remarkable. It went through the 

week with only one loss, and neither the semi-final nor final 

match could be termed nail-biters. They were that superior to 

the field. 

 

So the first thing to say is simply congratulations to Sandra; Jan 

Betker; Joan McCusker; Marcia Gudereit; fifth, Atina Ford; and 

coach Anita Ford. Congratulations for curling as we knew they 

would. 

 

I think however, that the chief point to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, 

is not their exceptional curling, but their laudable poise and 

dignity with which they represented their city, their province, 

and their country. The diplomacy they displayed is rare, even 

among diplomats. 

 

I congratulate them, and I know we all wish Sandra Schmirler 

well as she now turns her attention to another upcoming event. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passover Week 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Sunset tonight is the beginning of Passover 

Week during which Jewish people the world over observe and 

remember the preparation for and the flight from oppression in 

the land of Egypt. This is the basis of the “Book of Exodus” in 

the Bible. 

 

As Jews prepare for this most solemn ritual, it is instructive for 

the secular world to remember with them, the historical and 

moral significance of this event. 

 

The migration which began thousands of years ago still shapes, 

to a great extent, our religious and civil institutions as well as 

our attitudes. The escape from slavery by the children of Israel 

led to the creation of laws which are the basis for our codes. 

 

The Ten Commandments, which were delivered to Moses 

during the flight, are, one can argue, all the law we need. Once 

we learn to follow these, we don’t really need much more. 

 

This story of a people who refused to be enslaved still uplifts 

us. It reminds us that the human spirit is indomitable. What 

unites us is stronger than that which divides us. 

 

Passover reminds us that today, wherever slavery remains, we 

all taste its bitterness. In every generation each of us should feel 

as though we ourselves had gone forth from Egypt if we are 

ever to rid the world of the scourge of slavery and oppression. 

 

During this week, Mr. Speaker, I join all members in saying: 

peace for us; peace for everyone. For all people this is our hope. 

Next year in Jerusalem; next year may we all be free. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Upgraders Making Profits 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had many 

occasions to stand before members of this Assembly and point 

out the increased activity in our oil and gas industry, and the 

unquestionable economic benefits that have been . . . are being 

produced throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

I was in Lloydminster on the weekend and the optimism is 

overwhelming. I’ll have something to say about that later this 

week. But our communities are benefiting from this renewed 

enthusiasm. I see it firsthand throughout my constituency, and 

I’m sure other members do as well, but some will not admit it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an important part of our oil and gas industry are 

the two provincial upgraders: the Bi-Provincial in 

Lloydminster, and the NewGrade Energy in Regina. Together 

the upgraders employ approximately 500 people directly, and 

hundreds more indirectly. The Bi-Provincial upgrader plays a 

significant economic role for the people and businesses in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is why I am happy to congratulate the Bi-Provincial and 

the NewGrade Energy for their 1996 recorded profits. This is 

good news for our oil and gas sector as well as our provincial 

economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to congratulate Bi-Provincial and NewGrade 

Energy for their successful year and wish them all the best in 

the future. And I want to commend our government for having 

the business sense not to follow the Liberals in Ottawa and the 

Tories from Alberta in bailing out . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The member’s time has expired. Next 

statements by members. 

 

Tisdale Business Marks 75 Years of Service 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to take this opportunity to have the members recognize a 

very special business in the town of Tisdale. Groat’s Supply is 

celebrating 75 years of service to the Tisdale district. 

 

As an automotive and parts store beginning in 1922, Groat’s has 

become a thriving business. Ed Groat’s legacy has left a lasting 

impression on the business community as well as the town 

itself. 

 

The late Mr. Ed Groat spent two terms as mayor and six years 

as councillor. Congratulations on three generations with 75 

years of community service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Z99 Fund-raiser 

 

Mr. Trew:  More good new from the Z, Mr. Speaker. C.C. 

and Lori Lindsay completed their most successful radiothon at 5 

p.m. on Friday raising $35,479 for the Regina General Hospital 

neonatal unit. Donors, Z99, and C.C. and Lori Lindsay deserve 

nothing but praise. 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

The $35,479 will be used in the neonatal unit to purchase two 

Isolette units. These infant incubators cost $15,000 each. The 

radiothon goal was to raise $30,000. I am told the additional 

$5,479 will all be spent in the neonatal unit buying extras that 

that unit would need. 

 

Other people I spoke to reacted with things like: “It’s just 

great.” Well what a way of understating the fabulous dedication 

to Regina people that Z99, C.C., and Lori Lindsay have 

demonstrated again. Whatever the Z is paying C.C. and Lori 

Lindsay, it should be more. 

 

Congratulations to everyone involved, especially C.C. and Lori 

Lindsay and the donors for a job very well done. There are 

35,479 ways of saying thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

50th Anniversary of Western Sales Ltd. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have many 

times stood here and acknowledged the important role small 

business has in their constituencies, and I’ve had my share of 

chances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise today to take this opportunity 

to point out the success and longevity of a particular business 

from my constituency that is celebrating its 50th anniversary 

later this week. 

 

Western Sales Ltd. of Rosetown has been a successful and 

competitive farm implement business since 1947 when Glen 

Thrasher built a small shop and was awarded a John Deere farm 

machinery contract. In the early years of that business, one of 

the Herschel dealers joined in in a partnership to strengthen it in 

Rosetown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 50 years ago Glen Thrasher committed his 

business to serving the needs of the community and providing 

quality service to area farmers. Today Western Sales Ltd. is 

continuing the tradition established by Mr. Thrasher. They 

remain community focused and they are committed to their 

customers. 

 

Their dedication to their customers has not gone unnoticed, Mr. 

Speaker. They are ranked fifth in sales for John Deere 

equipment in Canada, and for the past three years have placed 

in the top 100 businesses in Saskatchewan. Employing 47 

people in four locations that include Rosetown, Elrose, Biggar, 

and Outlook, this energetic, forward-looking company believes 

in giving back to the community. 

 

As an example, Mr. Speaker, Western Sales purchased a 

47-passenger bus for the Rosetown community that serves a 

multitude of community events and organizations. 

 

I would like to congratulate current owners Grant Henderson, 

Grant McGrath, Doug Slimmon, and Tim Drake for continuing 

the tradition of excellence that was begun by Glen Thrasher . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member’s time is 

expired. Statements by members continue. 

 

Organ Donor Week 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

generosity of Saskatchewan people is legendary. Against all 

odds we have forged a society here in this province based on 

sharing and cooperation. This week is Organ Donor Week. This 

week attempts to build on that tradition by asking Saskatchewan 

people to give a very precious gift of themselves — the gift of 

life. 

 

The Saskatchewan Coalition for Organ Donor Awareness 

launched a campaign this morning to draw the attention of the 

public to this very important issue. Unfortunately, Canada has 

one of the lowest rates of organ donation in the world. One of 

the main reasons for this is that families deny consent when 

asked about organ donation. 

 

Clearly, action needs to be taken before a tragedy occurs within 

a family. Families need to have that discussion when the 

atmosphere is less emotionally charged. The key is for people to 

make their wishes regarding organ donation known beforehand. 

 

Everybody in Saskatchewan who carries a health care card will 

have received an organ or tissue donor consent card. I urge all 

Saskatchewan people to take a moment to fill out this important 

piece of information and to make sure that it is displayed 

prominently in your wallets. The gift of life is a precious one — 

please give the gift of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

applauding the work of the Saskatchewan Coalition for Organ 

Donor Awareness in drawing the attention of the public to this 

very important issue. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Provincial Auditor Report on SaskPower 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, the 

Premier used one of his minor ministers to launch a vicious 

attack on the Provincial Auditor for daring to question the 

government’s accounting practices. This attack illustrates just 

how far the Premier and his ministers have sunk, Mr. Speaker. 

They have become nothing more than bullies — smug, 

arrogant, and manipulative. 

 

Now the Premier has said this is just a dispute over accounting 

practices. And on Friday the Premier stood in this House and 

said, I quote: 

 

. . . nobody is attacking the Provincial Auditor and nobody 

is undermining the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Yet in the Crown Corporations Committee, the minister 

responsible for SaskPower said, and I quote, 

 

  



978  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

. . . you might support the Provincial Auditor; I don’t. 

 

If the government doesn’t see this as an attack, Mr. Speaker, 

will the Premier please explain to the people of this province 

exactly what his minister was saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I was not in the Public 

Accounts or Crown Corporations Committee where the 

statements that the member refers to were made, and so 

therefore I don’t have that advantage in being able to answer. 

But I can repeat again on behalf of the government, our 

position. 

 

Our position is that the Provincial Auditor, as an officer of this 

Legislative Assembly, is a very important officer. The office is 

very important and integral to the democratic process. That 

does not mean that on some occasions the government of the 

day may take a position in disagreement with the position taken 

by the Provincial Auditor. If it does so, it must have a valid 

reason for doing so. 

 

In this case, there is a valid reason as articulated by Ernst & 

Young and the other auditors used by SaskEnergy and 

employed by the minister in charge of SaskEnergy. In all 

regards where there are differences, they should be handled 

with civility and respect. And the Provincial Auditor, I 

conclude, himself notes that this is an area that is not free from 

some doubt since he has asked that it be referred to the CICA 

(Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants) for further 

consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, we and the people of 

Saskatchewan know that this is an attack on an individual. What 

is behind this assault on the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When it was in opposition, the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

was quite vocal in defending the Provincial Auditor, calling the 

then Tories, and I quote, “a downright attack on the individual 

and the institution of the Provincial Auditor.” Yet now the NDP 

is attacking the auditor simply because he had the audacity, Mr. 

Speaker, to raise questions. 

 

This is what is truly scandalous, Mr. Speaker. This NDP 

government should be ashamed — ashamed of the hypocritical 

stance of supporting and then not supporting the Provincial 

Auditor whenever it feels like doing it. 

 

Will the Premier do the honourable thing, Mr. Speaker, and 

apologize to the auditor for this uncalled-for and unprovoked 

attack? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the present 

incumbent in the Provincial Auditor’s office is mature enough 

to understand the nature of a dispute respecting the accounting 

procedures of SaskPower because he has himself acknowledged 

in paragraph .32, quote: I have asked the CICA to examine the 

practices respecting this very particular matter. 

 

There is an honest difference of opinion. We have accounting 

firms who have advised SaskEnergy that the charge should be 

recorded in the way that it was. The Provincial Auditor takes 

another point of view. There’s a legitimate difference. Even the 

Provincial Auditor says, I’m asking this standard to go toward 

the CICA. 

 

There’s nothing wrong with that. We will have those 

differences. We’ve had those kinds of differences. What I 

disputed at the time in opposition and always will, even under 

our administration, is any kind of a baseless attack on any 

officer of this Legislative Assembly without valid reasons and 

grounds, or any baseless attack at all. 

 

This is a defence of an accounting procedure which was set 

forward by chartered accountants, reasonable people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I’d hoped that the Premier 

would stand up and do the right thing and that is to apologize. 

Obviously I was wrong. What is so sad, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Provincial Auditor was hired by this government to do a job and 

because of this, he has been discredited for voicing his concerns 

which obviously fly in the face of what the government wants 

the public to know. 

 

I’m again asking this government to issue a much-needed 

apology to the Provincial Auditor, who in questioning 

SaskPower’s bottom line was looking out for the best interests 

of this province and the people who live here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I can only again repeat 

the answer I have given the member for the last two previous 

questions. There is obviously an argument amongst the 

accountants as to how this reconstruction charge should be 

recorded. We have professional firms in this business of 

advising companies like SaskPower to do it in a certain fashion. 

It was done in that fashion. 

 

The Provincial Auditor has another view, which I would argue 

he is not absolutely certain about because he himself says he’s 

going to refer it to the governing body of chartered accountants 

to see which of these two approaches should be adopted. What 

is wrong with that? That happens; it has happened from time to 

time; it’ll happen again. 

 

The Provincial Auditor is very, very much capable of handling 

these kinds of differences and we will not in all circumstances 

— I don’t mean this government — no government in all 

circumstances will always accept the Provincial Auditor’s 

statement. It’s not possible, and where it does not accept the 

Provincial Auditor’s statement, it should have good and valid 

grounds for not doing so. 

 

The minister has advanced good and valid grounds. The 

Auditor himself is uncertain about it . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well he did. The Auditor himself says, the Provincial 

Auditor himself says that he’s referring it to the chartered   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

accountants’ board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is also to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, this 

government has added fuel to the cynicism fire by attacking the 

credibility of a neutral officer of the legislature, one of the few 

people residents of this province felt they could turn to for 

government accountability. 

 

But how accountable can the Provincial Auditor be, Mr. 

Speaker, or the Ombudsman, or the child’s advocate if this 

government undermines their efforts and discredits this 

information? The people of Saskatchewan look to the 

government for guidance to represent their best interests, but 

with this attack on the Provincial Auditor, the government has 

just created more public distrust. 

 

And a recent government poll reflects this, showing 69 per cent 

of respondents said they didn’t have enough information about 

how the Crowns operate. Yet when the Provincial Auditor 

raises concerns about the operation and accountability of 

SaskPower, he gets a verbal slap in the face. 

 

Will this government explain to the people of this province why 

it has taken such great steps to discredit the auditor just because 

his professional opinion’s different from the government’s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this line of 

questioning, in my judgement, is patently false if not childish. I 

have said for three answers in a row, and I repeat again — in a 

row. 

 

We have a dispute amongst auditors. Ernst & Young — using 

that firm as an example — is no slouch when it comes to 

auditing. I think they know something about auditing. They 

have professional standards. SaskPower relied on Ernst & 

Young’s advice. The member from Melfort is in business. He 

hires chartered accountants, no doubt, to do his auditing and he 

relies on their advice. 

 

And there will be disputes, and there is a dispute in this area, 

and there’s a dispute that the Provincial Auditor himself 

recognizes is not free from doubt. That’s all the minister was 

doing, was explaining . . . he was explaining the questions that 

were put to him by the opposition and by the Provincial Auditor 

on this issue. I think it’s a legitimate matter for contention. 

We’ll see what the CICA board says in due course and take the 

appropriate action at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, if it was such a trivial issue 

that the auditor was totally unprepared for, then I simply have 

to ask: is why did he issue a special report about this very issue? 

He knew what he was talking about; he knew what his position 

was, and he was raising a very legitimate concern. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, by you allowing the minister of SaskPower 

to politicize this issue and to allow the minister to take this as a 

personal attack on the Provincial Auditor, you have discredited 

the whole Crown Corporations Committee and the process that 

that committee should be following. 

 

Will the Premier explain why his ministers are being allowed to 

use the Crown Corporations Committee to attack legislative 

officials rather than using it to ask legitimate questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, our ministers do not use 

legislative committees or this legislature to attack officers of 

this Assembly. It has not happened; it’s not going to happen 

under my administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the Premier 

should attend some of these meetings then because obviously 

anyone that was attended at that meeting knew what this was 

last Thursday — it was an attack on the credibility of the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Premier, if that’s the way you’re going to operate it, will 

you at least commit that this auditor’s report should go to the 

Public Accounts Committee for review? Because that is a 

financial review committee, and because your ministers aren’t 

at those committee meetings, at least we can have this done in a 

non-partisan, serious way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I stand to be 

corrected by the procedures of the House, but I think the Public 

Accounts Committee gets all Provincial Auditor’s reports. So I 

don’t know what the big applause and the big purpose of the 

question is. The report is out and it’s obvious what the words of 

the report say. And it’s obvious that the Provincial Auditor says 

that there is a dispute amongst accountants as to how you list 

this matter. And it’s going to be resolved by the CICA. And 

when the CICA resolves it we’ll know what the CICA says, and 

we’ll take the appropriate action thereafter. 

 

So if the member said should it go to Public Accounts, I think 

I’m correct in saying it does go to Public Accounts in any event. 

So no problem there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister of SaskPower. Mr. Minister, exactly how much 

did you spend on getting a bunch of accounting firms to 

second-guess the Provincial Auditor? If it’s bad enough that 

consumers are paying a record high power rates and $14 million 

in reconstruction fees, now they have to pay extra for your 

political reconstruction fee. So you can reconstruct history and 

say that this $14 million isn’t really revenue. 

 

In fact I heard you and your accountants refer to the   



980  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

reconstruction fee as a loan. Mr. Minister, if I’m loaning Jack 

Messer money, I’d like to call that loan today. And I’m sure 

that everyone else in the province would also. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much did your little failed public relations 

exercise cost SaskPower and Saskatchewan taxpayers? How 

much did you pay a bunch of accountants to come to the 

legislature and join your attack on the Provincial Auditor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to point out to the member opposite that Ernst 

& Young was representing the corporation as their external 

auditor. I would also want to remind that member that Ernst & 

Young has acted on behalf of SaskPower for many years. As a 

matter of fact I can take you back to 1989-90 when Ernst & 

Young was the accountant on behalf of your party under a 

tender process, the same as it happened under this one. 

 

Ernst & Young has consulted with a couple of major accounting 

firms in Canada, and has received the same opinion to concur 

with what their recommendation was to SaskPower. I want to 

remind the member that this is a dispute between two auditors. 

We pay and do pay through our Crowns, through a tendering 

process, professional, widely renowned across this country 

firms. And for this member to indicate that they are other than 

professional, I would only say to him, he might want to go out 

and repeat those comments outside. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 

questioning the credibility. We’re asking you: how much did 

you, SaskPower and Jack Messer, spend to get a gang of 

accountants to come in here and attack the Provincial Auditor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell you what 

the accountant fees were but I can tell you that the officials 

certainly will have those numbers, and that number will be 

offered through the Crown Corporations Committee which is 

the appropriate place for those kinds of detailed questions to be 

asked. 

 

And as the member will know, SaskPower will be sitting before 

the Crown Corporations Committee shortly and that’s certainly 

one of the questions that I would urge him to ask. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Auditor Spring Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, I want to know if you’ve learned 

anything from the SaskPower minister’s little public relations 

disaster of last week. Later today the Provincial Auditor 

releases his spring report. So I guess what we’re wondering, 

and I think the people of Saskatchewan are wondering, if we’re 

going to see a repeat of the SaskPower minister’s disgusting 

display last week. 

 

If there are areas in the report that he releases today that are 

critical of your government, are we going to see you hauling in 

accountants from all over Canada to launch another full-scale 

attack on the auditor’s credibility? Or can you assure us and 

other members of this Assembly and all members of 

Saskatchewan that you will treat the auditor’s recommendations 

with the respect they deserve instead of resorting to the tactics 

displayed by the minister last week? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the 

Leader of the Third Party the same answer which I gave to the 

Liberal Party. This side of the House treats every officer of the 

Legislative Assembly with respect. 

 

That is not to say that in every instance where there is an 

opinion offered by an officer of the Assembly that we cannot 

take issue with it if we have legitimate grounds and rationale for 

doing the same. In the case of SaskPower we think we do have 

legitimate grounds, as evidenced by Ernst & Young and the 

other chartered accountants and their advice to SaskPower as to 

what should take place. 

 

With respect to the Provincial Auditor’s report to be tabled later 

this day, we’ll see what he has to say. In some areas 

undoubtedly . . . in some areas we’ll undoubtedly try our best to 

comply with his recommendations — in most of the areas. If 

there’s an area where we disagree with him for legitimate 

accounting or other reasons, we’ll express that. We’ve done it 

in the past. Nobody is under any personal attack here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Reconstruction Charges 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much. I have a 

supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. 

 

What are the chances of other Crowns introducing 

reconstruction fees that will take millions of dollars out of the 

pockets of taxpayers without recording this money as revenue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, there are no plans to 

introduce any new fees, as the member opposite, I believe, 

knows. This fee was introduced as a part of a public review 

process where it was suggested that there would be a rate 

increase and a reconstruction charge which would be handled in 

this fashion in order to replace an ageing infrastructure in the 

power sector; and each Crown will look after its own interests 

in terms of providing for its future capital investment and we 

will make sure that it fits with the generally accepted practices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Minister, once again NDP government polling shows two   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

things very clearly. One, health care is the most important issue 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And number two, health care 

is the area where the NDP is doing the poorest job. 

 

In January, approval of your government’s handling of health 

care sank to an all-time low of 23 per cent. As bad as that is, 

most people expect it to get worse — 62 per cent expect the 

health system in Saskatchewan to deteriorate over the next 10 

years. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is clear that Saskatchewan people regard NDP 

health reform as a dismal failure. What are you going to do to 

address this crisis of confidence in your government’s handling 

of health care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

tell the member and the House that the latest polling showed 

that of the people that use health services in Saskatchewan, 86 

per cent of those who used health services in the past year, Mr. 

Speaker, found them to be good or excellent. Because the fact 

of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has one of the 

best health care systems in the world — a medicare system 

opposed by the Conservatives, opposed by the Liberals, still 

opposed by those parties if you listen to the two-tier rhetoric 

that they come up with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to issue a challenge to that member as I did to the 

Liberal members — which challenge has gone unanswered so 

far, Mr. Speaker. And that is this: since they like to get up day 

after day and say we don’t have a good health care system in 

the province of Saskatchewan, I challenge them to rise in their 

place, Mr. Speaker, and tell us where in the world there’s a 

better, more caring, and compassionate health care system than 

there is right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, you 

really have to wonder why the government even does this 

polling. And it’s quite obvious that they have extensive polling 

so that they hope they can pull one good comment out of the 

polling at the end of the day, especially when their poll shows 

that more than 62 per cent of the public of this province 

disapprove of the way they are handling health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that the government, every time it puts a 

poll on and every time it listens to the people, then the minister 

puts on the blinders and says, everything is fine, as he just told 

us. Mr. Minister, when a person gets diagnosed with a terminal 

illness, they usually go through five phases. I see that you’re 

going through denial, but everyone else in Saskatchewan has 

already moved on to anger and fear. 

 

Mr. Minister, why do you do these polls if you refuse to listen 

to them? When are you going to start addressing the crisis in 

confidence in your health care system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the first thing I want to point 

out is that that member, like the Liberal members, refuses to tell 

the people where they have a better health care system than the 

province of Saskatchewan. Because we have a very good health 

care system, Mr. Speaker, and the record of this party and this 

government — which was to found the medicare system in our 

country, Mr. Speaker — has been a good record and it’s going 

to continue to be a good record. 

 

And we’re going to continue to build our health care system, 

Mr. Speaker, which is a far cry from what Conservatives do in 

office or what Liberals do in office, Mr. Speaker. Because when 

the Conservatives were in office federally, do you know what 

they did? They started cutting back on the transfer payments to 

the provinces for health care, and that’s been continued by the 

Liberals. 

 

There’s no difference between the Liberals and Conservatives, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the latest edition of the Canadian 

Medical Association News has this headline. It says: “Ottawa 

fails to protect medicare.” They failed to protect medicare, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’re going to protect it on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farming Taxation Rules 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the past few days, 

Mr. Speaker, a number of farmers have contacted my office 

with a very legitimate question. Because a certain percentage of 

their grain sales are used for capital purchases each year, they 

wish to know if they can designate part of these sales as 

expenditures, and not as income. 

 

Will the Minister of Agriculture indicate whether his 

government feels this is a reasonable request? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 

Mr. Speaker, the accounting practices and the rules of taxation 

are set out very clearly. This government will always consider 

farmers’ requests as serious requests. We’re willing to look at 

this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As this House 

knows, the auditor suggested that $14 million this government 

collected from SaskPower as new reconstruction charge should 

be reported as revenue. This government maintains of course, as 

we’ve heard earlier today, that because these funds will help 

pay for infrastructure upgrades and reconstruction, it should not 

be listed as revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers, or for that matter any business person, 

uses part of his or her income to improve their business in one 

way or another. Will the minister in charge of Crown 

Investments Corporation explain, if this government can decide 

that part of its revenue should not be included as income, why 

can’t individuals then? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



982  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I see how the member is 

trying to twist around the issues here and see where he’s going. 

I’ll tell you, the bigger concern — and we always will, like I 

say, consider what farmers are requesting as far as income tax 

purposes are concerned — but what the member opposite 

should be, should be asking is how fast can we make sure that 

the federal government gets our grain to market. Why aren’t 

they working on that? 

 

We’re going to have, we’re going to have, with dropping grain 

prices, some problems for the Crow benefit gone. I’d like to 

know what the member’s going to do about that, talking to his 

federal partners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, in the last year there’s been several 

hundreds of millions of dollars cut out of the farmers’ pockets 

by the Liberals in Ottawa, the cousins of these Liberals. 

 

I find it very amusing that they will stand up in this House and 

try to convolute the issues, convolute the issues and make cheap 

politics out of what could be a serious issue in Saskatchewan 

and that is our net farm income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage these members to go and talk to Mr. 

Goodale, who has done very little for Saskatchewan in terms of 

the federal government and tell him to start working for the 

farmers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Evidently what’s 

good for the goose is not good for the gander in terms of this 

government’s eyes. Mr. Speaker, maybe the Premier could 

answer: if the government can hide revenues, then why will he 

not allow the people of the province to do the same thing? And 

that’s exactly what’s he doing. Why, Mr. Premier, what’s good 

for the goose is not good for the gander in your eyes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, the federal government in 

this country, in this country, has taken hundreds of millions of 

dollars out of the pockets of prairie farmers. We have a 

transportation system, we have a transportation system that has 

cost the farmers of this province hundreds of millions of dollars. 

We have demurrage payments. 

 

We see the federal minister a couple of weeks ago saying that 

he was going to do something about transportation of grain. A 

couple of hours later, his office said he was just kidding. Yet 

now he’s saying they’re going to try to do something again to 

ensure the movement of grain. 

 

I think what the member opposite should be doing is standing in 

his place and telling us . . . tabling his correspondence to make 

sure that the Wheat Board legislation gets through and that the 

federal government is serious about moving our grain to port. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and 

Security Guards Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, The 

Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, 

The Arts Board Act, 1997 be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day and pursuant to 

section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I now table the 

Report of the Provincial Auditor, the 1997 spring report. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly to make a statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, as the member from 

Swift Current said a few weeks ago, in Saskatchewan we have 

learned to respond to challenges from nature in a number of 

ways. Blizzards, drought, hail, wind — we’ve experienced them 

all and accept them as part of the challenge of living here on the 

Prairies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are not so used to are floods. Last spring, 

and this one as well, we’ve had high water, some property 

damage, some roads washed out, and a great deal of 

inconvenience for Saskatchewan residents. 

 

But I think it’s fair to say that considering the amount of 

snowfall both winters, we’ve been substantially flood proof, 

and we’ve been very lucky here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past few days, as we and the people across 

North America and really around the world have watched the 

news, we know by comparison just how lucky we have been. 

Our neighbours to the south in North Dakota are experiencing 

floods that are called “once in a century” if not more, and the 

Red River has created havoc in Grand Forks, a city of 50,000 

people. The people are now without water and electricity, and to 

compound their suffering, fire has destroyed part of the 

downtown area. 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

The sights on our TV screens of fire burning in the middle of 

floods is truly astonishing and it serves to remind us of how 

powerful nature can be and, by contrast, how little we can do 

when the forces of nature turn against us. It’s being said that it 

will be a full two years before life returns to normal in Grand 

Forks, if then. 

 

And as we know, the Red River flows out of North Dakota into 

Manitoba through Winnipeg, and in that province people are 

bracing and preparing themselves for a record crest of the river. 

It’s some comfort to them that they can watch the progress of 

the flood and prepare themselves accordingly, and I know huge 

efforts are being made to protect life and property in Winnipeg 

and in Manitoba. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to the west, both in Alberta and British 

Columbia, there is also flooding or the threat of flooding in 

some of the communities — not to the same extent, but serious 

none the less. Particularly, the town of Peace River has had its 

downtown core flooded, although fortunately most residential 

areas were spared. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all members will join me in 

expressing our empathy and moral support for the states and 

provinces that are under siege from flooding. We also join, I am 

sure, in stating our admiration for the heroic struggles taking 

place to fight back the waters — a losing one in some cases but 

a noble one none the less. 

 

We know that the human spirit and the determination have 

already displayed . . . have been displayed, will enable them to 

rebuild once the waters recede. And I know we all wish them 

the best and express our support for them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the remarks are concluded, I intend to 

move a motion, seconded by the Government House Leader: 

 

That the proceedings by all parties be forwarded to the 

mayors, governors, and premiers of the affected locales. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Is leave granted by the House to allow the 

Leader of the Opposition and others to comment? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 

opposition also extends its condolences and heartfelt thoughts 

to the thousands of people ravaged by the floods and fires in 

North Dakota. During such widespread disaster, humankind’s 

lack of clout against mother nature becomes painfully evident. 

 

We would like to extend our prayers and best wishes for all 

those trying to piece their lives back together in the Dakotas. 

We also wish all Canadians in Manitoba who will be affected 

by the flow of water along the Red River, a very safe next 

couple of weeks and wish them all the best. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Conservative opposition wants to join all members of the House 

this afternoon to send our thoughts and our prayers to our 

friends in North Dakota. 

 

Last week we all watched the news and listened to the reports 

of the city of Fargo and how these Midwesterners were fighting 

to protect their homes and businesses from the ravages of the 

Red River. I’m sorry to say that the dyke broke in Fargo late 

last week and about a third of the city’s south end was flooded. 

 

Our hearts and support go out to all of those in Fargo, Alida, 

and several other small towns along the Red River, and we 

haven’t heard much about the suffering as well from those 

folks. Newscasts say it’ll be about another week before they are 

safe from further flooding. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, the thousands of families in Grand 

Forks, North Dakota have been the focus of the news coverage. 

Seventy-five per cent of over 60,000 citizens in Grand Forks 

had to evacuate their homes and businesses and spent their days 

in air force base hangars with other victims. This has been truly 

devastating, Mr. Speaker, and the damages can’t even really 

begin to be estimated at this point. 

 

We understand President Clinton has declared a state of 

national disaster and thousands of National Guard, Red Cross, 

and other volunteers are doing their best to help out the very 

difficult situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people are prairie people, much like 

ourselves. While they are in the midst of turmoil, volunteers to 

help have actually had to be turned away because so many 

individuals have turned up to help out in this situation. 

 

That says a lot, Mr. Speaker, about the types of people North 

Dakotans and prairie people are in general. They are hardy and 

hard-working, and I know with our help and the help of many 

concerned, they’ll be able to rebuild their homes, their 

businesses, and their lives. 

 

They are also a giving people, Mr. Speaker. When the Red was 

rising in Fargo, North Dakota State University cancelled classes 

so thousands of university students could help sandbag. And 

they all turned out and helped out. People from all across North 

Dakota and Minnesota helped out those in need. 

 

I’m thankful, Mr. Speaker, that the Rafferty-Alameda dams are 

preventing this same fate for areas like Estevan or Minot. If not 

for these important structures, we could be watching the same 

news reports for those areas as well. Rather than just providing 

moral support, these structures are tangible support, and we’ve 

had numerous phone calls from the people that say the same. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that all parties here join 

today to convey our heartfelt wishes to the people of North 

Dakota. Hopefully the flood waters will recede very quickly. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just   



984  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

like to take a moment as well to join in with other members in 

support of this motion being brought forward by the Deputy 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the flood damage that we’re seeing and the 

flooding that we’re seeing taking place in North Dakota, and 

certainly that’s now headed up into the Manitoba area, has even 

brought a little closer to home . . . as neighbours of ours who 

were just a mile and a half down the road moved to the area of 

Portage La Prairie. We called on Saturday evening just to see 

how they were doing. Unfortunately we just got to talk to the 

young daughter because they were out sandbagging, helping 

their neighbours to try and protect their property as the flooding 

on the Red progresses north. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s just another reminder of how human we are. 

And despite all our abilities, there are times when nature 

certainly just shows that it still has the upper hand. And I guess 

as human beings, we can . . . we show how thoughtful . . . and 

our loving and compassionate ways by reaching out to people in 

need. 

 

While we’re addressing the flood situation, I think as well we 

should just be mindful of the problems that were created by the 

severe winter. And I think of North Dakota and Montana 

ranchers who are right now, Mr. Speaker, just going out and 

counting up the loss in livestock as a result of this severe 

winter. 

 

While the snow has created a problem, flooding is even 

expanding that problem. It’s certainly important that we take a 

moment to reflect and I guess, if you will, Mr. Speaker, to say 

thank you, thank the good Lord for the country we live in — be 

thankful for the fact that we aren’t being affected by these 

floods. 

 

And I guess if there’s one other thing to just be mindful of, Mr. 

Speaker, is — and the thing that I think brings it even closer to 

home — is we see the problems that people in Saskatchewan 

were affected with last year, and when you hear of flood or a 

major disaster to find out that you’ve carried insurance for so 

many years but insurance finds a way . . . or has basically 

through the years shown, well we don’t really cover that. 

 

And I think that’s where it is important that we as individuals 

then pick up the slack. And I know that over the next few 

months, people — even though we’ve got an invisible boundary 

line between us and our neighbours to the south — people on 

both sides of the border are going to be showing how much they 

care not only by the way they’re willing to work together right 

now to prevent damage, but even in the way they reach out to 

help as people recover from the damages as a result of the 

flooding. 

 

So I certainly extend my heartfelt wishes that each one who is 

affected will certainly see the brighter side as the floods recede 

and as they get on with their lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my 

remarks that I’d be moving a motion, I hereby move: 

 

That the remarks made by all parties be forwarded to 

governors, mayors, and premiers of the affected areas. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Watrous. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38  The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees’ 

pension plan provides benefits to municipal employees, school 

board employees, and designated police officers and 

fire-fighters. Over 700 employers and over 9,000 active and 

inactive employees participate in the plan. The plan currently 

pays benefits to about 2,400 members. 

 

An amendment proposed in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, explicitly 

defines the term “salary” for the purpose of members’ 

contributions to the plan, and benefits payable from the plan. 

This redefinition of the term salary will result in fairer treatment 

of part-time and seasonal employees participating in the 

pension plan. 

 

The Bill facilitates the appointment of a representative from the 

Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association to the 

nine-member commission that oversees the plan’s operations. 

The commission represents major employers and interest 

groups participating in the plan, such as the Association of 

School Business Officials of Saskatchewan, the Rural 

Municipal Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan, and 

the urban employees. 

 

Other amendments to the plan result in fairer benefits for plan 

members. Members who served a one-year waiting period prior 

to joining the plan will have the opportunity to purchase the 

one-year waiting period, giving them parity with employees 

now joining the plan. Members who leave their excess 

contributions in the pension plan upon their termination of 

employment will have the opportunity to convert those 

contributions to a defined benefit based on the option they 

choose at retirement. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, members transferring their 

pensionable service and money from their previous employer’s 

pension plan to this pension plan will have the opportunity to 

purchase any service for which insufficient money is transferred 

under the terms of a reciprocal agreement. While enhancing the 

portability of pension assets, the amendment will allow the 

member to protect a pension asset for which he or she has 

received credit under a pension plan. 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

Other proposed amendments facilitate the pension plan’s 

compliance with the Income Tax Act (Canada) and clarifies the 

rules for members contributing to the pension plan while in the 

receipt of disability benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to have the opportunity to speak to The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Act and, Mr. Speaker, as the minister 

indicated, the plan provides benefits to municipal employees, 

school board employees, and designated police officers and 

fire-fighters. 

 

Although some sections of this Bill are fairly non-controversial, 

there are others which will increase cost for the aforementioned 

employers. Mr. Speaker, this in and of itself may not be 

problematic. Individuals who contribute a significant number of 

years in public service without a doubt deserve a fair pension. 

With that aside, Mr. Speaker, despite what the government likes 

to say, they simply have not provided adequate funds to either 

municipal government or to school boards to cover these 

increasing costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipalities and school boards are in a no-win 

situation. They do not have ultimate authority over wage 

determination for their employees nor do they have any control 

over the amount of funding that they receive in a year. Not only 

is the provincial government the ultimate arbitrator of funds, 

they also dictate to a large extent how these funds must be 

spent. 

 

Given this centralized control, the only win situation for 

municipalities and school boards is if the government were to 

provide adequate funding to cover all these additional costs. Mr. 

Speaker, it is evident that this is not the case. Neither the 

municipal governments, school boards, taxpayers, or children of 

this province are winners because of the 1997-98 budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite do not believe my 

assessment of the situation, allow me to share with you the view 

of Mr. Al Klassen, the president of the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association. 

 

(1430) 

 

According to Mr. Klassen, and I quote: 

 

Last year the government agreed to salary increases for 

teachers which will cost school boards $8 million in 1997. 

The $8 million the government has put into school board 

operating grants will cover teacher salary increases and 

that’s all. No additional money for anything else. 

 

Mr. Klassen has also stated that, and I quote: 

 

This budget represents a zero sum gain for boards, or 

worse. While the dollars to cover teacher salary increases 

have been provided, school boards face a wide range of 

other costs that are not covered. To suggest that 

Saskatchewan school divisions, and by extension students 

and their families, are better off as a result of this budget is 

truly a stretch. 

 

It became very clear this last week, Mr. Speaker, that not only is 

this government underfunding education, it is also seriously 

underfunding municipal governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week my colleague from Saltcoats informed 

the members opposite that at least 106 municipalities, municipal 

governments, were concerned about the downloading of this 

government. The funding cut-backs handed down to municipal 

governments averaged 38 per cent. And this was only an 

average, Mr. Speaker. In some cases the cut-backs were as high 

as 95 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because this government continues to offload its 

constitutional responsibilities, both of these systems are in a 

state of severe, severe underfunding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it very ironic that the members opposite rise 

in this Assembly on a daily basis and criticize the federal 

government for its cuts to transfer payments which, Mr. 

Speaker, only represents one and one-half per cent of the total 

government funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want to know how the 

members opposite can criticize the federal government for 

cut-backs which amounts to one and one-half per cent of their 

total budget when it has cut municipal governments to the tune 

of 38 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this situation draws out yet another inconsistency 

with this government. When the members opposite were in 

opposition, they were highly critical of the PCs (Progressive 

Conservative) because that administration cut government’s 

traditional portion of education funding from 60 to 40 per cent, 

leaving the property owner with 60 rather than 40 per cent of 

the burden. The members opposite were very critical, Mr. 

Speaker, yet they have done nothing, not one single thing, to 

reverse this trend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time for this government to take responsibility 

for such areas as municipal government and education, which 

are their constitutional responsibility. Mr. Speaker, I would go 

so far as suggesting that the members opposite revisit section 92 

of the constitution and refresh their memories on what areas 

they are in fact responsible for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government must take a serious look at the 

results of its offloading. One result of government cuts has been 

fighting between and within communities and school boards 

over appropriate solutions to the grave dilemma they are in. The 

local taxpayers and officials are left to deal with the situation 

and, Mr. Speaker, this government is trying to wash its hands of 

the whole thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite cannot have it both 

ways. In this legislation, we see the government increasing 

costs for municipal governments and school boards with respect 

to pension plans. I would like to emphasize that on the surface   



986  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

this may not seem to be a problem, but we must consider the 

context in which this Act will be implemented. This 

government’s intolerable offloading, and the increased financial 

burden shouldered by local taxpayers, will make these 

additional costs all the more painful to bear. 

 

With these concerns, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn 

debate. We believe that further consultation with the affected 

groups is necessary before we can support this Bill. I therefore 

move adjournment of this motion. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 14 — The 

Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

have the opportunity to speak again on this Bill. Two weeks ago 

I spoke to this Bill and raised several concerns, and I would like 

to take a few minutes today to discuss them even further. 

 

A discussion of Sask Water seems especially timely considering 

the recent flooding in so much of our province, and this 

government’s lack of commitment to help people affected by 

the flooding damages. When we called on the government for 

disaster relief the member from Prince Albert Northcote said 

the government could not yet act because the damage had not 

been assessed. Well, Mr. Speaker, municipalities are assessing 

the damage as we speak, and are busy putting together their 

requests for relief. Unfortunately until the applications find their 

way through the bureaucracy, municipalities will have to 

shoulder the costs of reconstruction. 

 

This burden is especially onerous given that municipalities are 

faced with Draconian revenue-sharing cost-cutting. The 

member also said the government would work with local 

governments to minimize the impact on their areas. I certainly 

hope they stick to this commitment. 

 

There have been hundreds of thousands of dollars damage done 

to homes, machinery, and personal belongings. Roads have 

been wiped out and bridges swept away, worsening the already 

dangerous road conditions in this province. 

 

Not only has the government shown a lack of commitment to 

rebuilding Saskatchewan roads, it has not acted on its promise 

to aid communities affected by flooding. How can 

municipalities be expected to cope when revenue-sharing grants 

have been drastically cut by up to 90 per cent? People are 

frustrated and angry and it is incumbent upon the government to 

alleviate their concerns. 

 

Lately people have been paying a lot of attention to the Crown 

corporations, like Sask Water’s new advance into business 

called SPUDCO. The NDP has been crowing about the Crown 

dividends paid to the government this year and they brag about 

how well they are doing with people’s investments. 

 

What they are not bragging about is the rate of return; that is 

only .625 per cent. They are not bragging about losing $16 

million in a bad SaskTel deal. And they are certainly ashamed 

— or they should be — about their attack on the Provincial 

Auditor when he rightly pointed out that Sask Water was 

under-reporting profits. I’m waiting most impatiently to see 

how our Water Corporation makes out in the potato business, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this provides interesting grist for the mill 

but my purpose here today is to discuss Sask Water and the Bill 

before us. Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the clause dealing with 

expropriation. This amendment will take the power of 

expropriation from the government and give it to Sask Water. 

 

As people in the Condie area well know, having your land 

expropriated is a painful and frustrating experience. Taking 

someone’s land affects the very livelihood and dignity of an 

individual. We all know in Saskatchewan how important land is 

and what it means to our farmers. It’s often more than just an 

income; it’s a way of life. 

 

Because of the seriousness of expropriation, because of the 

seriousness of meddling with individuals’ rights, the decision to 

expropriate should be made by duly elected representatives of 

the people. Somehow it seems inappropriate to me to have 

Crown corporations with no obvious ties to anything but the 

bottom line of a balance sheet make these kinds of decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill talks about reducing the regulatory 

process for urban municipalities which are undertaking sewage 

or waterworks projects. This is all supposed to be for the benefit 

of reducing regulations. 

 

Reducing government regulation is of course a very good idea. 

Everyone knows how frustrating red tape is. And regulatory 

overlap like there was between Sask Water and Sask 

Environment and Resource Management is definitely a waste of 

time and of money. 

 

It is especially frustrating to the people of Saskatchewan and 

the Liberal opposition that this government has a habit of ruling 

by regulation rather than legislation. So any time we can reduce 

the opportunity for government to rule by regulation, the better 

off we all are. 

 

Speaking of regulations and red tape, I have concerns about the 

changes to the rules requiring registration of approvals at the 

Land Titles Office. The government is proposing to suspend all 

licences and replace them with approvals. It would seem that 

this is simply a housekeeping measure. But where’s the 

guarantee that a new approval will be issued, and who is 

responsible for making these decisions? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that this government make clear 

what the responsibilities are in this regard. And it is vital that   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

we avoid the possibility of arbitrary decision making where, in 

certain situations, approvals may not be issued. 

 

I am concerned that this Bill does not clear up all of the 

administrative tape. There are still questions to be answered. 

New approvals will have to be registered with the Land Titles 

Office. Will they be registered as a caveat or an easement? And 

the answer to these questions could impact land transactions. 

 

In their effort to fulfil treaty obligations to Indian bands, the 

federal government must have jurisdiction over certain bodies 

of water which normally fall within provincial jurisdiction. The 

Bill before us will allow for this. 

 

The issue of treaty rights is a contentious one. And this is why 

the government must be absolutely clear with the people of 

Saskatchewan about what is happening when land is handed 

over for the settlement of treaty obligations. This must be not 

only a fulfilment of our obligations, but an exercise in public 

education. 

 

People have come to us with concerns that the government is 

not consulting enough with local residents and has not 

explained the process of land grants. Because this is a 

potentially volatile issue, the government must do all it can to 

alleviate people’s fears. 

 

We need to raise questions about the problems of access, the 

usage of the water, environmental regulations, and so on, when 

we give up jurisdiction over the bodies of water. I am 

concerned about how adequately these issues will be addressed. 

 

All of these concerns and more will come up in greater detail in 

the Committee of the Whole, and I move the Bill be passed on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the whole, 

this is a positive Bill and our caucus supports it, with one very 

important exception, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In general, this Bill strives to eliminate red tape and 

over-regulation. Once again, it is pleasing to see the 

government adopt a page out of the Conservative campaign 

platform. The NDP took our 2 per cent cut on the PST 

(provincial sales tax), Mr. Speaker, that plank, out of our 

campaign. And now they’re taking another plank, which is the 

reduction of red tape, bureaucracy, and over-regulation, Mr. 

Speaker. So to Dr. Melenchuk, though, I should inform him that 

we only meet with the government occasionally to discuss our 

platform and for them to take our ideas. 

 

Now in light of this, Mr. Speaker, we would like to renew our 

invitation to the members of the government caucus to come 

across the floor and join our caucus where their new-found 

conservative ideals will no longer be subject to the needless and 

unfounded criticisms of the NDP Party membership. 

 

The first major change made by this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the 

elimination of the need for municipalities to submit detailed 

plans for pipeline systems. They need to maintain those plans 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, but there’s really no need to keep 

transferring them into a central body all the time. Whenever 

companies are going to do work in the area, they have to go to 

the municipality for agreements anyway, Mr. Speaker, and they 

can check at that point as to what is in the ground. 

 

Our caucus has no longer . . . has long tried to stress to this 

government that municipalities run the most efficient and 

responsible governments in the province. Allowing them this 

greater autonomy recognizes the excellent work and high skill 

that municipal leaders have shown over the years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also eliminates paperwork for landowners 

who operate dams on their own land. As the minister pointed 

out in his speech, if land containing a dam is sold, the new 

owner had to submit a new application to Sask Water for an 

operation that had long since been approved — simply a 

replication of the previous application, Mr. Speaker, and 

previous approvals. 

 

The change frees up time that farmers had been wasting filling 

out forms instead of running their farms, Mr. Speaker. It also 

saves the government money in terms of staff resources to 

process these needless applications. So again we support this 

change. 

 

However, the one area of this Bill that we do not support is the 

increased power of Sask Water to expropriate easements on 

land without orders in council, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, this is 

very dangerous whenever you give a government agency more 

power to run roughshod over the rights of property owners. 

 

(1445) 

 

And as you know, Mr. Speaker, I have a particular interest in 

property rights and have brought forward many times in this 

House Bills which would actually give the people of 

Saskatchewan the right to hold property. 

 

The minister gave the excuse that Sask Water is the only Crown 

required to receive an order in council to make expropriations. 

To me, this is quite simply a case of two wrongs not making a 

right. The rights of property owners have already been 

deteriorated by allowing expropriations without orders in 

councils by the other Crowns. This negative situation will only 

be worsened by extending this unjustified right to Sask Water. 

 

The decision by a government to expropriate land, Mr. Speaker, 

should always be as a last resort and the Crown should always 

have to jump through as many hoops as possible to be able to 

implement this regrettable policy. 

 

The previous government, Mr. Speaker, certainly learned about 

the need to jump through hoops while the NDP members 

opposite did all they could to make sure that those hoops, Mr. 

Speaker, were rings of fire when it came to the expropriation of 

any lands dealing with the Alameda and Rafferty projects. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the lands there are still not expropriated. 

Now however, the NDP believe that government has no need to 

provide notification or, indeed no political accountability, by 

authorizing the expropriation, as in the case of the Condie   



988  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

power line and SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the government must provide an OC (order in council) 

it’s available for people to see; it’s available for people to see 

who signed that order in council allowing for that expropriation, 

Mr. Speaker. This change to this particular Act will no longer 

make that available. Now the minister of the Crown will no 

longer be responsible for that expropriation. 

 

It will simply be the Crown corporation that is doing it and it 

takes the political heat off of the minister responsible. We 

believe that the minister should bear that burden; that they are 

elected to represent the people and they should accept their 

responsibility as well as the benefits of being a minister of the 

Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while our caucus supports most parts of this Bill, 

we have serious reservations about these expropriation powers 

and we would like to examine it in more detail in Committee of 

the Whole, where we will be considering bringing forward 

appropriate amendments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 47 — The 

Psychologists Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

welcome the opportunity to comment on The Psychologists Act 

today. There’s one thing upon which all psychologists in the 

province of Saskatchewan can agree, and that is that all 

psychologists should be registered. It’s important that a 

profession is empowered to first of all police itself, and 

secondly and equally importantly, protect the public. 

 

And to do this, changes most certainly had to be made to the 

outdated and ineffective Act of 30-odd years ago. And I would 

say that the majority of them, Mr. Speaker, are welcomed, but 

there are some proposed changes that are not eagerly embraced. 

There are some that I truly hope will be amended because they 

can be improved, and without modification I think that they’re 

going to lead to ongoing division in psychology in this 

province. 

 

Of equal significance, without amendments, are going to be the 

implications as far as the standards of psychology for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to be more specific if I may, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 

have spoken not only with the minister but one of his 

employees as well as a member of a committee for this House 

that was examining this Bill. And I spoke with them in exactly 

the way that I will be addressing this Assembly this afternoon. 

 

I felt that of primary importance was, first of all, the need for all 

members of this profession to agree. It was extraordinarily 

important that these people — psychology professionals who 

are both doctoral trained, master’s-level trained and so forth in 

the province of Saskatchewan — reach a compromise. 

 

And I must say that I was extremely disappointed that this did 

not take place. Not totally surprised, but very disappointed. 

Especially when I read from different members of the 

profession of psychology that they felt that they were reaching a 

compromise and were stunned, to say the least, when they 

found out that this in fact was being brought forward to the 

House. 

 

It’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that members of this Assembly 

would receive many letters of endorsement on this particular 

Bill. And the reason for that is because the majority of people in 

Saskatchewan who are in the profession of psychology are not 

Ph.D.-level trained. It’s unfortunate, but it happens to be the 

case in our province. So it is not surprising that there are greater 

numbers that would come to us that in fact state that they are in 

favour of it. 

 

I want to speak to some specific issues. These specific issues 

include title distinction, they include the transitional council, 

and they will include supervision and a few other points as well, 

in particular the grandparenting provisions and the conflict of 

interest bylaw and so forth. 

 

Let me begin with title distinction. It’s interesting Mr. Speaker. 

When I met with people about this, one of the things that was 

raised was the difficulty that people in Saskatchewan would 

have in understanding exactly the differences between 

psychologists if they didn’t all have the same title. And I find 

that rather an absurd argument, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For example, we do have ophthalmologists in the province of 

Saskatchewan and our citizens have little difficulty 

differentiating between an ophthalmologist and an optometrist. 

We have orthodontists in the province of Saskatchewan and our 

citizens are bright enough to be able to differentiate between an 

orthodontist and a dentist. We have lawyers in the province of 

Saskatchewan and no one seems to have any difficulty knowing 

the difference between a lawyer and a paralegal. And yet when 

it came to this particular professional field, Mr. Speaker, it 

appears as though the Government of Saskatchewan doesn’t 

think that our citizenry are bright enough to be able to 

distinguish between this profession on the basis of its training. I 

found that insulting at the very least, as far of the people of our 

province are concerned. 

 

We have extraordinary psychologists in our province, some of 

whom are trained at the master’s level. These are highly 

competent people, people with a great deal of experience, 

people who have been well trained. There is no question that 

they have these kinds of characteristics. 

 

We also have highly trained, highly competent and very 

experienced people at the Ph.D. level. 

 

So there is no question about that, Mr. Speaker, and there is no 

question at all that all of them should be registered in order to 

protect the people of Saskatchewan as well as to ensure policing 

of this particular profession. 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

What is very interesting, however, Mr. Speaker, is that 

somehow we think that if we differentiate between the members 

of this particular professional group that it somehow will 

undermine people who are not trained at the Ph.D. level, and I 

find that utterly absurd. 

 

Similarly, when we’re talking about the transitional council, 

there must be fairness. If there’s not fairness, the whole purpose 

of the transitional council will collapse. For example, it is very, 

very unwise for the inequality that is now being suggested in 

this proposed Act and it’s very unfortunate that what has 

happened is, in essence, to coalesce the two groups that have 

the least training, the least education, and to make them 

outnumber the group that has the most. 

 

Now I’m going to give the analogy that I made earlier about the 

field of law. Mr. Speaker, I really do pose this question to the 

Minister of Health, in essence, whose profession is law, and I 

ask him how he would feel if in fact paralegals were to join in a 

transitional council with lawyers; and that in the province of 

Saskatchewan, if it were the similar situation as there is with the 

profession of psychology, that that group of paralegals actually 

outnumbered the lawyers in that transitional council, would that 

be considered to be equal, would it be considered to be fair, and 

would it be considered to be wise? 

 

Well I don’t think any of the above, Mr. Speaker. And what 

concerns me, we are not making comment on the competency 

of the paralegal, were not making comment on their experience 

or their ability to carry out their work and do so in an 

extraordinary way, but why is it that one would want to create a 

transitional council where in fact members of the group for 

educational psychologists and the one for master’s-level trained 

psychologists in Saskatchewan, would actually outnumber that 

group, which is Ph.D.-level psychologists. It doesn’t stand to 

reason. And I most certainly hope that the minister will bring 

forward House amendments and, if not, will at least consider 

those that will be brought forward by me or others. 

 

To further comment, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that 

is also important is looking at supervision, and there have been 

suggestions as far as what we consider to be minimal 

supervision. I know of people who, in this province, were 

trained at the doctoral level and in the past were never even able 

to consider themselves or call themselves psychologists, with a 

doctorate in clinical psychology, unless they had gone through 

registration. And registration not only included exams and oral 

exams but also a certain level of supervision. 

 

Surely in order to protect the members of the public who will be 

going to people considering themselves . . . putting themselves 

in front of individuals who are well-trained and so forth and 

professional people, that at the very least we can ensure that all 

people, before they are grandfathered into this . . . 

grandparented into this new Act, will be considered to have to 

go through certain minimum requirements for supervision. 

 

I think it is a sad commentary perhaps, in our province that we 

have so few doctoral-level psychologists here; it’s not a 

problem faced in other provinces. But if what we do is actually 

minimize the importance of the highest training available for 

people, what we also do is minimize the importance of one of 

the most important departments at one of our universities in this 

province. And that is a department which has received 

recognition not only from the Canadian Psychological 

Association but the American Psychological Association. 

 

If I may reiterate, Mr. Speaker, I want to state the following: I 

have worked with people with a broad range of training; I have 

been proud to work with all of them. I believe that all of us 

should in fact be required to be registered in our province. It is a 

good thing. It’s good for the profession and it most certainly is 

going to be better for the public. 

 

At the same time, it’s extremely important for us to understand 

that, when we’re dealing with a profession in this House, that 

we consider it as equally important to any other profession, to 

be thoughtful about the implications that this will have on its 

membership; to ensure that when there is a minority, that those 

minority interests are well represented and protected because 

they too are going to contribute in an extraordinary way and 

have to this overall profession and treatment for people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I hope that the minister will entertain the kinds of changes that I 

think are warranted in this new psychologist Act. And at this 

point, Mr. Speaker, without going into any further detail about 

the conflict of interest bylaw regarding public appointees or 

protection of terms and so forth, which I will continue to raise 

with the minister, I will adjourn debate in hope that the 

government will consider House amendments. Move to adjourn. 

Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

Bill No. 28 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No 28 — The Family 

Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have this chance to address some of the amendments 

proposed within Bill No. 28, The Family Maintenance Act. 

 

As my colleague from North Battleford so eloquently pointed 

out, we are hopeful that Bill No. 28 will make some 

long-overdue changes to Saskatchewan’s systems of 

establishing child support payments. 

 

Right across Canada provinces are trying to bring their own 

legislation in line in order to complement the changes that are 

also being introduced at the federal level. However it is my 

hope that this Bill will consider both the financial and 

emotional health of the children of divorced couples. 

 

In this day and age divorce is becoming increasingly frequent. 

Some studies predict that one in two marriages will end in 

divorce by the year 2000, and so millions of Canadian children 

are faced with that reality. Many children of divorced parents   



990  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

find themselves in the middle of bitter custody and maintenance 

battles. In addition to facing the challenges of overcoming the 

breakup of their traditional family unit, these children are often 

victimized again by prolonged legal battles and bitter feuds over 

other divorce arrangements. 

 

Introducing some standardized guidelines on establishing child 

support payments is a welcome change if it succeeds in 

reducing the amount of time and money and emotional turmoil 

that often result from divorce litigation. 

 

This legislation will still allow judges to have the overriding 

power to draft child support payments for special circumstances 

that are brought before the courts. But I’m hopeful that standard 

guidelines across Saskatchewan will make the process of 

arriving at child support payments much less complicated, less 

expensive, and less damaging to the children involved. 

 

As my colleague from North Battleford stated, lawyers are 

often fond of saying that clients should not mix up the issue of 

child support with the issue of child access. But reality is quite 

different. If child support is a bitter and emotional and divisive 

issue, it is almost inevitable that visits by the non-custodial 

parent will be a time of turmoil and fighting. 

 

Some recent studies have shown that child support and child 

access are often linked in reality. Many people I have spoken to 

about this Bill are concerned that governments at all levels have 

failed to consider these two issues jointly. They are concerned 

that the payer in the custody agreement, who is also the 

non-custodial parent, should also be granted more equitable 

access to their children. 

 

And I believe that governments at all levels have also found this 

to be a difficult issue with which to grapple. The crux of the 

problem is that governments, the courts, and the parents have 

spent decades and millions of dollars trying to assess what is 

fair and equitable income support for children of divorce, 

because we all agree that children must be provided with 

enough income in order to be provided with the necessities to 

live. 

 

And it’s only very recently that research has started to delve 

into the deeper emotional matters surrounding the access issues 

of divorce. Canadian divorce statistics are on the rise and 

thousands more Saskatchewan children will certainly be 

exposed to the trauma of their parents’ breakup. As parents and 

as elected members of this Assembly, we should all be more 

aware of the potential social impact that child support 

arrangements and child access arrangements are having on our 

youth. Above all, children must not be a bargaining chip. 

 

I hope that governments at all levels can now begin focusing 

more attention and research to these very important issues that 

are shaping the emotional well-being of children across Canada. 

Many children of a divorce already bear the scars of an 

unsuccessful union of their parents; they should not be made to 

suffer any further because of a lack of social conscience in 

Canadian society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few more concerns about Bill No. 28 that 

I’m still gathering input on. And so at this time I move to 

adjourn debate on this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act 

Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 

Darcy McGovern from legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

know if the minister could tell me, is this also the fruit of the 

uniform law commission? Is this an Act which you anticipate 

will be introduced in other legislatures and jurisdictions of 

Canada, and if so, what stage we’re at in terms of other 

provinces of the country. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to confirm that this is 

legislation that comes from the uniform law conference. To date 

British Columbia and Prince Edward Island have already passed 

this particular Bill, and we anticipate that the others will come 

along in the next legislative sessions. So we would be the third 

one to pass this Bill. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Could the minister indicate if there are any 

areas he sees that will result in any profoundly different practice 

in the province. It seems to me that while there are some details 

which may change, that in fact there is little substantial 

difference to present civil practice in the province and 

registration of foreign judgements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the member is correct, that it will 

not cause a great deal of consternation in the legal profession or 

in the courts in Saskatchewan. The one thing that it will do, 

which will be of assistance, is that it will set out clearly the full 

faith and credit clause so that when all jurisdictions in Canada 

have this legislation passed, there will not be the necessary 

concern in the courts in Saskatchewan as to whether the other 

court that made the order had the jurisdiction to do that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I note, Mr. Chairman, that there is reference in 

clause 4 to registration fees being charged. I would ask the 

minister if he could tell us what is contemplated there. Would 

this be a relatively nominal charge in order to cover the 

operations of our local registrar’s office in the Court of Queen’s 

Bench, or is it anticipated that significant charges would be 

levied for registration of a foreign judgement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The current fee for registration is $10, and 

that’s under the regulations under The Queen’s Bench Act. And 

we don’t anticipate that that fee would change. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I note that under clause 6, judgements from   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

other provinces cannot be enforced after the time limit for 

enforcing them has passed. Are any complications anticipated 

where limitation periods may be different in other provinces 

than they are here in terms of then giving rise to different legal 

rights for people registering a foreign judgement here from 

people who might be commencing a legal action here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the clear rule set out here is that it 

would be the limitation period where the judgement was 

granted that would apply, but with the further proviso that if 

that in some way was longer than 10 years, it wouldn’t be 

longer than 10 years in Saskatchewan since that’s our rules 

here. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So in other words then, Mr. Minister, there 

might well be situations in which a legal action would be out of 

time in this province but because it started in another province, 

it would therefore be valid and registerable here. 

 

 (1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think as you know, the 

enforceability of a judgement in Saskatchewan is 10 years; so 

that meshes with this. I think the question you’re getting at 

again is the similar one as we were looking at it . . . the other 

legislation the other day, which is the project that uniform law 

conference has to try to set uniform limitation periods across 

the country. 

 

And at this time we don’t anticipate any problems, but there 

may be some places where there would be a slight question. But 

after the hopeful review of all the limitation periods, that any 

small concern would be eliminated as well. 

 

Mr. Hillson: —There is reference in this Bill, Mr. Chairman, to 

a power to not register a judgement from another province 

where that judgement would be contrary to public policy. And 

that is contained in, I think, various places, including clause 7. 

 

I realize, as you say, this came from uniform law conference, 

but I’m a little bit puzzled that the drafters would apparently 

think that there could be a judgement in another province that 

would be contrary to public policy. And I wonder if the minister 

could give me some example of what would have been on the 

drafter’s mind in making this provision. What’s a circumstance 

or situation it would really be designed to deal with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, I appreciate that question because it 

is a very good question. The classic example that common law 

. . . obviously are, you know, the rules around slavery, which 

then became against public policy in certain jurisdictions and so 

orders related to slavery would not be enforced. 

 

In Canada we don’t anticipate that there would be a problem; 

although the example that was discussed, and continues to be 

discussed, is a situation where there might be exorbitant 

damage awards made in one jurisdiction in Canada — say 

there’s, you know, a hundred million dollar award that ends up 

then being enforced in Saskatchewan. And we wanted to leave 

some room there for the courts to review situations that seemed 

to be just really, really out of whack. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I believe, Mr. Minister, that even prior to our 

no-fault legislation, that awards in the province of Ontario 

arising out of motor vehicle mishaps were significantly higher 

than those generally awarded in our courts. And I suppose it 

would probably be fair to say that gap has increased 

enormously since no-fault. 

 

And so you’re saying that where someone has recovered a very 

high award in, say the province of Ontario, that it might not be 

automatic that that would be registered in Saskatchewan where 

a Saskatchewan victim would presumably be paid far less? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, that’s not the understanding we have 

at all. I think the more important point is that it allows for that 

ability to challenge an award if it’s against public policy. I think 

practically, in Canada, we would accept the fact that an Ontario 

award might be higher than what’s here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Does the minister have any indication as to 

when he intends this Act to come into force? Are there 

regulations in place or the rules of court? And can he indicate if 

Saskatchewan will proclaim this together with the other 

provinces or will we be proclaiming it on our own? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present plan is to proclaim the 

legislation when we have a sufficient number of the provinces 

that will have passed the Bill. So when we’re finished here that 

will be three, and we’ll see what the results are from the other 

legislative sessions this spring. I’m not sure what the magic 

number is — six or seven, probably. 

 

We’re already in the process of contacting the chief judge in the 

Court of Queen’s Bench to look at what kinds of discussions 

they need to change the rules to accommodate this particular 

legislation. So that process will be commencing, and it’s 

anticipated that all the rules will be in place before the Bill will 

be proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, Canada does of course have 

nine common law provinces, twelve if you include the two 

territories — I mean eleven, if you include the two territories — 

and of course we have one civil code jurisdiction. 

 

I note that in this case the Bill has been translated into both 

official languages. Do these principles relate specifically to 

either common law or civil code? Will they be difficult in 

translating to the other system, or do the principles contained in 

this Act really transcend civil code versus common law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Quebec, the Government of Quebec, 

participates in the uniform law conference and makes sure that 

things mesh with their system. So it’s our understanding that 

this would include whatever requirements they need so that 

judgements obtained in Quebec could be enforced in 

Saskatchewan and vice versa. 

 

That’s as far as we can go at this point. They haven’t yet passed 

the legislation there, but we anticipate and the plan is that they 

would be included as well. 

  



992  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that 

that satisfies me that this is legislation which will be enacted by 

other provinces in the country . . . and that while this is a matter 

within provincial jurisdiction, obviously there is a strong public 

policy argument for having these provisions the same 

throughout all of our provinces. 

 

And so it is good that our provincial Departments of Justice are 

cooperating so that the same provisions apply in all provinces. 

And I’m pleased to hear that’s the case and I am satisfied that 

this is a sensible proposal for us to proceed with. 

 

I would also like to thank the minister for his answers today and 

also for the attendance again of Mr. McGovern. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

welcome to you and your officials. This Act with respect to 

enforcement of maintenance orders is very important, as you 

know. 

 

It’s something that frankly, when I was elected I guess in 1991, 

I never thought that I would be sort of involved in the numbers 

of cases with respect to things of this nature and . . . Maybe I’m 

a little bit off topic here; I’m not sure. Were we on to the 

enforcement Act thing? 

 

An Hon. Member:  No. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Oh, I’m sorry then, Mr. Chairman. I’ll reserve 

my comments for the other later. I think the member from 

Moosomin has some comments with respect to this. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

regarding the Act — and I was listening to the member from 

North Battleford with his questions — as you indicated in your 

opening remarks regarding the reasons for the Act, you were 

talking about uniformity of law across . . . and I believe you’re 

looking at uniform legislation enacted across Canada. Right 

now it’s just currently B.C. (British Columbia) and Prince 

Edward Island have brought forward legislation as such, dealing 

with the same matter. 

 

I would like to know, Mr. Minister, in what way does this . . . In 

what areas will this bring our legal system into uniformity, if 

you will, or what’s your view of how this will address 

judgements across Canada and the types of judgements that it 

will address? Is it an overall, blanket-type piece of legislation or 

are we referring to specific legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is that 

this legislation covers everything except maintenance and fines. 

And what it does do is, clarifies and consolidates the rules that 

are presently there at common law. And I think the member 

from North Battleford asked about this particular question in the 

same way . . . I mean in another way, asking if there would be 

any disruption to the legal profession and to the courts. 

 

I think the answer is no, that the law is fairly clear — this 

confirms it. But what it does do is it sets out common ways of 

assessing when the judgements can be enforceable right across 

the country. And so what we’re doing here is making sure that 

every province has the same rules as far as enforcement go, so 

that we won’t have to have our courts here wonder about a 

judgement in another province, except in extremely rare 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If I heard you correctly, 

you mentioned it doesn’t affect enforcement of maintenance 

Acts. Maybe you could just correct me on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s a separate legislation called The 

Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, and that 

covers that. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, and this is where I need a 

clarification as well. When you talk about uniformity of 

legislation and legal practice, I guess, or law under this 

legislation, a question comes to my mind — and maybe this 

doesn’t fall under the legislation, but you can certainly correct 

me on that — is a situation that happens to have come into my 

care personally. 

 

And we’ve talked about it, but I just want to see if this piece of 

legislation addresses the type of thing where a custody battle 

began in this province. It’s basically where one of the partners 

has moved out of province and has now started legal action 

there, and it’s really created a problem. Would this then put . . . 

When you’re talking about uniformity of legislation, if a 

custody battle starts here, does it address it, that the custody 

battle . . . would there be . . . I guess if you will, we’re taking 

down the interprovincial trade barriers; so that whether a case is 

started here and then proceeds in Manitoba or vice versa, that 

there will be a correlation of legal services, or am I off on a 

different track? Is this not really addressed under this piece of 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think you are off on a little bit of a 

different track, because this legislation applies only to 

judgements for payment of money other than maintenance 

orders or fines. And so it’s specifically for money orders, if you 

can put it that way. 

 

Mr. Toth:  And I thank you, Mr. Minister. I was gathering 

that’s where it was going but I just wanted to raise the matter 

for clarification so that down the road . . . Because I think that 

there’s other areas that need to be addressed as well in how we 

deal with some issues when it comes to inter-provincially. And 

whether they can be addressed or not, I don’t know, but it’s 

probably something that need to be looked at at a later date in 

some of these questions. 

 

And certainly when we get into the department, there’ll be an 

issue that I’ll be talking with you about to try and find some 

way of coming to an understanding of how we can correct some 

of these inequities, if you will, within the system. 

 

Mr. Minister, does your department have any idea of how many 

cases or judgements this may affect in any given year? Have 

you done a study that would kind of indicate, once this 

legislation is passed, of how many cases may come before the 

department in regards to this specific piece of legislation? 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t have the exact numbers. But 

practically, we do have a system already which will continue to 

exist until this one comes in place and it’s under The Reciprocal 

Enforcement of Judgments Act. So practically we don’t 

anticipate any great increase or decrease, but what we do 

anticipate is eliminating some of the questions or concerns that 

arise. And so in many ways this is a housekeeping kind of Bill 

that will hopefully create a better system over the longer term. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So this piece of legislation then is basically 

addressing, say another piece of legislation that’s already in 

effect, and it’s basically giving a broader interpretation to the 

reciprocal — what was it? — house agreement Act I think you 

talked about, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer would be that it 

improves as it relates to Canadian judgements because that 

Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments Act would also apply to 

judgements from England or Australia or from one of the states 

in the United States. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I understand the member from the Battlefords 

asked how soon you expect this piece of similar legislation to 

be passed in other provinces, and I think you’d indicated that 

you weren’t sure. You expected in the near future . . . Have you 

run into any provinces who are somewhat reluctant to bring 

forward this type of legislation? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Not that we know of. As you can 

understand, when the uniform law conference meets, there are 

representatives from every jurisdiction in Canada — the federal 

government and 10 provinces and 2 territories. And normally 

problems are identified at that level, and a Bill is not sent 

forward for adoption across the country if there are concerns 

that are registered by a particular jurisdiction. So I would have 

to say that given the process, this is one that has cleared 

everybody’s concerns. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, a further question going to section 

6, the time limit for registration and enforcement. I understand 

you’ve said in the legislation a limit of 10 years. And I’m 

wondering exactly how that period of time was arrived at. 

Would it have been possible to look at a shorter time period? Or 

what were the reasons behind this 10-year limit, and does this 

10-year limit just drag out a process that leaves, let’s say 

individuals wondering when they will see maintenance or 

judgements enforced and certainly followed through on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think if I understand your question 

correctly, you’re asking about the 10 years and why 10 years. 

Practically 10 years, if the judgement has not be collected, say 

you have a judgement for $50,000 against a neighbour and he 

can’t pay you in those 10 years, it’s possible to renew the 

judgement for another 10 years in the last year, as long as you 

do it before the judgement expires. So it’s possible these 

judgements could extend for quite a period of time. 

 

But practically, and as many people know, if you don’t collect 

your money from somebody fairly soon after it’s due, the 

chances of collecting it later decrease quite rapidly. And in fact 

by the time you get a judgement, it’s often quite difficult to 

collect from people. 

 

So if you wait for 10 years after you have a judgement, I think 

that you’re sort of waiting for the person to win a lottery or 

inherit some money from a rich uncle or something. So you’re 

not basing it on the fact that you can collect from that person 

based on their own hard work and effort. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately, if I 

understand you correctly then, you may take a case to a 

particular court to seek a judgement in a certain area. You may 

receive a judgement awarded by the court. A person, individual, 

may move out of province, and that’s why we’re having 

reciprocal agreements or even this piece of legislation. 

 

The fact is though, if the judgement’s awarded and an 

individual say leaves the jurisdiction, doesn’t pay the 

judgement, you have to within 10 years to renew the judgement, 

to try and collect those funds. Just based on the comment you 

just made though, a judgement could be made but you may 

never, ever collect on that judgement. 

 

And what you’re saying then is there’s really no teeth in a 

ruling, and this legislation doesn’t address, doesn’t appear to 

address that. Or is there anything that would address it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I think what I was talking about, that 

there are sometimes companies that disappear, individuals who 

don’t have any money. And so you end up waiting a long time 

before you collect. 

 

Practically there are other procedures — the sheriff’s office, 

sometimes abilities to garnishee money that’s payable from a 

third party to the person, the judgement debtor. All of those 

processes are still available. But I guess what I was basically 

saying is that there are situations that it is quite difficult to 

collect funds. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess in . . . You 

agree with me or you may not, but if a person knew beforehand 

maybe they would save some money and not go after a 

judgement if they felt that there was no way of it being able to 

be collected at the end of the day. 

 

But I would like to just thank you, Mr. Minister, and your 

official for the time here, and certainly addressing the questions 

we’ve raised regarding this specific piece of legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would like to speak to an amendment, a 

House amendment to this. And basically the explanation is that 

we need to make a House amendment to make the French and 

the English versions identical. 

 

  



994  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

The French version was not changed to reflect certain minor 

amendments that were made in the uniform Bill to reflect 

Saskatchewan practice. 

 

So section 4, the Bill that is set out in the French version 

provided that fees would be set in the regulations under this 

Act. And it also required additional information materials to be 

set out on a regulations under this Act. 

 

In Saskatchewan, fees have traditionally been set in the Queen’s 

Bench fee regulations under The Queen’s Bench Act. So we are 

amending the standard Bill across Canada to recognize that this 

will prevent having fees set up in a variety of Acts rather than in 

the particular regulation. 

 

So we think that we want to change this version. And so I have 

a motion which I would like to read. I move that we: 

 

Amend Clause 4 of the French version of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by striking out “réglementaires” and substituting 

“requis”; and 

 

(b) in clause (b) by striking out “règlement” and 

substituting “les règles de practique et de procedure de la 

Cour du Banc de la Reine”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We have another House amendment and 

the motion would be to: 

 

Strike out Clause 11 of the French version of the printed 

Bill and substitute the following: 

 

“11 Le lieutenant-gouverneur en conseil peut, par 

règlement, prendre toute mesure d’application de la 

présente loi, notamment des mesures concernant les 

formules, qu’il estime nécessaire pour mettre en oeuvre 

les buts et l’intention de la présente loi.” 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 12 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me to 

review this legislation, Madeleine Robertson who is a Crown 

solicitor in legislative services; and Kathy Hillman-Weir who is 

the master of titles. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I’d 

like to welcome the minister’s officials to discuss this particular 

Bill No. 21. And I just have a few comments to make at the 

outset with respect to this Bill which I see as being crafted in 

order to create more accountability among the players in this 

condominium project. And generally this is very acceptable and 

I’m certainly agreeable to that. It clarifies more specifically the 

duties and the obligations and responsibilities of all the players 

within these projects. 

 

The Act itself also attempts to make information surrounding 

such projects more accessible. Up to this point in time it’s not 

been very clear in that respect. The board of directors and the 

condominium bylaw amendments, I understand will now have 

to be filed in a registry, which is a good move. 

 

There are some concerns about the changes relating to the 

definition of security that will now affect the various sections of 

this particular Act. And these changes, these are the changes 

that need to be taken into consideration, and for the protection 

of the condominium buyer. So those will be some of the issues 

in the various clauses that we’ll be asking for some comments 

on. 

 

(1545) 

 

The Act does not appear to address the complaints of 

condominium owners who feel they are being discriminated 

against during the reassessment process. That’s one area that 

perhaps we’ll need to have some dialogue on as well. The 

reason being that condominium property is classified probably 

in a separate category from residential property, and will be 

given an assessment value of .85 per cent. The other residential 

property owners are to be assessed at .75 per cent. That slight 

discrepancy causes some concerns and raises the eyebrows of 

folks that feel there is some discrimination. 

 

It is of some concern to myself and my colleagues because 

many of the people living in Saskatchewan condominiums are 

seniors who are in fact on fixed incomes. They have not 

budgeted for any of these major reassessment increases because 

they did not feel, I guess, at the time of moving into these 

projects, that the government would assess them any differently 

than they had been in the past with other residential property 

owners. The fact is they feel now . . . they may feel now that 

they’re being treated unfairly under the present circumstances. 

 

Again I have some concerns that this portion of the 

reassessment process, what will cause even more headaches for 

implementation of this . . . and more headaches for the 

implementation of this badly bungled reassessment program. 

Residential groups across the province now are beginning to 

organize themselves in order to educate the general public on 

how to file assessment appeals. So it tells you that there is a 

great deal of uncertainty and the need for people to become 

better acquainted with what direction we’re going. 

 

While it did take the government quite awhile to acknowledge 

the fact that there needed to be changes made to the agricultural   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

property factor, those changes did in fact eventually happen. 

And again, I relate that back to the difference in the assessment 

of residential property versus condominiums. And this is why 

the condominium owners in large part are wondering if this 

government will also give them equal consideration with 

respect to that kind of an assessment. 

 

And while there are bound to be some problems with the 

massive reassessment process, the government continues to 

unfortunately mishandle the whole program, and that causes 

some concern. It’s happening right across Saskatchewan in 

towns, in the country, people are trying to sort out all these 

changes and the mistakes that the government has passed down 

with this reassessment process. So I guess this would be the 

place if there are some inadequacies or inequalities, that perhaps 

they might be corrected before it is passed along to people that 

will be affected. 

 

While the changes in the structure are quite complex, the heart 

of the problem is laid out in this respect quite simply. The 

government did not adequately anticipate or plan the 

reassessment program in its entirety, and as a result the people 

will be the ones that unfortunately will be paying for these 

mistakes. 

 

Nevertheless I just wanted to make some opening comments 

with respect to this particular Act and I would like to ask the 

minister why Bill 21 in fact does not contain any reference to 

the inequalities faced by condominium owners in the 

assessment program. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can 

tell me if they can expect that the government will address this 

issue in the short term or in the long term or if they will address 

it at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I should start off by not 

accepting a lot of the comments that you’ve made about the 

way that assessment has been dealt with. And I should say quite 

clearly that this particular legislation deals with the 

condominium property and it doesn’t deal with assessment. And 

many of your comments I think are much more appropriately 

dealt with by the Minister of Municipal Government when 

you’re raising questions with her. 

 

What we have here is a legislation that sets out how a 

condominium works. And the only thing that has even a little 

bit of a connection to what you’re talking about is the fact that 

the condominium owners as a group, if they feel that their total 

complex has been assessed inappropriately, can then appeal to 

the Saskatchewan Assessment Management authority which is 

controlled by the municipalities and raise questions about the 

total assessment for the whole complex. And what we’re doing 

in here is setting out some of the rules about how decisions are 

made within condominium corporations. 

 

But it’s quite far removed from the whole assessment issue and 

it really isn’t the issue that’s being dealt with here today. And 

so that practically I can make some comments I suppose if you 

want me to comment, but I don’t think it really assists us in 

dealing with this particular legislation other than dealing with 

how decisions are made within a condominium corporation. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. The fact is 

though that it will affect the people in the condominiums. And I 

appreciate your response that this particular Bill does not deal 

with that. And I appreciate your suggestions that I really go 

after the Minister of Municipal Affairs over that issue, and I 

will. 

 

My next question, Mr. Minister. I was just wondering, there 

seems to have been a lot left, the meat of this Act, for 

regulations. And I was wondering why it would not . . . a lot of 

that meat could not be included in the legislation but is now 

being left to regulations. And as you know, we have some 

concern about a lot of the Bills that are being passed where we 

do not have an opportunity to see what regulations will 

subsequently affect how various actions take place or what 

restrictions are put in force. 

 

We don’t have an opportunity to debate those regulations. And 

that’s been a bone of contention with members, with my 

colleagues in the official opposition here, with respect to not 

being able to challenge some of those regulations that are 

subsequently put in place. I wonder if you’d just comment on 

that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think, as I set out in the speech at 

second reading, these changes are made to an Act which was 

passed in 1993. It’s only four years ago. And what happened 

was there was continuing consultation with condominium 

developers, condominium owners, contractors, people who 

were dealing with condominium corporations, lawyers, many 

others. And they all had many suggestions about problems with 

that 1993 legislation. 

 

What we did in the department —and primarily with, I think, 

Madeleine riding herd on all these people — was to come up 

with those ideas which made sense to a broad cross-section of 

people, and that’s what we’ve brought forward here. And so 

that the amendments that we have brought here are the ones that 

have substantial consensus throughout the whole part of the 

Saskatchewan community that’s affected by the condominium 

Act. 

 

One of the reasons that we’ve retained some of the things in 

regulation is that as the consultation continues and as there are 

more solutions arrived at, it’s much easier to make the changes 

so that the people affected can have a solution to their problem 

in a timely fashion as opposed to waiting another five years or 

four years to amend the legislation. So that’s why we’ve done it 

in this particular legislation. It allows for the continuing 

consultation, which I think is something that we do well in this 

Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. And again since this particular Bill 

will impact or potentially impact thousands of people 

throughout the province, I guess, Mr. Minister, I was wondering 

if in fact you would not agree that perhaps instead of 

regulations that the structure should be more laid out in the Act 

so that it can be more properly scrutinized, rather than 

subsequently add and delete. Would you not agree that it 

perhaps should be better laid out within the Act so people can 

really see what’s going to be affecting them? 

  



996  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that the legislation as it is set 

out in ’93 really provided some better ways of doing things. 

And what we’re doing now is making those amendments that 

will affect the major parts of the legislation so that it responds 

to the needs that have been identified in the community. And 

we have some areas where continual discussion will go on 

about the regulations. 

 

But I think it’s also quite clear we’re not changing regulations 

every week. I mean it might be once every six months or two 

years or, you know, depending on the situation. And that’s all 

done in a way that people in this particular industry and 

condominium owners are kept well aware of it because we want 

to provide stability in this particular way that people have 

increasingly decided to live. 

 

Mr. Osika:  But, Mr. Minister, how can you believe that the 

objectives of openness and accountability of government can be 

achieved by leaving so many of the applications of the 

legislation to be prescribed in regulations which come after the 

fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I guess we just have a disagreement 

on the word, “so many.” We don’t think there are that many 

that are left to regulation. The basic rules are all set out; the 

framework of how condominiums work is all set out. The 

various formats . . . what we’re doing here is providing the 

register and other things which will make it much more 

consumer friendly, if I can put it that way. The people can have 

better access to it. 

 

But there are some places where we recognize that as the 

industry changes as the needs of people change, we will have to 

make some adjustments rather than trying to, I guess, fix 

something at a certain point right now with a certain rule in the 

legislation which we will then be wanting to come back next 

year to say well, we have to fix it. We’re saying let’s leave that 

part in the regulations so we can deal with it as it progresses. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I guess I should apologize for saying so many 

regulations, not knowing how many will be in place. 

 

But again I go back to our bone of contention that it’s often 

regulations that come subsequent to the Bill being proclaimed 

that we have no opportunity to debate nor do the people who 

are affected by have an opportunity to express their concerns 

and/or views on certain regulations that now they have to be 

guided by. 

 

The next question I have for you is what changes in the present 

day developers’ practices prompted the proposed change that 

the definition of a declaration is no longer approximate area of 

each unit. Was that part of the developers’ practices that 

prompted that change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is that 

this doesn’t really relate to the developers so much as it does to 

the surveyors and the method of actually setting out the plans 

through the chief surveyor’s office. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, can you tell me if the changes . . . 

the amendment proposed within clause 5 is simply meant to 

update the terminology of this Act with current day surveying 

terms. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think that’s exactly what it does. It 

reflects more accurately the existing survey practice and how 

the plans are processed at the Land Titles Office. So it’s to 

clarify the practice. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Could you explain to me what 

exactly is meant in the last part of that clause 5 where it states: 

 

“(d) illustrate common property and indicate in the 

prescribed manner any prescribed common facilities”. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, I think the idea there is, once again, 

to provide more information to the purchasers or to others who 

are interested in the plan. And so that it may be possible, for 

example, in common facilities to describe the landscaping or 

some other facility right on the plan. So if you buy a particular 

unit, you might get a plan that just describes your unit, but then 

it may also be able to include a description of some of the other 

things that you’re getting right on that plan. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Will that — again I’ll go back to 

regulations — will this be affected by regulations, that 

particular part, as far as common property, common facilities or 

common property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, I think the regulation is referred to 

when it talks about the prescribed manner. Any time you see the 

word “prescribed” that means there might be a rule that sets out 

how to do it. For example, if you had a plan that’s an eight and 

a half by eleven sheet of paper, you might want to attach to it 

four or five pages that describe the common property and the 

characteristics of that common property. So, therefore, the 

prescribed way of doing it would be to attach a document that 

provides a better explanation that shows on the face of the plan. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, according to the 

explanatory notes provided for clause 6, the amendment will 

allow appropriate municipal officials to approve straightforward 

condominium plans. Now I understand that this amendment will 

allow municipal councils to cut back on some of the red tape for 

condominium developments. 

 

Now when this particular section is in fact applied, some 

projects can be fast-tracked while others will be put on hold 

until the entire municipal council can scrutinize the proposal. I 

just wondered if the minister foresees any problems arising 

among competing developers because of this change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the practical effect of that change 

will be that if there are no concerns in the neighbourhood, that it 

will just proceed as a regular administrative act. But if there are 

concerns related to the particular building or to where it’s built, 

or there are neighbours who object, well then that would go to 

that full procedure that you talk about. 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

But it’s to provide the ability where there’s no controversy to 

have a matter go fairly quickly, but where there’s controversy, 

it provides for the people in the community to have their say. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. That same clause no. 6 would also 

allow some developers to proceed with the minister’s approval 

even if the security or bond requirement has been waived for a 

project. I just wondered if the minister could please explain in 

what circumstances a bond or some type of security for a 

project might be waived. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, I think that what this does is that it 

comes directly out of the condominium contractors’ and 

developers’ present practice. Sometimes they would have 

already finished the building before they come forward to 

register their plan. So at that point it really doesn’t make much 

sense for them to provide security because the building’s 

already there. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you. Here we go back to 

regulations again. And again, like I said, it’s a bit of a sore spot 

with us over on this side. And I’m just wondering why, Mr. 

Minister, you might have left the types of acceptable security 

left to regulations instead of outlining them in the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think this is set out in this way to make 

sure that we’re able to respond through the land titles system to 

commercial practice as it changes. And if we had some rule in 

there that held up the ability of contractors to get funding to 

build new projects, well that wouldn’t make any sense either. 

So what we’re trying to do here is maintain that flexibility in 

this very narrow area to respond to the needs of developers. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, would you not be concerned then 

that perhaps the types of security needed for approval of a 

project may become too broad? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I wouldn’t be concerned about that. I 

think the main person concerned about the security is the 

lender. And we know that most of the lending institutions have 

many more rules than whatever rules we’re going to create 

before they lend their money. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you just give me 

some examples of other types of securities, other than the letter 

or the bond, that might be deemed sufficient security? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Right now, the only security we’re 

accepting is the bond. But we are reviewing the possibility of 

whether we could accept letters of credit. 

 

Mr. Osika:  So I take it those are the only two at the present 

time that are acceptable. 

 

In clause no. 7, that appears to tighten up the legislation 

regarding information the developers must provide to 

condominium corporations about any future projects. Did this 

section cause many condominium corporation problems under 

the old Act? Did you get a lot of complaints from developers, 

Mr. Minister, who were not providing the corporations with 

enough information? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think there’s been complaints from 

the developers of the condominium corporations, but where the 

questions arise is when the new condominium board is set up of 

the owners of the condominium. They often appreciate having 

the full history of the corporation available when they’re trying 

to make decisions. 

 

It also relates to the fact that sometimes condominium 

corporations are phased developments and there may be 

necessity of having information about what the future plans are 

as it relates to that particular development. Like you might be 

part of one area of the development and then there’s other areas 

coming, including a golf course or a swimming pool or 

something like that and you need to have all of that information 

in a consistent way. 

 

But the main point in this is providing consistency of 

information. And practically, I would say most of the time it’s 

done already, but we’re just having it set out clearly in the rules. 

 

Mr. Osika:  That particular section in clause 8, because it 

deals with projects that are being developed in phases, some 

parts of the complex will not be totally completed when the first 

clients buy their units. Mr. Minister, do you not believe that 

proper security should be the utmost attention for these 

developments, so if the developer does experience set-backs, 

the people who have already purchased the units are not left 

high and dry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We’ve always had security for completion 

of projects and that will continue to be a rule that we will keep. 

So there’s . . . that’s one of the most important factors and the 

reasons why you have security is to make sure that the projects 

are completed. So that’s always been the rule and that’s the rule 

we’re going to keep. 

 

Mr. Osika:  The clause no. 10, that amendment refers to 

rules surrounding the transfer of a condominium project from 

one developer to another. Mr. Minister, can you tell me if this 

type of a transfer is quite common? Is that the sort of thing that 

goes on quite a bit? Is it quite a common practice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is a very uncommon practice but we 

wanted to make sure we had a rule in there to cover it in case it 

did arise. But it’s very uncommon that this would happen. So 

it’s a protection and a provision that will, you know, deal with 

any problem that may show up. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chairman, I move that we report 

progress on Bill No. 21. 

 

The Chair:  Before putting the question on reporting 

progress, the Chair requires the minister to move, I invite the 

minister now to move item no. 3, Bill No. 23 with amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

report the Bill No. 23, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Act with amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

  



998  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 23  The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act 

Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that Bill No. 23 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 21. 

 

(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

Seated to my left is the president of the corporation, John Law. 

Over on my far right is Mr. Garth Rusconi, who is the 

vice-president of accommodations; seated next to him is Mr. Al 

Moffat, who is the vice-president of commercial services; Deb 

Koshman, seated directly behind Mr. Law, is the vice-president 

of finance and corporate services; and directly behind me is Mr. 

Rob Isbister, who is the financial planning, finance and 

corporate services; and I’m Clay Serby, responsible for 

Property Management, Mr. Chair. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome 

the hon. minister and his officials. My name is the member 

from Melville. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  My colleague from Thunder Creek has allowed 

me an opportunity to just ask you a couple of questions . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thunder Creek? Sorry I mispronounced it. 

 

A couple of questions this afternoon and questions that have 

been burning that I’ve been trying to get answers to for some 

time since it affects the community of Melville, and that’s with 

respect to the court facilities. And I wonder if you could be 

kind enough and share with me the amount of money being paid 

in rent for the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management offices presently at Melville, at 117 3rd Avenue 

West. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, the member 

from Melville, for the question. I want to indicate first to the 

member from Melville that we have been working very closely 

with your mayor and a number of people in your constituency 

about the relocation of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management) to their new office space, which will be 

in the court-house of course, as you well know. 

 

It is the policy of course not to disclose the amount of what the 

lease value of any of the properties are around the province. 

And the reason for that of course, as you well know, is it’s an 

industry standard; it’s an arrangement that we’ve had with the 

industry for many, many years. And of course that kind of 

information is viewed as being protected information. As a 

result of that, I’m not able to disclose that to you at . . . 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That comes as a 

surprise. At some point I thought I had seen a list of costs of 

property and rentals being paid for various government 

facilities used by government agencies; perhaps it was for 

something else. 

 

If that information is not available, I wonder if you might be 

able to share with me the cost or the total amount that’s been 

budgeted for renovations of facilities that SERM will now be 

occupying in the near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The work that would need to be done on 

that particular location or that piece of property would be, of 

course, tendered through an RFP (request for proposal). That 

process yet has not been completed, but when we have that 

information in terms of what those costs for the renovations of 

that space will be then we can provide that to the member. We 

just don’t have that information currently because the RFP yet 

hasn’t been issued on the work that needs to be done. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Going back to the 

leasing and rental payments for various buildings. Again, could 

you clarify for me, is that not come under SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), with the 

amounts of costs for buildings that are leased directly by 

SPMC? Not necessarily what the rent payments are by any 

particular agency, but the lease payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The value of the cost of a particular 

department, being in a property that’s owned either by the 

government or whether or not it’s property that’s leased by 

SPMC on behalf of a particular department. And that 

responsibility of course, as you rightly say, is that of SPMC. 

 

The value of a lease that is currently occupied, that is leased, we 

would not be able to disclose, as I've indicated earlier to the 

member, on the basis that of course it is the industry standard. 

Because we go to the market-place of . . . by an RFP. That in 

their opinion would be . . . that type of a disclosure of course 

would be a hindrance to the future in terms of leasing   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

processes. 

 

The issue as it relates to a particular department having space 

within . . . and a government-owned property, we would in fact 

I think be able to provide that kind of detail out of the 

individual department’s budget that they would set aside for the 

use of that particular space. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Is there any time that those numbers 

and those dollar amounts are in fact released? 

 

I go back to still having a recollection of seeing a list of 

properties and buildings that were the responsibility of SPMC 

and the dollar amounts by individual properties and then the 

bottom line as to the total amount of taxpayers’ money that goes 

for paying for rented properties to house agencies or carry out 

various provincial department activities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  To each of the departments of course — 

the member is correct — we would show what the . . . so the 

global amounts that each of the departments would in fact be 

budgeting or the payees that would be paying the Saskatchewan 

Property Management on each of those properties that they 

would have access to or occupancy to. 

 

So we are disclosing that. And they would appear of course in 

the space allocation, or in the accommodation side of each of 

the departments who are utilizing the space in which we’re 

providing for them. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, one final question that 

I have with respect to the operation in Melville, I wondered if 

you could tell me if you have any idea what the government 

currently budgets for to hold provincial police court in 

Melville? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Currently that particular cost would be 

included in the Department of Justice’s space allocation 

requirements as they currently occupy the Provincial Court. 

That of course will change once new facilities are located for 

the Provincial Court in Melville. And would expect that that 

cost will be significantly less because they’ll be using less space 

on less occasion. 

 

As you well know, I think that court will only be used six days 

per month, and so that’s currently what Saskatchewan Property 

Management is looking for. We expect that that will be 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of 50 to $100 per day for each 

of those days that Provincial Court would sit in the city of 

Melville. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I still go back to having to ask you 

the question about specific locations and costs. When you 

answered you indicated that in a global sense there would be a 

dollar amount for a figure that would tell us how much the 

government was paying for rented property, and not by specific 

locations. 

 

Again I seem to recall a document that specified particular 

buildings within various locations that were leased by the 

government. And those figures should be public. I don’t 

understand why they would not be, given that it is taxpayers’ 

money that’s paying for them. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well what we have in lease 

accommodations throughout the province, Mr. Member, is that 

we have about 39.5 million is what we would pay out in lease 

payments. I think we’ve provided in our annual report, in the 

supplementary annual report, what we do list there is all of the 

payees across the province on a individual basis, of what those 

are. So if the member were to look at his annual report, what 

they would find there is the costs on each of the individual 

properties across the province. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 

think what the member from Melville is referring to . . . and 

I’ve seen these documents myself, and in fact it was Crop 

Insurance offices throughout the province, where in fact we 

used to get the description, the legal description, what facility, 

the costs of rent, costs of renovations — it was all broken down. 

 

And perhaps that was with the previous administration. And if 

you don’t do it now, then that tells me there was a policy 

change. I’d like to know when you changed the policy, why it is 

we can’t have access to that information now when it used to be 

made readily available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  On individual projects, the member is 

right. Where we’ve in fact tendered a particular project, what 

we would be showing is what those tender costs would be on an 

individual project. But the member’s not correct when he says 

that in fact lease space has been disclosed for a . . . that there’s 

been a policy change in terms of our lease policy because that’s 

really not true. 

 

I have here a note that says that the Saskatchewan government 

has for 20 years now, and better, honoured the real estate 

industry’s request that rental rates for individual leased 

buildings are kept strictly confidential. So this isn’t the change 

in the policy; this policy’s been around for at least the 20 years 

that we talk about and there hasn’t been any change in that 

particular process at all. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, perhaps what’s happened 

then is that in Crown Corporations meetings this came through, 

I guess through the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, but actually 

those buildings are leased through SPMC. So why then do we 

have to play that game where you’re showing, if we actually 

know who owns the buildings, we can sort of match things up? 

I mean really anyone that wants to know that information, I 

guess is what you’re saying, can find it out. Right? So why 

won’t you just make it a public record? A lot of these are 

long-term contracts anyways. Are you actually going to be 

affecting anyone’s lease or any sites that may come available? 

Because these contracts, you’re not breaking them, are you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think what’s important here is that, I 

need to advise the member that — and I want to just go back to 

the position that I’d made earlier — and that is that it really is   



1000  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

the process of due diligence that we’re wanting to ensure that 

we protect here with the industry. And it’s, as I’ve said earlier 

on a couple of occasions to both you and the member from 

Melville, that it’s really the industry that’s asked that we protect 

the old process of the pure RFP. 

 

And in fact what we want to be clear on here is that when we 

are looking for property, or leasing property across the 

province, that you want to continue to ensure the competitive 

process and that the competitive process remains in place. And 

as a result of that we haven’t been in the position, as I’ve said, 

for the past 20 years, to disclose what those individual leased 

rates are. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the problem that we’re 

going to have . . . Let me give you an example — Crop 

Insurance offices. Your colleague, the Minister of Agriculture 

and Food and the minister in charge of Crop Insurance, went 

around the province last year closing Crop Insurance offices. 

And other ministers are busy closing other things down in rural 

Saskatchewan and we’re trying to get some idea as to what’s 

happening with these leases. Many of them were long-term 

leases. 

 

Did the Saskatchewan taxpayers have a lot of money invested 

in renovating some of these buildings which really weren’t 

theirs? We’ve heard numbers as high as 90,000, $100,000 for 

renovations, I mean. So to get some idea where we’re at, what 

the public have invested in some of these facilities, we’d have 

to know exactly which ones we’re talking about — see the list 

of, you know, who has the long-term leases, where they are, 

what they’re being used for. And maybe it would make perfect 

sense. 

 

We’re not asking that, you know, you have to put it in the local 

paper, but we would like to know, I think, for the good of the 

public, what it is you’re doing with some of these leases 

because I don’t . . . You know SPMC, as many know, has been 

often a very political group, I guess, from the minister on down. 

And we would want to just to have some assurance that, you 

know, some of this isn’t happening today; that there isn’t 

patronage or in fact leases given out, as they were under the 

Devine years, to friends. And the only way you’re going to 

clear this up is to give us this kind of information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think it’s fair to state to the member 

opposite . . . and of course he has a fair deal of familiarity with 

the way in which the process prior to 1991 transpired in the 

province of Saskatchewan in terms of leasing properties. And 

it’s . . . and ownership of some of the properties. 

 

And as the member well knows, that we have a great many 

properties around the province today that were leased for long 

periods of time, of which currently the Saskatchewan taxpayer 

still has an investment in and is still working at retiring. And in 

many of those . . . in some of those instances we have properties 

that aren’t being fully utilized or utilized at all, as the member 

knows. 

 

The member is also correct in stating that over the last couple of 

years of course what’s happened in Saskatchewan is that 

through the rightsizing process, Saskatchewan Property 

Management has been looking at ensuring that we try to match 

the particular department with the space that we have available 

across the province, and are moving towards reducing the 

number of, particularly leased properties that we have some of 

our departments, organizations and services in. In fact since 

1991 we’ve reduced the number of leased properties in the 

province by, I believe it’s 120, and there’s been a saving of 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of about $4 million. 

 

So what’s happening of course, is that the government is 

starting to use, or beginning to examine in a very broad fashion, 

all of the properties that we want to make available for the 

services that we have within government. And we’re attempting 

to achieve that, of course, over the long run. 

 

I think it’s fair also for the member to say that over the course 

of the years, Saskatchewan Property Management has had a bit 

of a taint which none of us are very happy with and certainly 

had hoped that we might have been able to change that over the 

decade of the ’80s. 

 

This year, as you well know, we . . . or the last year and a half, 

we’ve been going through a very detailed review of 

Saskatchewan Property Management, and when you take a look 

at the organization that we have today versus the organization 

that you had, for example, in 1991, you’ll see a reduced 

administrative structure within the corporation. You’re seeing a 

streamlining of the kinds of departments that are currently 

involved in providing three really broad major services; and are 

reduced and have reduced in this corporation significantly not 

only the manpower, but have examined how we might in fact 

provide a broader menu of services to the people who are in the 

province. And clearly, I think when you look at the number of 

employees that were involved with the department, for 

example, in 1991 I think were just over 1,100. Today within the 

corporation, we have just under 900 employees within the 

corporation. 

 

In the last series of work that the corporation has undergone, 

we’ve been able to reduce further through a . . . we have a 

three-stage process that we’re working at achieving over the 

next three years. In the last process, we’ve been able to reduce 

the number of people within the organization by about 60, 

which were positions that haven’t been filled over the years, 

and through that process have only had to see two people find 

different kinds of opportunities. 

 

So as the member points out, over the last number of years we 

have seen, I think, some abuse —if I might use that word a bit 

loosely — I think within the corporation, particularly through 

the decade of the ’80s. But we’ve changed that process 

significantly within the corporation, making it much more 

responsible, making it much more accountable to the 

government, also to the departments in which we serve, and are 

seeing a much better broad-based delivery out there, we 

suggest, in terms of supporting the departments and the 

organizations that we provide service to today. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, so I guess what you’re 

saying, you refuse to give us the full list of your contracts and   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

the buildings and such for the province. But you had mentioned 

that due to your rightsizing— you just got to love that term — 

due to the rightsizing rural Saskatchewan, there are a number of 

facilities that I guess were leased under the Devine government; 

you have to carry on that lease, long-term leases, but you’re not 

utilizing the facilities. 

 

So I can only assume that those contracts will be never be 

renewed anyways. Could you give us a list of those contracts, 

facilities, where located, what they were being used for? 

There’s no reason why we can’t have that list, Mr. Minister, 

because it’s not going to affect anyone in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There’s certainly no problem providing all 

of the properties that we have across the province that are 

currently not being utilized in each of the constituencies that we 

have those properties in, and we can provide that list for the 

member as soon as we can, and I would expect in the very 

immediate future. 

 

I guess the earlier question that the member asks is that we can 

certainly provide renovation budgets for individual construction 

projects. They’re disclosed. Every time that we do a renovation 

project around the province, we do an RFP. That information is 

public, and the member opposite and anyone who wishes that 

kind of information, we can provide that. 

 

And we can also provide the individual payee list, as is already 

indicated in the addendum to the annual report. That’s there as 

well for the members, so that you can see the kinds of dollars 

that we’re paying out right now on property leases and rentals. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister. Also, each and 

every year there was a set of global questions to which there 

were global answers, and have you prepared that yet? I mean I 

don’t have a copy, but then I’m not the critic. And I was 

wondering if you have prepared it and sent it across. 

 

I raise it for this reason: by doing the global answers, you’d cut 

back on a lot of the questioning as we’re doing here this 

afternoon. And if you had it, it would answer a lot of the things 

about what SPMC is doing with government vehicles, 

computers — where you’re purchasing them, from whom, for 

how much, things on tendering, employees. So I mean we’d 

have to wait for that before we can really go further. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Let’s see, I just want to respond to the 

member by indicating to the member that we’re about a week or 

a week and a half away from completing all of the work that we 

needed to do on our year end. And I think last year when we 

were here, we provided the kind of information that the member 

was asking for. We don’t have all of that information in detail 

yet at this particular point in time. 

 

I think the other issue that’s important to mention here is that in 

other years that detail was requested in advance by the critics 

that were asking the questions as . . . by the members asking the 

questions of each . . . of the portfolio. We hadn’t had that 

request this year, however. 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, thank you. I guess in a week 

and a half, then we’ll have to finish up on some of those 

questions. 

 

Mr. Minister, SPMC . . . You deal with a lot of computers. I’m 

sure you’re buying and taking the used or the older ones out of 

commission all the time. Can you tell us what you do with the 

old computer equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well see, as the member probably is 

aware, that what we have is . . . our surplus policy is that we 

make all our surplus supplies, whether it’s computers or 

whether it’s desks or furniture, whatever it is that we have, we 

make that available through a public auction as you’re aware, 

through a salvage and sales department within the corporation. 

 

I think specific to the question as it relates to computers, I think 

you’re aware that we have the computer for kids program which 

is operated really in conjunction with the SaskTel Pioneers. 

And what they do, of course, is they get this equipment and 

they provide some repair to it and maintenance to it; and as a 

result of that, then some of that then makes its way into some of 

the school system. Of course the Department of Education then 

picks up some of those costs as it relates to those particular 

computers. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 

officials here this afternoon. On the topic of disposal of supplies 

that SPMC is charged with the responsibility of, would you be 

able to tell us how many government entities, government 

agencies, your organization would be responsible for disposing 

of these supplies on behalf of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t have exactly the number that we 

might be looking for but we think it’s somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of about 70, because we would provide that 

service to all of the departments of executive government. We 

would provide it for some of the commercial Crowns. There are 

some public agencies that would also be using our services. So 

it would be the same number of groups that we would have 

under our purchasing policy. It would be the identical number. 

And we think it’s somewhere in the neighbourhood of about 70, 

but we can provide that for you in more detail. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, we would appreciate that, if we 

could get a copy of a listing, per se, of these various agencies 

that you act on behalf of in terms of disposing of supplies. 

 

Also, I understand, as these supplies are returned to SPMC for 

eventual disposal, there should be a process in place whereby 

which you, as an organization, should be able to know that they 

are in fact surplus supplies, that they should be disposed of. I 

worry, because I saw concerns expressed by the Provincial 

Auditor in years gone by where, perhaps, there hasn’t been the 

proper approval process followed in terms of . . . from the 

various agencies to SPMC, giving you authority to dispose of 

surplus supplies. I’m wondering if you’re anticipating those 

sorts of problems in this next fiscal year? 

 

I know, given that I saw a figure for the ’95-96 fiscal year 

where your department, I believe, disposed of something like   



1002  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

close to $7 million worth of surplus supplies, it would . . . that’s 

a fair number of dollars worth of supplies to be charged with 

the responsibility for disposal of. And I’m curious whether 

there’s a good portion of that that might be going up on the 

block without really any proper approval. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think what’s important to realize here is 

of course that Saskatchewan Property Management of course 

has within its purview some assets. And on those assets we 

would make the decisions ourselves as to what the productive 

life of a particular commodity that we might have would be, 

whether it’s a piece of furniture or whether in fact it might be 

highway vehicles that department employees are using. But 

more important though is that each of the individual 

departments of course, would be the ones who would be making 

the decision as to whether or not a particular piece of equipment 

still has a value. 

 

I think the member might remember probably one of the largest 

pieces of work that we’ve done in the last year and a half has 

been some of the equipment that is moved from the Department 

of Highways, and we of course looked after that major sale 

which was about a year ago or so. And the decision about the 

life of the equipment that was sold off was really . . . that 

determination was made by the Department of Highways and 

then what Saskatchewan Property Management did is 

accommodated that particular sale. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well if I understand correctly though, Mr. 

Minister, I think it’s a requirement of all of these various 

agencies that would, let’s say, borrow supplies from SPMC, 

that they designate a person or perhaps persons as being 

responsible to advise SPMC that in fact these are surplus goods 

that should be disposed of. So if there’s a requirement on their 

part, isn’t there a reciprocal requirement on the part of the 

SPMC division that they know that these goods should be 

properly disposed of at that point in time? 

 

I guess what I’m getting at is you’re mentioning there’s 

something like 70 agencies here and that you will be providing 

a list of those. And I should suspect we could get a list of 

70-some-odd names as well, of people that would be authorized 

from these various government agencies as far as being able to 

be authorized to dispose . . . or give you authorization to 

dispose of these properties. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think the member is correct. The 

information that was cited, I think in the last Report of the 

Provincial Auditor, indicates that what was lacking from some 

of the work that we were providing is that we needed to list an 

individual. As you’ve rightly pointed out, that should be 

included as it provides the authorization to the particular good 

or supply that in fact we’re going to be disposing of on their 

behalf. 

 

There’s also included in that of course now, is the transfer 

document that would be arriving with the particular commodity 

that we would be looking after disposing on their behalf, to 

ensure that in fact that work then is being done in a fashion that 

it’s accountable for and the proper individuals are really signing 

that off. So that process has now been accommodated, as the 

member has asked. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But I didn’t hear in 

your reply there that there actually exists a list of the individuals 

that are so designated. And would you just be able to advise us 

if that list exists and if we could have access to that list as well 

as the group of agencies that you’ve described for us this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What we’ll do, Mr. Chair, to the member, 

is that when we provide you with the list of the agencies that 

we’re doing work for we’ll also provide you then with those 

individuals that are authorized as well to sign off on the 

supplies in which . . . the goods that we’re in fact responsible 

then to manage. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  And if I could just have one final 

clarification. When this list does arrive, it will contain the sum 

total of government agencies for which you do provide these 

services, because I know there was a little bit of conjecture here 

this afternoon as to what were the total numbers of agencies that 

you do the services for. Will it be in fact the complete list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We’ll provide you with a complete list as 

you’ve requested. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, if you will, I’d like to at least get 

one question in before the Government House takes over. Mr. 

Minister, you made a comment earlier regarding a question on 

. . . a response to global questions. And I believe our caucus has 

sent a request for . . . with a global set of questions to your 

office and I just want a clarification. 

 

I think you had indicated that no questions had come to your 

department. And I know that the area that I’m responsible for, 

we sent a number of questions off before and I’m sure my 

fellow colleague would have sent a series of global questions to 

your office. 

 

I’d like to know if you’ve received those; if you haven’t, we’ll 

certainly double check on it. But if you have received it, when 

do you expect to have the responses to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  If that information was circulated to us it 

might have been part of the Crown circulation that your caucus 

had sent over. We’ll just review our information to see whether 

or not yours has been received or not, and if it has, certainly 

we’ll provide all of that detail, as you’ve asked, at our year end. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair, I move we report progress. 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 975 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Congratulations to Sandra Schmirler Rink 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 975 

 Passover Week 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

 Upgraders Making Profits 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

 Tisdale Business Marks 75 Years of Service 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

 Z99 Fund-raiser 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

 50th Anniversary of Western Sales Ltd. 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 977 

 Organ Donor Week 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 977 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Provincial Auditor Report on SaskPower 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 977 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 978 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 979 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 979 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 979 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 980 

 Provincial Auditor Spring Report 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 980 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 980 

 Reconstruction Charges 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 980 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 980 

 Health Care Reform 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 980 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 981 

 Farming Taxation Rules 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 981 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 981 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

 Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  Lingenfelter ....................................................................................................................................................................... 982, 984 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 983 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 38  The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 984 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 14 — The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 986 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 987 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 988 

 Bill No 28 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 989 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 990 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 990 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 992 

 Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 23  The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 998 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation  Vote 53 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 998 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 998 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 999 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1002 

 

 


