



















































Hansard: April 18, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 951 

 April 18, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I bring 

forward petitions today regarding big game damage to people in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent overpopulation of deer and other big 

game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are all 

from the community of Kelliher. I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

present a petition to do with the problem of youth crime. I will 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from the town of Kamsack. I 

present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 

to present and I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction, and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

And these all come from the community of Blaine Lake. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly for a task force to aid 

the fight against youth crime; 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to amend The 

Non-profit Corporations Act to protect volunteers; 

 

Of citizens urging the government to commission an 

independent study to review the social impact of gambling; 

and 

 

Of citizens urging the government to construct a new 

hospital in La Loche. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Tuesday next move: 

 

That this Assembly demand the government to 

immediately abandon its unfair and regressive attack on 

Saskatchewan businesses and taxpayers through The 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, and 

immediately repeal this policy, which is costly and 

ineffective and serves no purpose but to appease unions in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give notice of 

written question. I shall give notice that on day no. 34 ask the 

government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation: what is the total value of 

construction products within Saskatchewan Forest 

Products will undertake during 1997 coming into scope of 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

I have similar questions for all of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to draw your attention and that of the members to a group 

of visitors who are seated in your gallery. It is a group of 

students who are enrolled in the LINC program at the 

University of Regina. LINC stands for Language Instruction for 

Newcomers to Canada. They’re accompanied here today by 

their teacher, Marion Billings, and by Jan Phillips. 

 

And in addition to making them feel welcome in our Assembly, 

I would ask all members to show their very strong welcome to 

this group of newcomers to Canada. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



952  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the rest of the members here this morning, I’d like to 

introduce some friends of mine sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. 

They’re visiting the legislature this morning — Murray Valiaho 

and his son Ben, sitting with their friend Vic Olivier. Also Ben 

is a good buddy of my son Michael; so I’d just like everyone to 

welcome them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

SARCAN Celebrations 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today there are 

province-wide ceremonies celebrating tangible proof that we in 

this province take the protection of our environment seriously. 

Open houses are being held at SARCAN centres around the 

province. They are being held today because sometime during 

the month of April, SARCAN will recycle its 1 billionth 

container. If all 1 billion recycled aluminum, plastic, and glass 

bottles were laid end to end, they would circle the earth more 

than six times — that would be some nuisance ground. 

 

What is truly remarkable is that nearly 95 per cent of 

deposit-paid containers in Saskatchewan are returned for 

recycling. Because SARCAN began its recycling program nine 

years ago, a program that takes those containers out of the 

dumps and recycles them into useful products, that land is 

preserved for other uses. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should not forget that SARCAN is a 

good citizen in another way. The employees in the 70 SARCAN 

centres around the province are primarily individuals who are 

challenged in some way. Because of SARCAN these people are 

employed in valuable, rewarding work — work, by the way, 

which pays for itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Dale Botting, the executive director, 

and all employees for their very necessary work in keeping our 

small planet fresh. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Role of Bombardier at 15 Wing Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, on March 17 the former deputy 

premier, the member from Regina Dewdney, was up in this 

House condemning the Government of Canada for providing 

profit incentive loans to Bombardier of Montreal. Mr. Speaker, 

I was appalled by these remarks, given the lead role which 

Bombardier is taking in trying to procure NATO (North 

Atlantic Treaty Organization) flight training for 15 Wing 

Moose Jaw. 

 

If Bombardier is successful in this effort, it will help preserve 

one of the largest employers in this province. Moose Jaw and 

district, and indeed southern Saskatchewan, will be spared from 

the negative impact of losing over a thousand jobs and millions 

in economic activity. 

 

Given the importance of this project to Saskatchewan people 

and the sensitivity of the member’s remarks to national unity, I 

strongly urge the member to apologize. Considering the 

member’s key role in the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

national campaign and his influence within the government 

caucus, I’ve written Bombardier officials and I suggested they 

brief the member to ensure that he, like other people in 

Saskatchewan, offer support to Bombardier in its efforts to 

wholeheartedly help Moose Jaw and southern Saskatchewan 

join in the world’s expanding aviation industry. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Volunteers Recognized 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 

this is Volunteer Week in Saskatchewan, I wish to recognize the 

efforts of a few such individuals from Weyburn. Each recently 

received a volunteer award for outstanding service to their 

community and to Saskatchewan. 

 

Susan Hagel received an award as outstanding sport 

administrator. She demonstrated her commitment to the young 

people of Weyburn through her work with the Weyburn Skating 

Club, the TransCanada Pipelines Provincial Figure Skating 

Championships, and the Weyburn first invitational competition. 

Susan teaches Weyburn youth about self-motivation, time 

management, and self-confidence. 

 

Dr. Madhi Juma of Weyburn received an award for his 

contribution to Saskatchewan culture. He has served in various 

capacities in Weyburn’s multi-cultural community; is a main 

organizer behind the annual Folkarama Festival. He has also 

taken a lead role in welcoming new Canadians at citizenship 

courts and was instrumental in organizing the teaching of 

heritage languages in Weyburn. 

 

Danielle Bernstrom is a student at Weyburn composite, a 

volunteer at Souris Valley, and a candy striper at Weyburn 

General. She excels at speed swimming. Danielle has the 

tenacity that characterizes the people of this great province, 

making her a worthy recipient of the Athlete of the Year Award. 

 

Sharon Hoeving has been recognized as an outstanding official. 

She was the Weyburn Skating Club’s first full-time coach for 

18 years. Sharon is a highly respected skating judge, and trains 

and supervises other judges. 

 

I congratulate these four outstanding individuals. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Co-operators’ Wise Rider Program 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Every member 

of this Assembly would agree, I’m sure, that children are our 

most precious resource. The loss of even a single child is a 

tragedy that touches not just lives of his or her parents but each 

and every one of us. The cost in terms of lost potential for our   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

communities and for our province is incalculable. But what is 

even more tragic, Mr. Speaker, is when such a loss might have 

been prevented. 

 

Bike-related accidents are the fifth leading cause of death for 

kids between the age of five and nine, yet just 5 per cent of our 

children wear bike helmets. This tragedy, Mr. Speaker, is one 

that can be prevented. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

note in this Assembly today, the expansion of The 

Co-operators’ wise rider program. It is coming into Regina in 

the elementary schools, beginning with W.F. Ready School in 

my constituency. 

 

For some time now The Co-operators have taken a leadership 

role in raising awareness of this important public safety issue. 

Now, by expanding their program to include visitation of 

elementary schools, The Co-operators are ensuring that each 

child in Regina learns about the importance of helmets and 

bicycle safety. They are demonstrating an admirable 

commitment to Regina children and to the future of our 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you to join me in congratulating The 

Co-operators on their expansion of the wise rider program and 

for their commitment to the children of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wynyard Rodeo Week 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everyone in this 

Assembly has heard of the Calgary Stampede. Well today I 

would like to mention an event that isn’t as big nor as 

well-known as the Stampede, but just as much fun for the 

participants and the spectators. 

 

The week of April 19 to 27 has been designated by the town of 

Wynyard as Rodeo Week. Numerous events are planned 

throughout the week, commencing with an auction on Saturday 

and continuing with a horse pull, numerous suppers, pancake 

breakfast, team roping, and rodeo dance. The events are 

numerous and the volunteers needed to make this a success will 

be great. 

 

Because this is Volunteer Week across Canada, I would like to 

take this opportunity to congratulate the Wynyard community 

on staging this enormous event. It will take everyone’s 

cooperation and teamwork to ensure that everything runs 

smoothly. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it will be the many people who have 

successfully volunteered their time and energy to make this 

rodeo week a success. This event once again demonstrates the 

community spirit of Saskatchewan residents and their desire to 

maintain and foster that spirit. 

 

I would like to invite all members to Wynyard and take in this 

truly community event. And I would like to congratulate the 

many volunteers that will make it a success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Yorkton Lions Club Indoor Games 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Everything is set for the return of the 1997 Sunrise Yorkton 

Lions Indoor Games this weekend. And those of you who have 

not made your plans, you should plan to be at the Agriplex this 

weekend. More than 800 athletes from across Saskatchewan 

and Manitoba will take part in this traditional event, this event 

which will take them higher, longer, and faster, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the highlights this year is the Yorkton elementary 

competition called the screaming relays, a two-day event 

between students from Yorkton and area elementary schools 

who will then hold the bragging rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, events such as this deserve our support for two 

reasons. One, they provide training and practice grounds for 

athletes who will one day compete for us at the national and at 

the international levels, and perhaps maybe even at the 

Olympics. 

 

Two, and more importantly, the Lions Sunrise Indoor Games 

provide a venue for friendly, enthusiastic competition for 

students who simply like to run, jump, and throw for the pure 

joy of extending themselves. 

 

I want to congratulate the Yorkton Sunrise Lions Club for 

bringing the event back to our community and wish them well 

throughout the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Z99 Fund-raiser 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everybody’s favourite 

radio station, Z99, is at it again. C.C. and Lori Lindsay, the duo 

that would like the people to believe they’re a half a bubble off 

level, really are proving that they are on the straight and narrow. 

 

Today . . . starting yesterday actually and finishing at 5 o’clock 

today, C.C. and Lori Lindsay are broadcasting live from the 

Cornwall Centre and they’re seeking donations for neonatal 

incubators at the General Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very, very worthwhile cause. They’ve done 

this before. I’m hoping that C.C. and Lori Lindsay and Z99 will 

continue to do it well into the future. 

 

I urge everybody to stop by the Cornwall Centre this day, help 

out, make a donation; help C.C., Lori Lindsay, Z99, the Regina 

General Hospital, and all of Saskatchewan. Stop by today; make 

a donation at the Cornwall Centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Provincial Auditor Report on SaskPower 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,   



954  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

yesterday when the minister in charge of SaskPower levelled 

criticism at the Provincial Auditor and undermined his 

authority, it had a familiar ring. In essence what the minister 

was suggesting was that, if you don’t like the opinion, we’ll go 

and get another — just as the Devine government used to do. 

 

When the former Tory administration would attack the 

Provincial Auditor during the 1980s, the New Democratic 

opposition was quick to come to his defence. In fact during a 

May 1989 debate the current Premier in this House said: 

 

When a government gets an audited report it has one of 

two choices: either it has adequate explanation for what the 

Provincial Auditor points out or, in the alternative, it takes 

corrective action. 

 

Will your government take corrective action and implement the 

recommendations, implement the recommendations of the 

Provincial Auditor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to 

the member’s question, the answer is quite clear. With the 

difference of opinion between myself and the Provincial 

Auditor, it’s based on adequate opinion, adequate professional 

opinion, that would give us cause to believe his decision is 

wrong. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member and the Leader of the 

Opposition, and I quote from yesterday’s Hansard, Mr. 

Chairman, and this is from Mr. Ellis from Ernst & Young: 

 

. . . in summary, Madam Chairman, I do believe that the 

report prepared by the Provincial Auditor is inappropriate. 

It would result in the corporation preparing misleading 

statements and it . . . (was a) result in our firm providing an 

opinion on misleading statements, that they present fairly, 

if his recommendations were adopted. And (so) our 

professional standards will not permit us to do so. 

 

So the comments that you refer to are based adequately, I think, 

on the opinions that we have received not only from Ernst & 

Young, but from Deloitte & Touche and KPMG. The 

accounting profession is quite clear in terms of what is 

appropriate, and we believe that their recommendations to the 

corporation and to the government are appropriate and are 

adequate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, with each passing day it 

becomes more evident that this government is approaching the 

arrogance and incompetent rampant that was in the former Tory 

administration. 

 

The Provincial Auditor’s job is to report irregularities and 

concerns about accountability through his reports to the 

legislature and the Public Accounts Committee. Yesterday, he 

followed his mandate and came under fire by this government. 

It is sadly ironic that this government, which defended the 

Provincial Auditor when it suited its political purpose, is now 

undermining his authority. 

 

Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan deserve an 

explanation. Why are you attacking the institution of the 

Provincial Auditor which you once defended? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, nobody is attacking the 

Provincial Auditor and nobody is undermining the Provincial 

Auditor. The Provincial Auditor is an officer of this Legislative 

Assembly. I think that he does and has done . . . I’m not talking 

about the individual; the office has done a good job over the 

years. 

 

But may I say, Mr. Speaker, in answering the question that 

there is a fundamental contradiction in the opposition. They 

cannot put questions to the government respecting a statement 

made by the Provincial Auditor and expect in every case that 

the government is going to accept the Provincial Auditor’s 

view. And when we don’t accept the Provincial Auditor’s view 

and back up with supporting statements as to why we don’t, you 

can’t say that’s undermining. 

 

There’s a dispute here as to the accounting procedures. That’s 

all there is — pure and simple. You can’t elevate that to saying 

that it’s an undermining of the Provincial Auditor. Far from it. 

We support the Provincial Auditor. 

 

There is a legitimate accounting dispute as to what should be 

taking place with respect to these reconstruction fees. In fact the 

auditor himself points out that he’s going to CICA, the 

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, for a ruling on 

this matter. So he himself is not certain. We support the auditor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

latest provincial budget includes a pledge by this government to 

balance fairness and responsible financial management. A 

recent editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix underlines the 

fact that this government’s Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement is not balanced, not fair, and without question not 

responsible. It also states that among other things, this policy is 

an insult to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Labour indicated in this House two weeks ago 

that there is nothing unfair about the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement. He indicated, and I quote, “There’s no 

cost element to this thing at all,” and used words like stupid and 

unfounded when questioned about this policy which inflates the 

cost of construction projects. 

 

Is the minister prepared to confirm his comments that there is 

no cost element to this thing at all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well construction of course costs 

money. It costs money to build things. There’s no question   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

about that. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Extra costs, Bob. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The question, as the member says from 

his seat, is the extra cost. We’re satisfied that we’re achieving 

good value from our construction. The bids that are made are 

fair, whether they fall under the CCTA (Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement) or not. And the cost of constructing a 

project now is comparable to the cost of constructing a project 

before the CCTA came along. 

 

So what are the yardsticks? What are the yardsticks, Mr. 

Speaker, by which it is said that the CCTA results in extra 

costs? We’re happy to have any information that the opposition 

may have indicating to the contrary, but we’re quite satisfied 

with the way in which that agreement operates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, there is clearly a cost element 

to this policy and I’ll give the minister a case in point. A tender 

was recently issued for a project to divert water run-off from an 

existing SaskPower hydro line in Hudson Bay area. North West 

Construction, a non-union, family-owned company, bid 

$231,000 for the project. They later discovered that SaskCon, a 

Saskatoon unionized firm which received the contract, did so 

after submitting a bid of $327,000 — $96,000 more than the bid 

put forward by North West. 

 

Will the minister explain how he can possibly stand by his 

claim that there’s no cost element to this thing, when I have just 

demonstrated a recent project which inflated the cost of the 

project by 29 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar 

with the situation that the member raises, but I will certainly 

look into it. You have to wonder when bids are being presented 

to contracts that are covered by the tendering agreement by 

firms who don’t intend to operate under that agreement. They 

know, they know, they know that their bid is not going to be 

accepted at the time that they put it in, so it’s a little shaky to 

necessarily draw firm conclusions from a fact situation like that, 

but I’m certainly willing to look into it. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve looked at this with some 

care and we are not able to discern that the cost of construction 

projects in this province has increased compared to what it was 

before the CCTA came into effect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, if the minister is so sure that 

the non-unionized firms are putting in false bids, just award one 

once and see if their bid bond will stand by them. Take the 

chance and award one, Mr. Minister. 

 

There are other examples. In the Sask Crown report released 

just this past week, it takes a great deal of pride talking about 

the Wakaw to Humboldt regional water supply. Last year we 

tabled information in the House that showed that that project 

was also inflated by some 30 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ve made a number of these absolute 

documented reports. The Crown corporations will not release 

the awarded contracts because you’re afraid that you might 

show that this project is absolutely unfounded. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you either award some of these lower bids or 

get rid of the CCTA agreement once and for all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well we have no intention of getting rid 

of the agreement, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve tried to enunciate the 

reasons for that. 

 

I’m not saying that the bids are false. I didn’t say that; that’s the 

member’s own term himself. What I said was that it’s a bit 

shaky to draw any firm conclusions from situations where 

people bid knowing they do not qualify because they’re not 

prepared to operate under the CCTA. 

 

We have tried as best we can to determine whether there is any 

validity to the charge that the agreement is resulting in extra 

construction costs. And we are just simply not able to draw that 

conclusion; nor I think can anyone who’s prepared to look at 

the matter in a fair way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday in this House I questioned the government after 

hearing from 70 municipal governments about this 

government’s $29 million cut to revenue-sharing grants. These 

questions and the inadequate response by the minister have 

resulted in a flurry of calls to my office. And I can now report 

I’ve been in touch with 106 municipal governments who have 

serious concerns about the downloading of this government. 

 

Madam Minister, you had suggested that the funding for 

municipal governments is secure and that they have adequate 

resources. You also indicated the concerns I raised were a 

figment of my imagination. However, even your own officials 

disagree with you. 

 

In today’s Leader-Post, Doug Morcom suggests that 

conditional and unconditional grants have been cut by an 

average of 38 per cent and admits individual municipalities may 

have even had bigger cuts — something I demonstrated 

yesterday. 

 

Madam Minister, will you explain if the concerns being 

expressed by the local governments and your officials in your 

own department are a figment of their imagination as well? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to answer the question of the member opposite and   



956  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

I quote from Hansard and what I said yesterday: 

 

. . . the conditional side of the grant, the money has to be 

spent in order to receive the cost-sharing part of the 

revenue-sharing formula. So if a municipality's activity in 

road building, or whatever the shared project was, was 

reduced, well then the grant would be reduced. The 

member knows this, Mr. Speaker (from his previous 

experience). 

 

I explained outside the House again to reporters, it’s complex, 

as the member knows, and I may have been misunderstood. But 

I never said that the conditional side of the pool wasn’t reduced. 

I said that the amount a municipality gets depends on their level 

of activity, and it varies from year to year. 

 

And I would remind the member opposite that there’s also 

$16.4 million in futures and $23 million of infrastructure money 

going to municipalities this year. So the cuts that he talks about 

are not to the extent that he would have the House believe, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, you are the one that does 

not understand. When you cut the funding, activity in road 

building across this province naturally has to be reduced 

because you’re dropping your share of the funding. So that’s a 

ridiculous statement for the minister to make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s arrogance and contempt is 

highlighted each day in this House. We constantly hear 

members on that side of the House criticize Ottawa for its 

reduction in transfer payments — cut that represents one and a 

half per cent of total government spending. 

 

At the same time, officials within the minister’s own 

department admit that funding cut-backs handed down by this 

government to municipal governments averaged 38 per cent. In 

some cases the reductions are as much as 95 per cent, as I 

demonstrated yesterday. 

 

Madam Minister, do you really know what the word 

hypocritical means? Madam Minister, would the minister 

explain how she can sit back and state there is no problem when 

very clearly our local governments are facing a financial crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, there is no financial 

crisis at the local government level or anywhere else. I remind 

the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that this province is made 

up of communities. Municipalities are not institutions. 

Municipalities are people. 

 

And in this budget we have increased funding for health, 

funding for education, funding for social services. We paid out 

the futures. We’ve given them $17.6 million in tax room on the 

health, hospital, and social assistance levies. 

 

These are service . . . this is more money, Mr. Speaker, into 

services to the people that make up the communities in this 

province. They are capable. They have shared their priorities 

with us and we have responded. And all is well in 

Saskatchewan everywhere, Mr. Speaker, except in the Liberal 

caucus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the SaskPower minister. Mr. Minister, you would think that 

the NST fiasco would have taught you a lesson, but apparently 

it hasn’t. SaskPower is still trying to take over half the deeply 

troubled Guyana electrical company, GEC(Guyana Electric 

Company). 

 

But according to a news article in the Guyana Stabroek News, 

GEC is jacking up the asking price. GEC has advised the 

Guyana government that it should not accept less than 50 to $60 

million U.S. (United States), or 70 to $85 million, for 40 per 

cent of the company. And that’s a far cry from SaskPower’s 

initial offer of 31 million for 50 per cent. 

 

Guyana electrical has not only been dealing with Jack Messer 

now for a couple of months, but they already know all about 

jacking up prices. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now admit that SaskPower has no 

business risking millions of dollars from taxpayers on this 

crumbling, third-world power company? Will you immediately 

withdraw from negotiations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

I do know where it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m having a 

little difficulty following the line of questioning that the 

member puts forth this morning. He knows full well that the 

offer put forth by SaskPower Commercial was much less than 

$50 million that he indicates officials within the electric 

corporation in Guyana suggest it’s worth. Is he suggesting this 

morning that we should up our bid price, double it? I’m not sure 

where he’s going. 

 

I’m saying this to you, Mr. Member: these corporations are 

pursuing business opportunities where we can recover a 

reasonable rate of return on behalf of the shareholders, the 

people of Saskatchewan. We will do all measure of due 

diligence based on professional information that’s received 

from internationally known accounting firms, who will put 

values on these assets. That due diligence will be done. It will 

be reviewed by the board of the Power Corporation and in due 

course, if we feel there is a reasonable rate on a return and if 

there is a reasonable risk level, we would proceed. If not, the 

deal would not go ahead. It’s quite simple. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 

minister should open his third letter from Doug Anguish. 

 

Mr. Minister, if SaskPower has millions of extra dollars to   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

invest, why don’t you invest it in Saskatchewan by cutting 

power rates? How are you going to recover this investment in 

Guyana? Most people in Guyana earn fewer . . . a few hundred 

dollars a year, and Jack Messer can’t raise the rates very much 

there. 

 

The Guyana power company is a mess. It’s plagued with 

constant power shortages and blackouts, the infrastructure is 

falling apart — but you want to buy it and they want to jack up 

the price on you. Obviously SaskPower is making too much 

money if you can afford risks such as this deal. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s time to pull out of Guyana. Will you shut 

down this deal before it’s too late and we have an NST two? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me begin by 

saying that there has been an extensive review in this province 

with respect to the direction and the role of our Crown assets. 

One of the things that became very clear, both from the external 

review that was done by professional people across this 

province and the people of Saskatchewan, was that they should 

be . . . the Crown corporations should be pursuing business 

opportunities outside of this province if they’re to be long-term, 

viable economic entities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the Tory solution. I know the Tory 

solution; it’s quite simple. The Tory solution is find someone to 

buy the assets at a fire sale price — that’s where you come 

from. We’ve experienced that and we understand that. But I 

want to say that this government and this administration will do 

all measure of due diligence and all measure of business to 

attempt to maximize the assets, to maximize the return on 

investment for the people of this province — unlike the Tory 

administration, who has blinders on and can only see one thing 

and that’s sell it off at a fire sale price to your friends. We aren’t 

into that, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gun Control Legislation 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the past 

couple of years I’ve been calling on the government to fight the 

Liberal gun control laws passed by . . . by passing property 

rights legislation. The NDP have consistently said that there’s 

no legal grounds for this argument. But then last fall they 

launched their own legal challenge, and property rights formed 

the very basis for this argument. 

 

Mr. Minister of Justice, immediately after question period I will 

be introducing property rights legislation — legislation that will 

strengthen your legal challenge of the Liberals’ gun control 

laws. Both the member from Maple Creek and I are going to 

gun meetings this evening . Will we be able to tell the people 

there that you support our legislation, or has the NDP’s federal 

leader and the federal NDP president gotten to you and told you 

to back off on this issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, our position on the gun 

registration system and our challenge has not changed. We are 

following our course through that process. And I think you can 

report, along with the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management who will be present with you tonight, that our 

position has not wavered. We are still standing firm on that. We 

have discussed previously some of the interesting proposals that 

you have around property rights, but we don’t think that they 

will assist in our action at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Gaming minister. Mr. Minister, there are some astounding 

numbers in the Liquor and Gaming annual report that was 

finally released last week — $165 million a year are being 

sucked out of communities through VLTs (video lottery 

terminal). That’s nearly half a million dollars a day or $20,000 

an hour drained out of Saskatchewan communities. That’s more 

loonies than showed up at the NDP convention last weekend. 

 

And how much is going back into the communities? None. 

Surely the NDP could at least afford to honour the 10 per cent 

commitment it made prior to the last election. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is it too much to ask that you return 10 per 

cent of VLT revenue, just $16 million, to Saskatchewan 

communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this question has been 

asked many, many times of us and we’ve given the answer 

many, many times. So I’ll give the answer one more time again 

this morning. 

 

The government was involved in extensive consultations with 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) on what to 

do with the 10 per cent. No agreement was arrived at. That casts 

no blame on SSTA, SUMA, or SARM. It just worked that we 

could not arrive at an agreement in this regard. 

 

In the consequence . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No it wasn’t 

because us against the other three — amongst the three they 

couldn’t agree, they just simply couldn’t agree. And SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) was 

involved. And this simply is no chance of the agreement. Now 

in that context the money remains in the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

Now let’s be straight about this — this does not go into your 

pockets, or in the pockets of the minister in charge of Gaming 

or anybody; it doesn’t even go in the pockets of the journalists. 

It goes back to the people of the communities. It goes back into 

health care. It goes back into education, goes back into 

highways. It goes back into all kinds of programs for people. 

And it’s a highly regulated, controlled operation. 

 

  



958  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

I’m saying, don’t miscast the situation other than the way it is 

by simply telling the truth and acknowledging the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, your VLTs are 

taking tremendous amounts of money out of Saskatchewan 

communities: Rosthern, $250,000 a year; Kindersley, $730,000 

a year; Swift Current, 2.4 million; Prince Albert, 5.5 million; 

Saskatoon, 30 million. That’s about two and a half times what 

each of these communities receives in revenue sharing from the 

province. Yet you can’t find 10 per cent to honour your election 

promise and give back to the communities. 

 

Mr. Minister, the PC (Progressive Conservative) government in 

Manitoba recently announced it would be distributing 10 per 

cent of VLT revenues to municipalities on a per capita basis. I 

will be introducing a private members’ Bill to do the exact same 

thing in Saskatchewan. Will you support this Bill, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

hear the question being asked again of which the Premier just 

finished answering. And the member opposite is asking where 

the money currently goes from the VLT revenues. And I want 

to remind the member again that the VLT revenues from across 

the province goes directly back to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Last year $120 million, Mr. Speaker, made its way back into 

health, social services, education, all of the areas that the 

Premier has identified. Plus, Mr. Speaker, in excess of $22 

million went back into the hands of the hotel . . . the hospitality 

industry in this province. The hospitality industry in this 

province provides jobs in the small communities where the 

VLTs were located, Mr. Speaker. On their onset, you know that 

they were established, Mr. Speaker, to protect and secure small 

town Saskatchewan businesses. That’s why the VLTs are there. 

 

Today, if the member opposite says we should be re-examining 

that, what that will mean of course, Mr. Speaker, is the demise 

of many of those small businesses in Saskatchewan. Is that what 

the member from Rosthern is calling for, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High-risk Youth 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the province of Manitoba 

recently did a report on youth at risk identifying 4,500 young 

people in that province who are in danger of falling into the 

young offenders system. It also identified that it is far more cost 

effective to work with young people before they enter the 

system and far more expensive to try and deal with them after 

they are. 

 

When my colleague from Humboldt asked a question on the 

youth at risk report yesterday, there was much confusion over 

there. Finally, the minister of Gaming got up and rambled on 

about gambling for awhile. When he sat down, my colleague 

asked the question again, and this time the Premier got up and 

bawled her out for raising the problems of disadvantaged young 

people in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we still haven’t heard from the minister whether 

he’s going to accept the . . . our recommendation for a youth 

task force. We have heard him say that there are no youth 

justice committees appointed yet in this province. If anyone is 

listening this morning, what are you going to do about this to 

follow the lead of Manitoba? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member was 

either not in the — I’m sorry, I cannot refer to that — either did 

not hear the answer or had no attention to the answer that I 

gave. 

 

The answer that I gave yesterday, I repeat again today. Why is it 

that the Liberal caucus consistently, continually, persistently, 

always won’t even acknowledge the fact that we have in 

Saskatchewan — the only province in all of Canada to have 

been so recognized — an internationally, nationally, recognized 

program called the children’s action plan to deal with the 

question of kids at risk, youth at risk. Why don’t you ever give 

us that amount of credit, that little ounce of credibility on your 

side, for this program? 

 

I didn’t recognize it; the Canadian children’s welfare league 

recognized it. I accepted the award and I gave it to all the 

volunteers — thousands of them. We’ve doubled the funding 

for that program. Not statistics. We know what the statistics are. 

We need action. And we’re moving in action. 

 

Now if you’re saying that we don’t do enough, okay, we don’t 

do enough. We’re trying to do more. We need your help. We 

need your assistance. 

 

What we do not need is Liberal politicking, especially from that 

caucus and especially from a Liberal Party that at the federal 

level is delaying — delaying — an attack on kids in poverty for 

18 months, to their shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 225 — The Municipalities VLT 

Commitment Act 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I move first reading of the Bill No. 225, The 

Municipalities VLT Commitment Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member for Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley has requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

  



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

introduce a group of eight adult education students on behalf of 

our colleague, the Minister of Education. They’re seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they are students from the Re-Entry 

Roads Consulting in Saskatoon. 

 

Now Re-Entry Roads Consulting works with individuals and 

helps them develop a future plan of action that satisfies their 

needs and objectives, and the staff also helps them foster 

lifelong learning skills and encouraging re-entry and success in 

post-secondary education. 

 

They are accompanied today by their instructor, Ms. Zena 

Putnam. And I know that they will be having a tour and, if the 

opportunity allows, I look forward to meeting with them. And I 

ask all of my colleagues here to extend a warm welcome, 

please. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 221 — The Saskatchewan 

Property Rights Act 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of Bill No. 221, The Saskatchewan Property Rights 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, 

The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1997, be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of open, 

accountable, and responsible government, I hereby table the 

answer to question 45 and request leave to also table the 

answers to questions 46 and 47. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  The answers are tabled to items no. 1, 2, and 

3. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 22  The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Minister, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

The current Act was passed in 1988. It introduced several very 

important changes in the way in which justices of the peace are 

appointed and supervised. These changes were made to ensure 

that the Act would comply with the requirements of the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms that every person is entitled to be tried 

by an independent and impartial tribunal. 

 

One of the most significant changes divided justices of the 

peace into two categories: presiding and non-presiding. 

Presiding justices of the peace have a very significant role in the 

justice system — the authority to make decisions that can affect 

people’s life or liberty. For example, they may decide whether 

to grant a search warrant or issue a summons. 

 

After nine years of experience with that system, it became 

apparent that certain amendments could be made to improve its 

operation. The amendments I am introducing today will 

improve the provisions with respect to the discipline of 

presiding justices of the peace. 

 

With the amendments, the following improvements would be 

made. First, the three steps in the discipline process — initial 

review, investigation, and hearing — are now more clearly 

described. Second, the person who filed the complaint about the 

presiding justice of the peace would now be given the right to 

receive reports during the progress of his or her complaint 

against a justice of the peace. The complainant would also be 

given the right to attend the hearing. 

 

Third, the presumption that hearings will be held in private is 

replaced by the presumption that hearings will be held in public. 

These changes clarify the discipline process and make it more 

open and accountable. 

 

The 1988 Act also made changes with respect to who could be 

appointed as a presiding justice of the peace. The current list 

prohibits the appointment of government employees, members 

or employees of a police force, or a member of the corps of 

commissionaires. An amendment being proposed today will 

expand this list of non-eligibility. It recognizes other 

circumstances in which a person would have a conflict of 

interest as a public official and therefore be ineligible to be a 

presiding justice of the peace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today also makes changes with 

respect to the position of supervising justice of the peace. It 

provides that the supervising justice of the peace will receive 

employment benefits as well as salary for that position. It also 

specifies that future supervising justices of the peace will be 

appointed for a five-year term. 

  



960  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

When this Act was passed in 1988, the position of supervising 

justice of the peace was created for the first time. At that point 

it was not clear whether it would amount to a full-time position. 

It has now developed into a full-time position. It is therefore 

appropriate that the incumbent receive employment benefits 

such as sick leave, pension, and annual holidays, without the 

additional requirement of being appointed as a traffic safety 

justice. Currently the supervising justice of the peace receives 

benefits only because of his concurrent appointment as a traffic 

safety justice. These amendments will eliminate the need for 

that appointment. However, since traffic safety justices are 

appointed for a term, it is also considered appropriate that the 

appointment of a supervising justice of the peace be for a term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, presiding justices of the peace perform valuable 

services in our justice system. They ensure that legal matters 

can be dealt with expeditiously. Justices of the peace must be 

commended for their dedication in providing this public service. 

In addition, they do this valuable work for a fee that does not 

fully compensate them for their duties. One of the amendments 

before us today recognizes their commitment. 

 

Because of the complicated nature of the services they perform, 

presiding justices of the peace are requested to attend training 

sessions. In 1994 justices of the peace began to receive a 

stipend for attending training courses. This stipend is currently 

paid by a grant. An amendment included in this Bill will allow 

the amount of their stipend to be fixed by regulation. It will 

confirm the existing process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed today clarify the 

existing Act and confirm existing processes. It will also provide 

for new processes to improve the complaint process for the 

public and recognize financially the important work that 

justices of the peace perform. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend The Justices of the 

Peace Act, 1988. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

official opposition recognizes and particularly is grateful for the 

work that has been done by justices of the peace across the 

province of Saskatchewan throughout the years. And we 

recognize that the nature of this Bill is largely housekeeping to 

update the original Act that affects these individuals. 

 

However we are awaiting some further comments by some of 

the justices of the peace that wished us to express some of the 

concerns that they may have on this issue. And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn debate, would 

move to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property 

Security Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 

second reading of The Personal Property Security Amendment 

Act, 1997. Mr. Speaker, The Personal Property Security Act, 

1993 regulates most of the non-mortgage lending in this 

province. 

 

Lenders who take personal property as security use the personal 

property registry system to register their interests. This gives 

them the first claim over the car or the combine which they 

have taken as collateral security for a particular loan. 

 

Saskatchewan has long been a Canadian leader in the 

development of this legislation. We are also leaders in the 

development of a computerized registry system which allows 

for on-line computer registration and searches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we experienced problems with the 

computerized registry system in October 1996. During the 

routine back-up of the October 30 daily registrations, the 

computer registry system broke down. No data was lost; 

however the process to recover the data took much longer than 

was designed. As a result the registry system had to suspend 

operations for one week to allow the computer system to be 

fixed properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the personal property registry is a real-time 

registry, that is a system that records the exact time and date of 

a transaction in order to register the exact priority of all 

transactions. This is the basis of the priority registration system 

pursuant to The Personal Property Security Act. Therefore, the 

shut-down of the system for this extended period made it 

necessary to pass emergency regulations. 

 

These regulations provided a 10-day grace period to registrants 

so they would not lose their priority or be prevented from taking 

any action they normally would have taken during the 

suspension of registry functions. These regulations allowed the 

system to be recommenced on November 8, 1996, and they 

have been relied upon effectively by all parties to date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill I am introducing today will do two things. 

First it will ratify and confirm the step taken by regulation in 

the fall of 1996 to address the registry shut-down. Second, it 

will establish more detailed authority in the Act to address this 

type of registry shut-down in the future. 

 

The clients of the personal property registry system supported 

the regulation to correct the computer problem. They saw it as 

an obvious and necessary step to ensure fairness in the 

recommencement of the system. For greater certainty, and out 

of an abundance of caution, it is advisable to now ratify the 

measures taken through the legislation itself. 

 

This is the same approach taken by the province of Ontario as a 

result of the shut-down of their computer registry system. It is 

appropriate that Saskatchewan clients receive the same certainty 

in this situation. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

retroactively confirms the 10-day grace period for registration 

upon recommencement of the system on November 8, 1996. 

 

We are not aware of any parties who will be harmed in any way 

by this step. Indeed, all parties have acted in reliance on the 

original regulations and accordingly are not affected by this   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

legislative ratification. 

 

With respect to the amendments to address this situation in the 

future, the Bill provides for a more detailed process by which 

the operations of the registry could be suspended. This includes 

advising registry clients of the suspension and 

recommencement procedures. The Bill also provides for 

express authority to determine the legal effect of steps taken 

during such a suspension period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, needless to say, best efforts are being made to 

prevent any further suspension of operations of this essential 

service. Nevertheless, it is appropriate that we take all possible 

steps to ensure that Saskatchewan lenders may rely with 

certainty both on the steps previously taken in November to 

address this problem and on our ability to fully address any 

such concerns in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to enact provisions 

respecting the Personal Property Registry. 

 

(1100) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister 

of Justice has pointed out to us, computers are a marvellous 

invention, but when they go awry our society grinds to a halt 

and chaos ensues. I think we’re all beginning to wonder if 

computers are our servants or the other way around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I speak as someone who is unabashedly low tech 

and has been left as in the rear of the computer revolution. I’m 

one of those who had to quit using the VCR (video cassette 

recorder) when the kids went off to college. 

 

But this problem that we had last year of eight days without the 

personal property security computers certainly underlines some 

of the difficulties that can ensue when we go high tech and 

on-line. The computer system of PPSA (Personal Property 

Security Agreement) is no doubt a marvellous innovation and 

certainly one that the opposition supports. However, as I say, 

we now understand the great difficulties which can come about 

when the computers are down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a provision in this legislation for 

retroactive provisions. Now this is necessitated because when 

our computers went down in personal property, the staff had to 

take immediate corrective action. There was no provision for it 

in the legislation. I congratulate the staff of PPSA for the way 

they dealt with the crisis, and I think they handled the problem 

effectively and professionally. And now I say we require 

retroactive legislation in order to sanction what they did. 

 

In this case, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition is satisfied that 

retroactive legislation is in order. May I say, however, that 

again when we are talking about public confidence of our 

justice system, public confidence demands that retroactive 

legislation be used very sparingly. The retroactive legislation to 

wipe out the independent judicial commission, the retroactive 

legislation to cancel GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

benefits, did not have a good effect on public confidence in the 

administration of justice. 

 

And the Minister of Justice has to acknowledge that and face up 

to that and acknowledge that these questions about public 

confidence and the administration of justice are not the fault of 

the opposition when they raise them. They are the fault of the 

government when it deals with our justice system in that 

manner. 

 

So retroactive legislation is, as a general principle, it is harmful, 

it is bad, it is wrong, and leads to a destruction of public 

confidence in our justice system. However, in this particular 

case I think that it is necessary; that our staff and PPSA did 

their level best to deal with a situation they had not foreseen, 

namely that the computers come down. And I say they are to be 

congratulated for that. And I think it is appropriate that we now 

ratify the corrective measures that they took at the time. 

 

And I know it’s not fair of me to gloat, but may I again say, Mr. 

Speaker, that as someone who is hopelessly old-fashioned and 

low tech, it always restores my confidence again when 

computers and modern technology come short of the mark. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I was 

listening to the minister’s explanation, I can understand why the 

government has brought forward this piece of legislation at this 

time. And I can appreciate it; the corrective measures that I 

guess are being taken by the legislation are certainly something 

that I think is appropriate. It allows the Legislative Assembly 

and members to address concerns such as we see here and the 

reasons for legislation. 

 

And as I was listening to the minister . . . And I can only 

reiterate what other members say. When it comes to computers 

and technology, we’re starting to put so much confidence in 

computers, but computers are only as good as the individuals 

who program them and feed them in the first place. And once 

they get a little overloaded, they can get a little cantankerous as 

well and give a problem. And the problems that arose last fall 

certainly are things to be concerned about. And it just shows 

that technology, despite all its good spots and all the benefits, at 

times can create a problem and then you have to find other 

solutions to them. 

 

And the steps that were taken by the government I suppose, had 

we had a legislative session last fall, could have been addressed 

through legislation. The fact that there wasn’t one, regulations 

had to be used to make sure that the process continued properly 

— was certainly appropriate, but it’s gratifying to see that we 

do have legislation before us today that corrects this measure, 

and certainly opens up the door for processes down the road, 

should they happen again. 

 

However, I think it would be cognizant of us that we take more 

time to peruse the legislation, to review it and really take a   



962  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

careful look at it, so that we can adjust and address any 

measures that might be . . . that may have been overlooked by 

the government. 

 

In this piece of legislation, while it seems to be straightforward, 

we want to make sure that it certainly addresses the concerns 

that have been raised. And therefore at this time I would move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill 21 

 

The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion by the 

Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 21 — The Condominium 

Property Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a somewhat technical Bill 

and when we have been discussing with the stakeholders, we 

are satisfied that the basic provisions contained in the Bill are 

sensible and satisfactory. But I think that while we are looking 

at condominium property owners I feel obligated to raise in this 

House, the issue of assessment for condominium property 

owners. 

 

Now of course in our assessment system we use different 

percentages of value for different property classes. This has a 

historical basis in this province and the reasons are understood 

as to why commercial is at a different percentage of value than, 

say agricultural land. However in the case of condominiums, I 

think we have a particular problem. Namely this — the 

condominiums have a different percentage of value than other 

residences. 

 

Now condominium owners, Mr. Speaker, do not understand 

why their percentage of value would be set at 85 and other 

residential property owners would be set at 75. As I say, you 

may see a difference between, say commercial and residential, 

business and farm land, but nobody can get their mind around a 

different percentage of value between condominium property 

owners and other home-owners. It is personal residence 

compared to personal residence. 

 

And I simply haven’t heard an adequate explanation from the 

government, from the Minister of Municipal Affairs, as to why 

we need this distinction between condominium property owners 

and other home-owners. And frankly, I’m hearing from a lot of 

condominium property owners who tell me that they feel 

discriminated against. They feel that they are being treated 

unfairly, and they simply do not understand why they would not 

be treated the same as other home-owners in this province. 

 

So while the technical provisions of this Bill do not concern me 

or my colleagues, I think we still require, for condominium 

property owners out there, Mr. Speaker, we still require some 

sensible, reasonable explanation as to why the government feels 

they should be treated differently and taxed differently than 

other home-owners in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 31 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 31 — The Public 

Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the provisions of this Act of 

course run parallel with The Victims of Crime Amendment Act. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while the Minister of Justice explained to us 

that by pooling the money that is collected for victims in this 

province, by pooling it with other money being held in trust, we 

can get higher interest . . . Now that seems to make sense on the 

surface. However, when we look further into it, I submit there 

are some serious problems here in what’s going on with the 

victim surcharge and with our justice system. 

 

The problem is this. For the past five years we have had a 

victim impact surcharge levied for people who are found to be 

in violation of the Criminal Code and other offences in 

Saskatchewan, and a surcharge on fines. 

 

This surcharge is to create a fund to compensate victims. And 

what we have found, Mr. Speaker, what we have found is that 

this surcharge is collecting about 1.8 million a year. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it may be called a tax on crime, and as taxes go, I 

suppose putting a tax on criminal activity is probably about as 

good a place for a new tax as any other. And I don’t object to 

that and I don’t think my colleagues do. 

 

But this tax on crime was levied so that we would have a fund 

to compensate victims. What has happened now is that the fund 

is growing, and growing to the point that the Minister of Justice 

says, well we need to be more proactive in the way we invest it 

so it can grow and grow even more. 

 

Well my question, and the question of my colleagues here, is 

why is the fund growing and growing? Why isn’t it simply 

being used to compensate victims? Well gaining a good interest 

return sounds all very nice . . . that we don’t need to worry 

about how much interest we’re gathering if we’re simply doing 

what the fund was set up to do in the first place, namely 

compensate victims. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know from my other life that it is through 

this fund that we have set up the victim services coordinators 

around the province and I know that these victim services 

coordinators are doing good work in counselling and in 

providing timely information to victims, and we’re certainly not 

critical of that program. We’re very pleased with that program 

and we support it. 

 

However what we are not so happy about is, that out of the now 

1.62 million — 1.8 million, I’m sorry — 1.8 million, getting up 

towards 2 million a year, is collected, out of that, the Minister 

of Justice informs us that about 300,000 is spent on victims. So 

we have a fund, we have a fund that is collecting close to 2   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

million a year. 

 

Now there are admittedly, the programing for victims say that 

we support, but in direct compensation for victims in this 

province we’re actually paying out, you could say, nothing — 

300,000 a year out of nearly 2 million. 

 

(1115) 

 

Well that just doesn’t make much sense to us. And I say, now 

the Minister of Justice tells us that we’re building up so much 

money — we’ve now got 3.5 million; three and a half million in 

the fund — we’re building up so much that we have to worry 

about how we invest it. 

 

Well I don’t know if the hon. minister for SaskTel wants to use 

this to cover her losses on some of her international investments 

or not. She seems to be interested in the money. And I realize 

that she probably needs a bit of extra money when she’s got 

investments going sour all over the globe. 

 

But my understanding, Mr. Speaker, and for the information of 

Madam Minister, is that this tax on crime was actually for the 

benefit of criminals, not to get us out of the glue with some sour 

investment somewhere around the world. 

 

Anyway, my concern I say, is that we really shouldn’t be 

worried about building up a big trust fund at all. There’s no 

reason for a big trust fund. The only explanation I can think of 

for building up a big cushion is if we think we are in a low 

demand period right now — in other words, a low crime period 

— and we are anticipating a big spike-up in the crime rate, it 

would make some sense, I say, to have a cushion. We would 

need a cushion if we say that we are anticipating a big jump in 

the crime rate. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. I hope the Minister of 

Justice would say no, that we are not anticipating a heavy new 

demand on the victim surcharge; that our crime rate is quite 

high enough already, thank you very much, and we would hope 

that it would be coming down rather than going up. 

 

But if the Minister of Justice agrees with me that no, we’re not 

building and planning for an ever escalating crime rate in this 

province— if that’s his plan, and I hope it is — then I come 

back and say well, Mr. Minister, why do we need to expand a 

fund that’s already got three and a half million in it? What is the 

purpose of building up this money to bigger and bigger limits? 

Unless, as I say, the minister for SaskTel seems to be somewhat 

interested in it. But I would hope that the minister of SaskTel 

would restrain herself and would let this money go to 

compensation of victims as it was intended. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we have a fund building up, 

nearly 2 million a year. Some of it’s being paid out to 

programing for victims, to the victim services coordinators. 

Virtually nothing is being paid out to compensate victims. Now 

the government tells us they need a more aggressive investment 

strategy so that the fund can build up and build up and build up. 

We’re saying, don’t worry about investment, don’t worry about 

interest; worry about compensating victims, which is why it 

was set up in the first place. End of problem. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 35 — The Victims 

of Crime Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la 

Loi sur les victimes d’actes criminels be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the amendments to The Victims of Crime Act could 

have serious implications for anyone who has or will be the 

victim of a crime. And as the member from North Battleford 

has pointed out this morning, there is a lot of similarity between 

Bill No. 31 and Bill No. 35 in that indeed The Public Trustee 

and The Victims of Crime Act have a direct link. 

 

For a number of years the law has imposed an additional 

penalty called a victims’ impact surcharge. And it has been in 

place on most federal and provincial offences. The penalties are 

then allocated into a fund called the victims’ services and direct 

compensation fund. The monies from these funds are then used 

to help victims of crime. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that as 

we’ve indicated, the numbers of people who are claiming is 

increasing and it is increasing at an alarming rate. 

 

Many of these people are left traumatized, some with scars that 

linger for a lifetime. The emotional and material strain victims 

suffer is unfortunately unavoidable, and while compensation 

from the victims’ impact surcharge fund will not ease all the 

suffering, it can help somewhat. 

 

But the amount of money that has accumulated from this fund 

suggests the pay-outs have been few and far between. There 

seems to be a shortage of funding . . . I’m sorry, a shortage of 

spending, but the funds continue to come in. And as the 

member from North Battleford has pointed out, on April 4, 

during a meeting of the Committee of Finance, very specific 

questions were asked of the Minister of Justice about that 

surcharge. The minister has indicated that since the fund was 

established, I believe five years ago, the government has 

apparently collected about $1.8 million per year and about 90 

per cent of that, or about 1.62 million as my colleague has 

indicated, is funnelled into the program. 

 

It was then indeed disappointing for the opposition to learn that 

only 300,000 a year goes directly into victims’ compensation. It 

seems, if we are to rely on the Justice minister’s information, 

that leaves approximately $3.5 million in that trust fund — a 

significant amount of money when we start to look at the 

compensation that is paid out to victims over this five-year 

period. There isn’t a correlation there. 

 

  



964  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

We as an opposition have great concerns with the fact that the 

fund was set up to aid victims, there was going to be a 

surcharge, the monies have been allocated into the fund, and yet 

there seems to be very little pay-out. 

 

I don’t believe that the surcharge was ever intended for that 

long-term accumulation of money — in other words, the pot of 

gold. I think it was established to enable the government to help 

those victimized by crime on a fairly prompt basis. 

 

Now the government wants to hand over responsibility of this 

trust fund to the Public Trustee. The Public Trustee would then 

invest the money through a common fund to earn a greater 

return. Well while we don’t have a problem turning over the 

responsibility of the fund to the Public Trustee, Mr. Speaker, 

our concern is with the money in trust which has swelled to 

such an amount it requires an investment plan. 

 

We are under the impression that the surcharge was established 

to help people of this province who have been hurt by criminal 

acts of others. It should not be used as a long-term method of 

collecting money, no matter how worthwhile the purpose might 

be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as pointed out by my colleague from North 

Battleford, the linkage between Bill No. 31 and 35 requires I 

think, some concern and it requires looking at and indeed I 

think we have to identify where we’re moving in the long term. 

Is it an intended purpose to accumulate a large amount of 

money without actually compensating victims on a regular, 

consistent, and adequate basis? 

 

So with those concerns, Mr. Speaker . . . I think we can address 

those concerns later on at a time when we can fully discuss the 

implications of the Bill. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to take a 

moment as well, Mr. Speaker, to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the members of the Assembly for providing me 

the opportunity, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

But I have today, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery, three very 

fine gentlemen from the constituency of Yorkton who are here 

on a variety of different issues. But they are . . . on the far left 

from where I stand is Mr. Lorne Yeo, who is with the Farm 

Credit Corporation; Mr. Larry Pearen is the director of 

education, music department, for the Yorkton Regional High 

School; and Mr. Doug Brand, who is with the Jay’s Moving and 

Storage Company in Yorkton. 

 

They’re here today, Mr. Speaker, to do a little work around the 

project that we have with the Marching 100 Band that’s on their 

way to Pasadena, California, for January 1, 1998. The Yorkton 

band was the only one that was selected out of two bands from 

the entire . . . well from anywhere other than the U.S. We have 

about 185 students that will be going and probably that many 

chaperons I expect, will be making their way to Pasadena. 

 

These three gentlemen have been really actively involved in 

helping with the band boosters to ensure that this project comes 

to fruition and are here putting a little bit of pressure on people 

who live in this fine city of Regina and people who are within 

this Legislative Assembly. So I want to take this opportunity to 

wish them well in their endeavours. They’re looking for about 

$350,000 in order to get this band to Pasadena. 

 

There are about four and a half million viewers that will watch 

this band. They’re from Saskatchewan and they’re the finest 

marching band, as we know, anywhere in Canada. So I want to 

extend my welcome to them to the Assembly today and ask all 

members here to join in welcoming them as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  To introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to add to my colleague’s comments and welcome the 

members from Yorkton. I know, coming from east-central 

Saskatchewan, we hear about the fund-raising of the band and 

of course it is going to bring great recognition to Saskatchewan, 

and especially to east-central Saskatchewan, to have your band 

take part in that very, very international event. And I want to 

wish not only the members present here today . . . all those 

members who are associated with fund-raising and making that 

event become a reality, I wish you well and thank you very 

much for being present. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our 

caucus, I’ll extend sentiments. I found it interesting that the 

minister decided to start his introductions by introducing from 

the far left rather than the far right. But be that as it is, certainly 

we’re really . . . (inaudible) . . . from the area of Moosomin as 

well, certainly when we heard that this Yorkton band was going 

to Pasadena, we really were — I as one individual was — just 

really excited for the students. I think this is a real honour. 

 

And we know it costs money, and it takes some time and a lot 

of hard work. And I want to commend you for your efforts in   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

providing this opportunity for each and every one of the band 

members as they take this trip. We know it’ll be not only 

educational, it’ll be a fun time as well. So congratulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the Bill before us, as has been noted, 

this Bill is largely a housekeeping Bill but there are some 

concerns with the Bill. While we look at the Bill and we can see 

that it’s putting public funds in the hands of a trustee to garner 

larger returns so that there’s more money available for victims, 

the concerns we have with this fund is the fact that there are so 

many individuals who are still left in the lurch as victims of 

crime, and don’t seem to be addressed . . . or the problems 

they’re facing don’t seem to be addressed while this fund 

continues to grow. And that’s, I guess, that is the major concern 

we would have. 

 

I think it’s time we took a serious look as to the reasons for 

having such a fund, we addressed concerns out there in the way 

the funds are distributed and the fact that so many people seem 

to be without after they’ve been hit by a crime that wasn’t their 

fault, or wasn’t due to anything that they may have done, and 

they’re left in the lurch. And in fact many occasions when they 

go to the courts trying to seek remuneration, it costs them 

money and they get nowhere with it. 

 

And so I think there are certainly some questions that need to be 

raised in addressing this Bill and tackling the issue of how the 

funds are appropriated and how they’re handed out. 

 

I trust that we’re not building up another fund, as we see on the 

federal scene, where the federal Finance minister has now 

announced changes to the Unemployment Insurance program, 

calling it an Employment Insurance program, suggesting that 

the changes were needed because of the problems it was having 

sustaining itself when we find there’s a major surplus of, I 

believe, of some $35 million in the program. 

 

Having dealt with individuals who have come into my office 

because they’ve had problems just trying to get a little bit of 

support from a program they’ve paid into, I hope this fund as 

well isn’t used in that manner. And while we suggest they’re 

supporting victims and we’re putting money aside to help them, 

that indeed the money does not indeed address the concerns and 

address the monetary loss that victims experience. 

 

(1130) 

 

So while the Bill itself may be a housekeeping Bill and may 

have housekeeping amendments, Mr. Speaker, there are some 

concerns, some issues that need to be raised, and we certainly 

look forward to addressing these concerns and bringing them 

forward in Committee of the Whole. And therefore I just 

wanted to raise these and to certainly bring them to the attention 

of the House. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 20 —The Small 

Claims Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. The opposition is growing so 

rapidly, it’s hard for us to keep our chairs straight over here, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to this Bill. Mr. Speaker, the 

general thrust of the Bill is said to be to increase the jurisdiction 

of our Small Claims Court. And I may say that for that general 

purpose, members of the opposition are in support of that 

principle. 

 

The Small Claims Court is designed as a court where smaller 

matters may be heard expeditiously without the necessity of 

hiring a lawyer and in situations where hiring a lawyer would 

simply not be economic in view of the smaller amounts 

involved. 

 

However up until now, Mr. Speaker, the jurisdiction of the 

Small Claims Court has been set out in the Act. That is, at one 

time it was $500. It’s now over the years been gradually 

increased to the point where it’s now $5,000. If it is now 

thought wise to increase it even higher, we have no problem 

with that. However with the Bill that has been brought before 

this House, the jurisdiction of Small Claims Court is not in the 

Bill at all. It’s now to go into regulation. 

 

Now I know that my colleagues have many times spoken of the 

undesirability of having more and more principles of a Bill 

spelled out in regulation as opposed to in the Act itself. It has 

often been the position of this caucus that in so far as possible, 

we should have the full information in the Act and it is only 

more minor matters that ought to show up in regulation. 

 

In this case the very purpose in being in the Small Claims Court 

is now going to switch into regulation if we approve this Bill. In 

this case the limit will be set by the minister; it will not be set 

by the Act, which it has always been set by this House 

previously. I don’t see why this power is now being taken away 

from the Assembly by the Minister of Justice. And I don’t see 

why any members of this Assembly would be anxious to vote 

for a Bill which takes away a power that the members have 

historically had; namely, what the jurisdiction of our Small 

Claims Court will be. 

 

However it gets worse, Mr. Speaker. In the explanatory notes 

with which we were provided, the explanation is given that the 

Minister of Justice intends to name different levels for different 

communities in the province. Now what is the sense in that? 

What we are told in the explanatory notes is that once we 

surrender our right to say what Small Claims Court will do and 

what cases will be heard by Small Claims Court and we give 

that power to the Minister of Justice — we will no longer have 

it — the Minister of Justice will have different powers for 

different communities. And the limit as to what the Small 

Claims Court can hear will be different in one community as 

opposed to another. 

 

And the explanatory notes go on to say that that might be on   



966  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

the basis of whether or not a community has lost its Queen’s 

Bench court. 

 

Now I guess we should be somewhat thankful to the Minister of 

Justice that apparently he’s trying to do something for all those 

communities where he’s taken the Queen’s Bench court away 

from them, communities which maybe made the mistake last 

election of not supporting the party to which the Minister of 

Justice belongs, and so we have to take the Queen’s Bench 

court out of Kerrobert and out of Melville and Shaunavon and 

Assiniboia and Gravelbourg. And so this is trying to throw them 

something and say, well the Small Claims Court will be able to 

hear more in those communities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding that, I think it is 

fundamentally wrong to say that our legal system, our justice 

system, will function differently in, say Melville than it will 

function in Yorkton a few miles down the road. That’s simply 

wrong. It shouldn’t happen. We are one province, we are one 

people, and I think the Minister of Justice should treat us as 

such. 

 

The jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court has historically 

always been set by this Assembly. I don’t see why we now want 

to give that right away to the Minister of Justice, and I certainly 

fail to see why the Minister of Justice wants to say that he will 

give different powers to different communities and have 

different limits depending on what town you live in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is fundamentally wrong to set up a two-tier 

justice system. We hear a lot from friends opposite about two 

tier. They say, well we need one tier. We’re one province. Let’s 

have one level of service which will be consistent for all of our 

citizens in so far as it is humanly possible. I happen to subscribe 

to that philosophy myself. I see no reason for deviating from it 

on this Bill. 

 

So the Liberal opposition has two basic problems with this Bill: 

one, the limit of the Small Claims Court should be set by this 

House, as it has always been set; and two, that limit should be 

standard for all citizens of Saskatchewan and throughout the 

entire of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Certainly we share the concern for those communities which are 

losing their Queen’s Bench court. We are very disturbed about 

the fact that so many of our communities which historically 

have had Queen’s Bench services in their community, they’re 

now losing them. 

 

And I might say that, aside too, we’re very concerned that in 

some communities like Kerrobert, we have the historic old 

heritage building of that community is also being lost to that 

community because of the abandonment of it. Instead of finding 

alternate services, the other government offices that were in the 

historic court-house of Kerrobert were kicked out by the 

government; told no, you can’t use it. You can’t even use it for 

alternate services. 

 

So the heritage building of Kerrobert is now boarded up, and if 

it remains boarded up for long, I suppose that the sad thing is 

that that building itself will be lost to the people of Kerrobert, 

along with Queen’s Bench services which they have already 

lost. 

 

However the solution to that problem is not to set up a 

two-tiered justice system. I’ve spoken a lot about public 

confidence in our justice system. Public confidence in our 

justice system will not, will not be re-established, will not be 

strengthened, by having different rules for different 

communities. Let’s have one standard set of rules for 

Saskatchewan and let this House decide what the appropriate 

limit for our Small Claims Court is. 

 

I rise in opposition to this Bill. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:40 a.m. until 11:54 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  21 

 

Flavel Van Mulligen Mitchell 

Johnson Goulet Lautermilch 

Upshall Kowalsky Trew 

Bradley Lorje Scott 

Nilson Serby Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Kasperski 

Ward Murrell Thomson 

 

Nays — 6 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Hillson Aldridge 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hillson:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise because 

the hon. member for Athabasca is, unfortunately, attending to 

pressing constituency matters this date and I would like to first 

of all say that . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I will remind the member that you 

cannot relate to the absence or presence of any members in the 

House. I would ask him to withdraw that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, I withdraw that. But I do 

still wish to say that I am indebted to the member for Athabasca 

for the insights he gives myself and other members of our 

caucus into the challenges, the problems, and the benefits of the 

North to our great province — a wonderful part of 

Saskatchewan that we all appreciate and enjoy. 

 

And the member for Athabasca has been our window on that 

part of Saskatchewan, actually half of the total land area of our   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

great province, and we are constantly indebted to him for his 

insight and understanding into the challenges and for the 

problems of the North. 

 

(1200) 

 

Fifty per cent of the land area of our province; 3 per cent of the 

province’s population. Great wealth, great potential. However, 

sadly it must be said that the social problems in our province 

are amplified in the North as we see that many of the statistics 

regarding health, regarding education, regarding welfare, 

regarding suicide, regarding alcoholism, are unfortunately that 

much worse in the North than in the rest of our province and 

show the tremendous challenges there as well as the tremendous 

wealth and the tremendous potential. 

 

I would like to say while we are extremely pleased at the 

number of mines that have opened up in the North, there are 

other areas of economic and community development in the 

North that cannot be ignored either. Specifically, I would like to 

refer to the oldest, the historic industry of the North, which is of 

course trapping. 

 

And I think we all felt for the Minister of Northern Affairs, or 

the sub-minister of Northern Affairs — I’m not exactly sure 

where he fits into the hierarchy there — when some of our 

trappers were going over to Europe this summer and they 

weren’t sure whether they wanted the minister with them or not. 

And of course he had to do a lot of juggling and promises in 

order to be allowed on the flight at the last minute. And I’m 

sure that must have been very embarrassing for the minister, 

that northern people weren’t sure they wanted him as their 

spokesman in Europe. 

 

This is the oldest, the most historic industry in the North. Our 

biggest market, indeed almost the sole market, is the European 

Community. The European Community has sent many signals 

to us that they simply will not accept furs caught in leg-hold 

traps. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the number of people involved in the fur 

industry is now small enough that our government could, for 

minimal cost, simply have a trap exchange for the modern traps 

that are accepted by the European Community and the problem 

would be over. There is a simple, inexpensive solution that 

would give our people in the North historical continuity with 

their roots, with say the first industry of Saskatchewan, which is 

the fur trapping industry. It would give them an activity, an 

alternative to welfare. 

 

And frankly I question, I question whether there is much benefit 

in us sending the minister to Europe to tell the Europeans that 

they shouldn’t oppose leg-hold traps. Because I think the 

Europeans have made their decision on that, and I think that 

instead we should have a trap exchange for our trappers. This 

would not be an expensive program. It would cure the problem. 

 

I call on the minister, or sub-minister, whatever he is, however 

Northern Affairs figures into the priorities of our provincial 

government — I don’t think it’s very high but it must fit in 

somewhere — I call upon the minister to address this issue of a 

trap exchange to deal with our most historic industry in the 

North. 

 

In view of the fact the minister is on the SaskTel board, I 

believe the deputy chairman, you would think that he would 

have some impact on northern policy. But unfortunately the 

mobile telephone service expansion has, I understand, been 

cancelled for the North. 

 

I don’t know if the SaskTel board is no more interested in the 

minister’s input than the people who are going to Europe to 

argue on behalf of the fur industry, but you would think that the 

mobile telephone service for the North would be a priority with 

the minister, and that his position on SaskTel could encourage 

and stimulate an expansion of SaskTel service through the 

North instead of . . . I understand now it’s been cancelled. 

 

We are interested, in the Liberal opposition, in health care 

services for the North. We are interested in the statistics on 

hepatitis B and on AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) infection in the North. Are those statistics available 

in terms of per hundred thousand? How do they figure relative 

to other parts of this province? 

 

We are interested in what the minister is doing to meet with the 

people of the North over McArthur River. We know that the 

minister was very reluctant to talk to Northerners about mining 

development. And they wanted to meet with him, and they had 

trouble, I understand, getting to meet with their minister to see 

what was going to happen over mining development at 

McArthur River. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think also one of the really big industries that 

could really explode in the North is tourism. Fishing camps of 

course are again an old historic industry in the North, but I think 

it’s much bigger than that. And I think tourism could be much 

bigger than, you know the minister refers to somebody flying 

over the North once or maybe even climbing in a ski-doo for a 

short trip. I think there’s a lot more tourist potential in the North 

than that. 

 

I wish the minister wouldn’t downgrade his part of the 

province. I think there’s lots of people who would love to spend 

their holidays, spend their vacations, in the North, to enjoy the 

beauty of what I consider the most scenic part of our province. 

So please, Mr. Minister, don’t demean your part of the 

province. It’s worth more than just a quick, quick fly-over. I 

assure you it’s worth spending some real time getting to know 

northern scenery and northern people. And I would just never 

put down the North that way. 

 

And specifically though, I’m concerned about the bi-provincial 

park from Clearwater . . . from La Loche to Fort McMurray. 

And this is becoming one of the premiere canoeing destinations 

on the continent. 

 

And I’m concerned that . . . the province of Alberta has set up 

primitive campgrounds which are not only a service to 

canoeists, but also have the environmental importance . . . they 

protect the environment, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

  



968  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

And the way they protect the environment is that if you have 

campers and canoeists meet at the primitive campgrounds, then 

any environmental impact is concentrated rather than people 

having to camp anywhere without any facilities at all, and the 

problems that arise when people have to camp anywhere with 

no facilities. 

 

Very minimal expense, Mr. Chairman. Very minimal expense 

to have primitive campgrounds with outhouses. We’re not 

talking huge amounts of money here. And if this could be done, 

we could aid the tourist industry for the North; we could also 

protect the environment. 

 

Perhaps the biggest single important tourist destination for this 

province could be the Athabasca Sand Dunes. The Athabasca 

Sand Dunes are a spectacular part of our province. They 

provide a unique geology and topography. It’s now been in 

reserve; I hope it will go into park status. I would like to hear 

the minister say what his plans are. I realize it’s 

environmentally sensitive, but tourism can provide ongoing 

employment and economic benefit for the North and it can be 

done in such a way as to protect the environment and encourage 

development at the same time. 

 

I want to know about roads for the North. And my colleague 

from Athabasca wants to know, when will we get an all-weather 

road to Lake Athabasca? When will we get some repairs done 

to the roads that are already in the North and are dangerous to 

travel on? When will we get road repairs so the old 4x4 isn’t 

going to disappear into the potholes? 

 

Again, our whole province faces great problems. We have 

potholes everywhere in Saskatchewan. But when you go into 

the North, everything’s bigger in the North, Mr. Chairman, and 

that goes for the potholes too. The potholes just keep on getting 

bigger the further north you go. 

 

And I’m interested in knowing what commitment we will see 

from the minister, or the sub-minister, what commitment we 

will see from this government for northern roads, for northern 

development. 

 

And I think it’s obvious from these few preliminary remarks 

that the hon. member from Athabasca and myself and the other 

members of our caucus see great promise and potential in the 

North. We are committed to northern development and we will 

be holding the government accountable to bring in the social, 

the economic, and the developmental policies that our North 

needs to make it the most vibrant part of our great province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  First of all, Mr. Chairperson, I would like 

to introduce to the legislature, the staff of the office of Northern 

Affairs. And I’d like to introduce Ray McKay who is the deputy 

minister, and Brian Cousins who is in communications. 

 

For historical purposes, I’d like to let the House know that Ray 

McKay is the first aboriginal person in the province’s history to 

be a deputy minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I think we have to recognize that, you 

know, a person of Ray’s capabilities; been in the schooling 

system for many years, teaching science education and the 

whole aspect in the field of education. By 1979 he had moved 

back into his home area, which is La Ronge, and in that sense 

he was also instrumental in doing a lot of educational 

development in the North. 

 

I know that he worked with me while I was a principal of the 

community college in northern Saskatchewan, and he had 

worked for the Department of Education at that time. And he 

had also been instrumental in working with me when I was 

working in the North at the teacher education program in its 

developmental phases. So that Ray has been very instrumental 

in doing northern development and being part of the multi-party 

training program later on. 

 

And he’s from a background . . . he’s a fluent Cree speaker. 

He’s also been from the trapping background and also from 

tourism area experience. So we have a person in this office of 

Northern Affairs that is indeed a tremendous person to have. 

 

And the same with Brian Cousins who used to work in northern 

Saskatchewan in the ’70s and early ’80s and now has come 

back, and he’s living in the North to take care of our 

communications programing. 

 

Mr. Chairperson, I think it’s very important to say at the outset, 

in regards to the issues that the member raises, I’ve always been 

very aware of colonial attitudes that people had in regards to 

northern Saskatchewan. And I’ve expressed, you know, my 

position to the Liberal caucus in that regard, especially to the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

And I told them very straightforward that when the member 

from Athabasca started out he was in the front benches. When 

he was working with a person . . . when the leader was a 

member from Saskatoon, and later on they moved him and they 

took away the role that he had as the critic for Northern Affairs. 

I thought that was a very bad move on their part. 

 

I thought that indeed when they gave, you know, the critic role 

to the member from North Battleford that it was the wrong 

direction for the Liberals, you know, to go. That here you had a 

person born and raised in northern Saskatchewan that had 

strong feelings about the North and very, very strong in his 

positions. 

 

(1215) 

 

For him to be taken out as a critic for Northern Affairs, you 

know, was a very sad case of old-fashioned colonialism, you 

know, by the Liberals in regards to how they treated him. 

Maybe he didn’t support the leader in the election process when 

he ran, but I think that it is very important to recognize that they 

should still recognize him, you know, as a person who stands 

strong in regards to the North. 

 

So I would say that, you know, in regards to some of your 

comments about current consideration, I think that you should 

look at yourself first and what you’re doing to your own   



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

members in regards to your own caucus. 

 

I would say that the tenor of your questioning in general is also 

very, very part of the whole colonial regime, the whole 

neocolonial thinking in this sense. You don’t stand up for 

people who fight for jobs; who fight for the business contracts; 

who stand up and try and get a strong education. You say 

absolutely nothing about that. 

 

What you start out with is this. You start out with the old 

Liberal welfare mentality; you talk about welfare and then you 

talk about suicides and you talk about alcoholism. You start 

with the most negative aspects of life. Then you move on into 

an industry that needs great support. You know, we fight for 

mining development and being part of mining development and 

forestry development. We also fight for trapping. 

 

I will say this much for trapping. I was born and raised in a trap 

line. I have strong feelings for trapping. Whether or not 

somebody tells me I shouldn’t go to Europe is beside the point. 

I stood up as a minister better than any minister . . . Liberal 

minister across Canada, to go and fight for the trappers in 

Europe. I stood up strong with the trappers and the veterans — 

veterans who gave their lives. My own people in my own 

community giving their lives in Europe, liberating Europe. And 

also, many cases not coming back home; they lie buried in 

Europe. 

 

For me to be with them was a sense of strength in standing up 

with my own people in fighting for their livelihood. In this 

sense, I thought that it was very important because we have to 

give the message to the Europeans. 

 

The Liberals have a defeatist attitude. They say, accept what the 

Europeans say. They say, let’s go and buy up the exchange 

program for traps. Well that is a defeatist program. You’re 

accepting the position. If you read the document as a lawyer 

yourself, if you ever took the time to read that document that 

was presented in Europe, what it says there is that it is an 

internationally agreed upon standard for trapping. 

 

That is the issue we raised when we went to Europe. We told 

the Europeans that the word internationally agreed upon 

standard is important. We told them, this is not only a European 

agreed upon standard; it’s got to take into consideration what 

was happening in Russia, United States, many of the European 

communities that have trapping, and also most importantly, 

Canada. 

 

And that’s the position that we took, that we wanted to have 

support for our trappers. We didn’t have a defeatist attitude. We 

didn’t go for a divide and rule strategy that’s in the minds of the 

Liberals. We went in solidarity. We went in solidarity; we went 

in unity. And here you come and speak in the legislature and 

downgrade that solidarity. I say, shame to you. 

 

You don’t know anything about trapping. You don’t understand 

the trapping lifestyle. North Battleford may have the word north 

in it, but it is still not northern Saskatchewan. You may be a 

member of . . . you may have taken a ride and skidooed over to 

La Ronge, you may have flown over northern Saskatchewan as 

you have said before, but you don’t have the understanding, the 

in-depth knowledge that it requires to dig deep into the issues of 

the North. 

 

So when we fight for trapping, we don’t take a defeatist 

attitude. We went in and we made changes on that trapping 

issue. In many cases the Europeans put in the scientific names 

for the animals, as an example on the beaver and on the lynx. It 

must be remembered that only Canadian and North American 

beaver and lynx were included. They had deliberately excluded 

the European animals. We told them that. 

 

When the new law comes in and the new development comes in 

from Europe, they now include that in because we told them 

that. When you say that nothing was gained, you are totally 

wrong. You do not know what you’re talking about. We made 

gains in that regard. 

 

You may laugh about it because you don’t care about the North 

and you don’t care about trapping. Yes you may laugh on your 

seat. Well I’ll tell you I feel strongly about trapping, and I 

supported the trapping, and I went there and I stood up better 

than any Liberal and Tory minister across any provincial 

government across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Now on the issue of the whole question 

of how you deal with the first case, of how you deal with 

welfare. A lot of people say look, we want to get away from 

dependency. We want to move into education and training. 

What have we done in regards to northern development? Well 

I’ll tell you. For the first time in the history of northern 

Saskatchewan, for the first time in the history of northern 

Saskatchewan we now have over 1,000 people working in the 

mines — 1,000 Northerners — 84 per cent of those people are 

Indian and Metis people. 

 

And when you look at that history of people fighting for their 

jobs when I was growing up, it is very significant. No Liberal 

and Tory government across Canada can have that record where 

50 per cent of the people in a particular area in northern 

Saskatchewan have jobs to that degree. It says a lot in regards to 

the fact that Northerners, when given the opportunity, will stand 

up beside anybody and say, yes we can work with the best of 

them, and that’s what it says. 

 

When we look at the issue in relation to training, when I went to 

university in 1965, what I knew is that there was only a handful 

of us at the university, at the technical institute, probably less 

than 10. 

 

Today I would report this to you: we now have over 1,700 

people in training in northern Saskatchewan — over 1,700 

people — and you have to give a lot of positive responses and 

comments to the people who are taking the time out to get an 

education in mining training, forestry training, teacher 

education, and some of them doing social work, and some of 

them doing other types of training. 

 

So you’re seeing a tremendous impact of the people in northern   



970  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

development, and you’re seeing them . . . And I was in . . . I 

went to the mines just about three weeks ago, and a lot of the 

people used to say the very far North needs some training and 

needs some input on the mining. Well we had about 200 people 

from the far North involved in the mining sector. 

 

But what really pleased me when I went there dealing with 

educational topic, is that, the Dene people, what used to be 

called the Chipewyan people in the historical textbooks, that 

Dene people had their own people working in that mine. Not 

only working, when I got there it was Dene people. 

 

Again a guy by the name of Jim Laban from the Athabasca 

region, and another two women from that area, we had Lena 

May Seegurst, you know, from Stony Rapids, and we had a 

Sandra McDonald. They were in the situation where they were 

teaching me how to run this computerized control program for 

the whole mine. They had provided a programed approach and 

they were showing me how to operate that whole mine. And 

they had developed the program themselves. 

 

And I said I felt very proud because, for myself, I looked at the 

people from the Athabasca region and I said yes, they’re 

making a strong statement; yes, it is tough to fight for jobs; yes, 

it is tough to get a position in education, but the toughness was 

there; that they were moving forward to get an education and 

they were doing it. And that was the important thing that I was 

very, very proud of when I was there. 

 

And I said to myself, look, that is the best way to deal with the 

issue of welfare — getting at the jobs and moving forward in 

regards to the different sectors of northern development. 

 

And when I looked at the issue in relation that you mentioned to 

SaskTel, and I look again across Canada on SaskTel, on the 

issue of digitization . . . and you’re right, I’m in the board of 

SaskTel, and I would tell you this much: we also have a former 

chief of Montreal Lake that sits on the SaskTel board by the 

name of Ed Henderson. 

 

We have sat on the board for some time and you know 

something? We made a decision in our last term to put $30 

million worth of expenditures in northern Saskatchewan to 

upgrade the telephone service system in northern 

Saskatchewan, to get into digitization, and to get into the 

modern age, and to put that $30 million in there. And I didn’t 

see that anywhere across Canada. We were the leaders in that 

regard. 

 

Also the point that you made in regards to the mobile services. I 

think you need to get your facts straight, I think, on the mobile 

services. We had announced it and then we had made a decision 

to overturn it. 

 

The mobile service unit is available for the people in the North 

because — I’ll tell you something — because this is a 

government who listens to the people. We listen to the people 

who are using the mobile service units and we listen quickly. 

We didn’t spend any time to do any fancy studies. We didn’t do 

all of those things. We responded quickly when we heard the 

people talk about the mobile service unit. 

And that was the same throughout the province because we had 

heard the same type of comments throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On the issue of health care, there is no question that this 

government has made a tremendous commitment in regards to 

health care. We’ve seen a $40 million health care centre in La 

Ronge go up. We are now seeing a 10.8, $10.5 million project 

going up in Stony Rapids. That is commitment. 

 

Do you see that anywhere else in Canada? No. I see in Canada, 

all across Canada, devastation by the federal Liberals — a $7 

billion cut. 

 

Jean Chrétien did not only not . . . I’ll tell you: he didn’t tell the 

truth when it come down to the GST (goods and services tax) 

and he didn’t tell the truth in regards to medicare. He said he 

would not tax medicare. But out of this 7 billion, 4 billion 

affects the medicare system. 

 

But you know, when the Liberals cut $200 million in this 

province, $200 million in health, education, and social services, 

we replaced every penny of it plus we put some money on top 

— 40 million last year, $57 million this year. And when we 

looked at the North, because of the greater need, we put more 

money into the North. 

 

When you look at the increase, it’s over 7.3 per cent increase on 

the operational angle on the health operating costs for our new 

health districts in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But also the fact is this: when you look at it, on a 7.3 per cent 

increase, we’ve also put another million dollars in to help out, 

to make sure that the doctors stayed in the North. We also 

looked at the public health workers, the public health nurses. 

We put three more in northern Saskatchewan, three more in the 

mental health area. And we also had the community service 

workers to have support linkages in regards to the communities 

of northern Saskatchewan. So when you say in regards to health 

that we have not done well, I think you are dead wrong. 

 

(1230) 

 

We have done, the situation . . . and I’ll tell you something for 

. . . a little bit of it is northern control historical lesson. When 

we came into power in 19 . . . in the ’70s in northern 

Saskatchewan, the first phase of municipal control came in with 

the first elected body of the northern municipal council. Then 

later on, when we came in, we also had the school board 

elections. A northern school board was brought in so that 

people of northern Saskatchewan would control their own 

destiny in these areas. 

 

So we did the controls in the municipalities, we did the controls 

in regards to the area of education. Now we have moved into 

the area of health control. Of course you people . . . in terms of 

health control and health boards, we established three health 

boards. What do you do? You want to do away with the health 

boards. You want to do away with the health boards and replace 

them with appointed people from Melenchuk. 

 

  



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

That is a very, very bad strategy. I think he should rethink that. 

That is the same old colonial mentality that pervades the 

Liberals that are over there. 

 

So when you see health, I think you’ve got to remember that we 

have done well. We are moving forward to work with the health 

boards. They were very, very happy with the proposal. I’m 

getting two districts, on the east side and the west side in the far 

North, and they’re ready to take control as we’ve seen in 

education and . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order, order. I have to interject here and 

remind the members that we are on the administration of 

Economic and Co-operative Development and that we would 

like to stay on Economic and Co-operative Development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, I agree with you, Mr. Chairperson. I 

was responding to some questions but I thought that we would 

. . . we would . . . in due process of debate I thought I would get 

into it a little bit. But I will stick there for . . . 

 

Now on the idea of . . . You raise the issue of the mines, which 

is related of course to our agenda because our northern 

development fund, our total fund . . . in our office, we have 

approximately 34 point . . . we have thirty-four and a half 

people, you know, working in Office of Northern Affairs. We 

also have approximately $5 million budgeted. On the northern 

development fund we have monies, you know, going to help 

people going into the mining industry. 

 

And we were very, very pleased with the effect of the loans that 

we have made in that regard, and the help in regards to the areas 

of marketing and education, you know, support systems. And 

the establishment of CREDOs (community regional economic 

development organization) where the people in northern 

Saskatchewan take care of their own community regional 

economic development organizations, and they then control as 

we’ve seen in the South, REDAs (regional economic 

development authority). So we’re seeing that evolution take 

place in regards to economic development. 

 

So in regards to McArthur, we will be responding to McArthur 

because we just received the information from the joint panel. 

And the government will be responding in due time in that 

regard. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Pardon me, Mr. Chairman. I was enjoying that. 

I didn’t know it was winding down. But, Mr. Chairman, I don’t 

think it’s defeatist to say the Europeans are our customers. They 

say they have a problem with leg-hold traps. For a few thousand 

dollars we can do a trap exchange — end of problem. And we 

can carry on this historic industry in perpetuity — a renewable 

industry. 

 

Now it’s just not being defeatist to say that this problem can go 

away for a few dollars, probably for less money than financing 

junkets for the minister to go over to Europe. And it also . . . It 

will prevent some embarrassment; it also avoids the problem of 

maybe the minister being left on the tarmac when the plane 

takes off. 

 

So I want to ask the minister, how much would a leg-hold trap 

exchange cost, and why doesn’t he just do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Chairperson, again the member does 

not understand the process, not only in regards to northern 

development, but he doesn’t understand the process that’s 

taking place in here. What they will be doing is debating, you 

know, the information and the new resolutions that now are a 

lot . . . in a better position for not only Saskatchewan trappers 

but for Canadian trappers. 

 

We’re in a much stronger position now. That will be debated. It 

will probably be debated in this upcoming month. When that is 

done then we will see exactly whether or not there has been any 

changes whatsoever. And then from there we will make some 

decisions. 

 

On the issue as you relate to trapper exchange, tactically, if the 

Europeans had heard us, we’re going to go for trapper 

exchange, then they would have said, hey, they accept our old 

clauses. They’re accepting defeat. 

 

And that was the reason none of the trappers in our delegation, 

not one . . . When you look at the president, you know, of the 

treaty harvesters, you know, that was with us, when you look at 

Mr. Ratt, Mr. Philip Ratt that was with us, and when you look at 

William Carriere from Cumberland House, when you look at 

Pierre Robillard — all northern trappers — not one of them 

raised the issue of exactly what you put on a trapper’s exchange 

today. Because they knew that if they had done that, it would 

have been a defeatist position. 

 

That is one of the things that you have to learn to understand. 

Wait till the process comes into place in Europe. We will await 

to see what happens there then we will make some decisions in 

that regard. 

 

But rest assured this much: when you look at the history of 

trapper education, I sit beside Ray McKay. In the late ’70s we 

had the trapper training program — one of the first in Canada; it 

wasn’t the first, but it’s one of the first in Canada — we had a 

trapper education program that dealt with the humane trapping 

issue. 

 

I knew from experience that we had used different types of 

traps over the history, and that it had evolved, it had changed. 

We had seen the utilization of stop loss straps. We have seen 

the utilization of conibear traps and other traps that were new in 

regards to the different types of new snares. We knew that. 

 

But we also were quite aware that a lot of the people sincerely 

believe that they did not want cruelty to animals. Everybody 

agreed with that. So we moved towards more humane traps, and 

historically it did evolve that way. And that is how we wanted 

to see the change, you know, take place. 

 

So we know that in that sense in many cases a lot of the people 

want to look at more of the situations where the traps can be 

used. You’ve got to remember one other thing too is that people 

can still . . . because a lot of the Europeans were using 

drowning methods in trapping. What we discussed with them   



972  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

was this: well when we set the traps automatically the reaction 

of the animal is to dive into the water and they drown. Vast 

majority of the cases, you know, are that way. And in that sense 

therefore the leg-hold traps could still be used in regards to 

what you call aquatic sets. You know, those sets that are used in 

the water. 

 

That, they sort of didn’t mind. They were still against all of 

trapping but they saw that that could be a point of compromise. 

 

So those types of decisions are imbedded in that new decision 

in regards to Europe, and we should not try and pre-judge the 

decision and say let’s start buying up traps and accept defeat. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Educate, educate your consumer. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Educate the consumer, I hear the hon. member 

opposite say. I still have to say this: you know, the hon. minister 

reminds me somewhat of John Crosbie, and I think there’s some 

of the same personality and some of the same flair and bombast 

of which I congratulate him — it’s a marvellous talent. 

 

But what I think of when I remember John Crosbie is that when 

the Europeans started giving us opposition over the seal 

industry, Crosbie thought he could deal with the problem of our 

customers with bombast and bellering. And he thought he was 

supporting the Newfoundland seal industry. In point of fact, 

John Crosbie destroyed it, in point of fact, by refusing to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  The Europeans were wrong. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Maybe they were. I hear the hon. member 

saying the Europeans were wrong. Well that’s very likely true, 

but the fact is they are the customers. And I remember some old 

saying about whether customers are right or wrong. 

 

The point still remains that with some small, inexpensive 

reforms we can meet their objections and we can save the 

industry. Or we can refuse to spend a few thousand dollars on a 

trap exchange. We can instead tell the Europeans they’re 

wrong. We can practice the bombast of John Crosbie. My fear 

is we will have the same success as John Crosbie had; John 

Crosbie destroyed the Newfoundland seal industry. 

 

So why not introduce a few inexpensive reforms that can 

guarantee the stability of our province’s most historic industry. 

But anyway, I’ll leave that for the minister to hopefully 

consider. I’ll pass on. 

 

A few days ago in this House my friend and colleague from 

Athabasca rose on the Uranium City hospital issue. The people 

are concerned that when the hospital leaves that they will not 

only lose their hospital but the water and sewage system that the 

hospital has run for the community. And my learned friend 

wanted to know what the government is doing to guarantee that 

U City will still have a water and sewer system. 

 

Now at that time the minister said he was absolutely thrilled and 

delighted to have a question in this House on northern affairs. 

He was just absolutely delighted that the member for 

Athabasca asked him a northern question. He was so excited 

and so thrilled that he didn’t get around to answering it. 

 

So I’m going to ask again: what can the minister tell us about 

the people of U City? Are they going to have a water and sewer 

system after the hospital is taken out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  In regards to U City, I think I recall that 

there was two questions that were raised to me from the 

member from Athabasca. And the questions that he did raise to 

me were in regards to the hospital. And one of the things that 

you’ve got to remember, you got to listen to your own member. 

 

He acknowledges the fact that we are building a health centre in 

Stony Rapids. He acknowledged that, yes. And also he 

acknowledged the fact that we had a 7.3 per cent increase. We 

have put in an increase in regards to that area. And we even 

have, for this year, a mental health worker that, you know, goes 

right into Stony Rapids — I mean not Stony Rapids, but 

Uranium City. So we have done, you know, quite well in 

dealing with the health issue in that sense. 

 

And the other point was in regards to the Imperial Oil question. 

Those were the ones that he dealt with. 

 

Now you are dealing with another issue, you know, relating to 

the sewer and water question. It has not been raised with me. 

It’s the first time I heard about it. The member from Athabasca 

didn’t raise it with me when I sat with him, you know, after 

question period. And so what I can tell the member from 

Battleford is that we will definitely check into it because we 

have a committee that is working to deal with this issue and 

we’ll be doing some follow-up work on it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that 

answer and I’m sure the people of Uranium City will look 

forward to whatever information can be supplied on that issue. 

 

On the question of roads, I have a number of questions for the 

minister. I’m interested in knowing how much of the capital 

allocation on roads and highways is for north of 55 and what 

that works out to in terms of kilometres. And I would like to 

know if the minister is in agreement with me that it would be a 

marvellous boon to this province and to tourist potential in the 

North if we could get an all-weather road to Lake Athabasca, 

and marvellous service too to the communities on Lake 

Athabasca, to Stony and Fond-du-Lac. 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  In regards to northern road construction, 

we had put in you know last year, the monies for the 

Cumberland bridge, and we then went with a Grandmother’s 

Bay road and we did some work on the west side. 

 

This year we have put in about $5 million. And we’re building 

the roads, a lot mainly on the west side. There’s a lot of 

questions that were raised in regard to the improvement on the 

traffic going from Beauval to La Ronge, and also taking into 

consideration, you know, the forestry work that was done, and 

the forestry work that was done around Canoe Narrows area. 

  



April 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

So what we have done is put in some money into those areas as 

well as also dealing with certain communities like Turnor Lake. 

Turnor Lake always wanted improvement into their community 

— it’s just north of Buffalo Narrows — and we are putting in 

some money there as well. 

 

And we’re also awaiting, you know, certain decisions in regard 

to the Athabasca road. With due respect to the band council, 

they haven’t made a decision yet in regards to whether or not 

the road can go through their reserve, and as well as to make the 

necessary decisions with the Minister of Indian Affairs and 

Northern Development. 

 

And those types of decisions still have to be made. So the actual 

decision is on hold in that regard. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So can the minister then indicate how many of 

our new highway dollars will find their way north of 55 this 

year, say, both in terms of dollars and in terms of kilometres. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Well when you look at the decision on 

the new budget money that come out for the province, we had 

about a 10-year program of $250 million. And we also looked 

at, this year, an improvement in the budget of 30 million. So 

when you look at the fact about northern development . . . and 

we put in 5 million on northern development. 

 

It’s a significant overall chunk, you know, the dollars in regards 

to provincial development. We’re 3 per cent of the population. 

We have a large scale of the area and so on and we’re part and 

parcel of working with the mining companies, so they put in 

that money, which they do in regards to road improvement. 

 

That 5 million doesn’t even include the road building that takes 

place in regards to the forestry area itself. So, it’s a significant 

. . . inclusion in regards to the budget when you recognize that 

the feds are getting away from putting money in regards to the 

province and Canada as a whole. 

 

They’re getting away from transportation. For us it used to be in 

the ’70s the feds used to put in at least 60 per cent of the money 

on all road construction and all airport construction in the 

North. Well, they’re even phasing out of the airport in La 

Ronge — the federal Liberals are. And it’s a real problem for 

us. I think that if they . . . let’s say the feds put in another 5 

million on top of the provincial 5 million, we’d see a 

tremendous improvement in the roads in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I understand the Athabasca 

Sand Dunes are in some sort of nature preserve status at 

present. I would like the minister, please, to discuss that for me. 

And also tell me, when can we look forward to the Athabasca 

Sand Dunes being a full partner in our provincial park system? 

 

Will it require the election of Roy Bird on the federal level and 

the Liberal government provincially for that to happen? Or will 

this government look at the Athabasca Sand Dunes becoming a 

provincial park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I think in our discussion with a lot of 

people from Athabasca region, even as we talk about a road, 

there was a great deal of sensitivity with the people of that area 

in regards to environmental changes and so on, you know, that 

the Athabasca road would deal with. 

 

And I know that many of the elders in the North are still very 

concerned even about the road in regards to feedback that I 

have had. And I have heard some comments there as well in 

regards to the Athabasca area. People in the environmental 

movement as well as people who are in that area know the 

fragile nature, you know, of the sand. I mean the soil is very 

thin and it exposes all the sand. And it’s extremely fragile. 

 

And any development in there would have to go through a 

phase of environmental review. And those types of things need 

to be properly well done, and I think that that’s the sense we’re 

getting from the people of Athabasca. 

 

So that in your view I wasn’t quite sure whether or not you 

wanted to rush into it, but I know it’s a highly sensitive 

environmental issue and also a people’s issue from the 

Athabasca region. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the success stories of 

northern development and community involvement has been the 

$10 million multi-party training project which has been mostly 

directed at the mining industry. 

 

I understand that most of the funds have been provided by 

Ottawa and the mining industry, although I think the minister 

has contributed something from the provincial level — of 

course not nearly as much as what the federal government does 

— but I believe there is some provincial, there’s some 

provincial tie in there. 

 

I would like the minister to tell me how much, this year, will be 

contributed from the provincial government into the $10 million 

multi-party training project. And also while we agree over here 

that this training project has done great, great work in the 

mining industry area, can he tell me if this can be expanded to 

the other great economic industries of the North — in forestry 

and tourism and in trapping? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Like I mentioned before on the 

educational scene, the province, you know, supports teacher 

education, etc., and many other projects. We put in . . . we have 

training budgets which impact 1,700 people. 

 

On the specific one that you talk about, on multi-party training, 

it’s approximately 500, approximately 500 people that have 

been impacted. So it’s approximately one-third of it. 

 

Also on the overall view in regards to who puts in what, 

one-third comes from the province, one-third from the mining 

community, and one-third from the federal government. So it’s 

a three-way split. So it’s an important partnership. It’s one area 

where the federal government has put in, you know, some 

money. And we acknowledge that on the one-third. 

 

But they used to put in 60 per cent of the money. What we are 

worried about is that . . . You should talk to your members from   



974  Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1997 

Ottawa. They should not keep cutting back. We’re hoping that 

they will continue. 

 

We’re trying to see . . . The five-year agreement on the $10.5 

million will take place this coming year. Hopefully, they stand 

with us and say we’re going to have something even better than 

that as we approach the future. For this year’s spending it was 

about 750,000. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I was pleased when the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs advised us that the RRAP 

(residential rehabilitation assistance program) program, the 

residential assistance for seniors, for challenged people, was 

being extended. And that’s, I believe, 75 cents on the dollar 

from Ottawa, 25 cents from Regina — marvellous program. 

And we know there’s a desperate housing shortage in the North; 

I understand at least 600 houses short. Crowding in housing is a 

real problem. 

 

But on this program that’s 75 per cent funded from Ottawa, I 

wonder if the minister can tell me how much of this money will 

go north of 55, particularly say when it’s really only costing the 

province 25-cent dollars. It’s a great program from the federal 

government, but how much of it will get up to Northerners 

where we have the biggest challenge in housing in this 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  For the member’s information, the 

biggest problem that we have . . . From the final statement that I 

made when we were worried about the Liberal, federal Liberal 

government, you’ve got to remember the federal Liberal 

government has got out of the construction of housing, of social 

housing — completely. The next three years, not a penny from 

the federal government. 

 

It’s $8 million provincial money that’s going in to build houses 

in the North. What you’re talking about on the RRAP program 

is when people get a certain amount of money, you know, up to 

$10,000, and I think we’re changing the amount, you know, this 

coming year with the RRAP program. But they did 

approximately that to repair their houses, you know, to improve 

their houses. 

 

It’s very important. I hope that the federal government 

continues to do that. But what we’re seeing is that they’re 

getting away from building houses, period. Social housing . . . 

they said that they really cared about the people in the North, 

but they don’t. The 8 million that is put in in the next three 

years is provincial money — $3 million this year. 

 

Sure we like the money from the federal government on the 

RRAP program, but it’s definitely not the same amount. As 

anybody who is listening will know, that repairing a home 

doesn’t cost as much as building a home. We’re pulling 8 

million in building houses over the next three years. We still 

like the federal involvement in the RRAP program, but I think 

that it’s . . . hopefully it will continue, but I’m afraid after the 

next election it may be gone. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair, I move we rise, report progress 

and ask for leave to sit again. 

The Chair:  Before the House rises and reports progress, I 

want to take a minute, as Chair, out of context here, to wish our 

Sergeant-at-Arms a very happy birthday, and our page, Guy 

Turton, a very happy birthday. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Speaker:  It now being near the normal time of 

adjournment, and after wishing all hon. members to enjoy the 

spring-like conditions this weekend, and make sure you spend a 

little time with friends and family in your constituency this 

weekend, I declare this House adjourned until Monday 

afternoon at 1:30 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 951 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................. 951 

  Heppner .................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 951 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................ 951 

  Aldridge .................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 

  Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 

  Serby ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 964 

  Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 964 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 SARCAN Celebrations 

  Ward ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 

 Role of Bombardier at 15 Wing Moose Jaw 

  Aldridge .................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 

 Weyburn Volunteers Recognized 

  Bradley ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 

 Co-operators’ Wise Rider Program 

  Hamilton ................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 

 Wynyard Rodeo Week 

  Flavel ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 953 

 Yorkton Lions Club Indoor Games 

  Serby ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 953 

 Z99 Fund-raiser 

  Trew .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 953 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Provincial Auditor Report on SaskPower 

  Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 953 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 954 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................. 954 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 954 

  Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 954 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................. 955 

  Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 955 

 SaskPower Project in Guyana 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................ 956 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 956 

 Gun Control Legislation 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................ 957 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 957 

 Video Lottery Terminal Revenue 

  Heppner .................................................................................................................................................................................... 957 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................. 957 

  Serby ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 958 

 High-risk Youth 

  Hillson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 958 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................. 958 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 225 — The Municipalities VLT Commitment Act 

  Heppner .................................................................................................................................................................................... 958 

 Bill No. 221 — The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................ 959 

 

 Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 22  The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 960 

 Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 960 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 961 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 961 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 962 

 Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 962 

 Bill No. 35 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes d’actes 

criminels 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 963 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 964 

 Bill No. 20 —The Small Claims Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 965 

 Recorded division ......................................................................................................................................................................... 966 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 45 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 966 

  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 968 

 

 


