



















































Hansard: March 21, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 313 

 March 21, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of concerned citizens with respect to young offenders: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a task force to aid the government in its fight 

against the escalating problem with youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are primarily 

from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to present petitions 

from concerned citizens of Saskatchewan on the issue of young 

offenders: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

again to present petitions on behalf of those concerned about 

Working for Women. And I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to continue the services of 

Working for Women, Saskatoon, who have a 16-year 

history of successfully providing cost-effective, accessible 

services to women in poverty by reducing their barriers to 

training and employment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 

petitions today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reduce the PST by 2 points in the 1997 provincial budget; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

change the big game damage compensation program; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to assist women in 

poverty by continuing the services of Working for Women. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, 

the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 1997, 

free votes. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 

members of this Assembly, 13 students from Gray School in the 

community of Gray south of Regina here. The students are 

kindergarten to grade 5 and they are sitting in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Accompanying the students are the three teachers, Mrs. Kim 

Engel, Mrs. Bev Birch, and Mrs. Penny Wiebe; also chaperons 

Gail Stuermer, Tanya Boesch, and Neil Vernon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of our members might remember 

earlier this week on the front page of the Leader-Post there was 

a front-line story, “Tiny schools can do it.” And I’m sure that 

the community of Gray is very proud of this achievement and 

we look forward to their school and community being open for 

many years to come. 

 

And I will be meeting with the students later on. And I ask all  



314  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

members to welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and to the Assembly, in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, three very important people in my life. The members 

of course are familiar with my good wife Carole, who is always 

delightful to be here supporting. But more importantly today, 

I’d like to introduce my daughter Laurie — from Calgary — 

McKerracher, and the young person in the basket who has made 

me a grandfather, Hayley Dawn McKerracher. 

 

Would members please join in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to join 

my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone in welcoming the 

group from Gray. This is where I started my education, was in 

Gray, so I do know that small schools can do very, very well 

and I just want to welcome them here today also. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

introduce to you and to my colleagues in the House this 

morning a very distinguished guest seated in your gallery. She 

is Dr. Karen Mock, and I would ask you to stand as I introduce 

her. 

 

Dr. Karen Mock is the national director of the League for 

Human Rights of B’nai Brith Canada, which is a national 

agency dedicated to combating racism and bigotry. She is a 

registered psychologist and teacher, specializing in human 

development, interpersonal communications, multiculturalism, 

and race relations. She’s widely acknowledged as one of 

Canada’s foremost experts on anti-racist education. 

 

She is in Saskatchewan as part of the marking of International 

Day for the Elimination of Racism. She is being hosted by 

Carol and Dave Abbey, and members will recognize Dave 

Abbey, who is with her today, who is the League for Human 

Rights contact for the B’nai Brith lodge here in Regina. 

I ask all members to join me in extending a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well, 

on behalf of my colleagues and the Leader of the Third Party, 

would like to extend a special welcome to Dr. Karen Mock as 

well; that we’re pleased to have you with us this morning, and 

we wish you well in your ongoing endeavours. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, not to sound too repetitive, I too 

wish to welcome Karen here today. I consider her a friend and a 

mentor in the area of specific, practical measures to eliminate 

the evil of racism. And I have been very pleased to both share 

speaking engagements with her, and also to share a profession  

with her as a psychologist. 

 

And I want to tell this Assembly that if ever you want to hear 

about solid, practical, human ways with a compassionate touch 

to eliminate racism, please contact the B’nai Brith Society. 

They’re very good and Karen is a leader in helping us to figure 

a way out of the morass of the evil of racism. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Day for the Elimination 

of Racial Discrimination 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

commemoration of this day — the International Day for the 

Elimination of Racial Discrimination — it is an honour for me 

to stand before the Assembly and ask everyone to renew their 

commitment to overcome all forms of racism and 

discrimination that we face today in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a society that is composed of many 

diverse ethnic and culture groups. Members of this Assembly 

are representative of that diversity, and must reinforce and 

recommit ourselves to overcoming all forms of racial 

discrimination. Let us use the opportunity of this special day 

against discrimination to continue to build bridges of 

understanding and a society free of racism. We must overcome 

all forms of racism and discrimination and show that we 

respect, accept, and celebrate the cultural diversity of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of this Assembly will 

join me and recommit themselves to the elimination of racial 

discrimination in our society. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I join the 

members opposite also and rise today as Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination Day in Saskatchewan. 

 

Racism is an ugly disease that is spawned from ignorance and 

hatred. Racism is a disease that leaves scars that are hidden but 

felt for ever by those who are targeted with unwarranted 

remarks and unfair treatment. Racism is a disease that we have 

a cure for and that cure is zero tolerance. We should all do our 

part to promote multiculturalism. 

 

In fact I recently attended an annual banquet organized by 

Herman Slotsve, president of the Potashville Multicultural 

Council and past president of the Saskatchewan Multicultural 

Council. It was a fantastic evening highlighted by the guest 

speaker, Corporal Jim Nadon of Yorkton, who spoke on his 

time as a peacekeeper in Bosnia. Mr. Speaker, he gave a great 

speech, and I would encourage anyone who has the opportunity 

to hear him tell of his experiences to listen very carefully. 

 

I would like to thank all those volunteers across Saskatchewan 

who devote their time and energy to wiping out racism. 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Closure of Working for Women 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a sad 

day. It’s a day of disappointment and a day of disillusionment 

for many Saskatoon citizens. Today, Mr. Speaker, Working for 

Women, an organization that has successfully helped women in 

poverty, will be closing its doors after 16 years. It is apt that I 

quote from the March 1996 budget address to illustrate a point. 

 

But in meeting new realities, we must be guided by the 

enduring values of our past — values (like) . . . compassion 

— the conviction that all, whether rich or poor should have 

access to essential services . . . We have listened. We are 

responding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these words and the words of the 1997 budget 

address yesterday ring very hollow indeed for the hundreds and 

hundreds of women who mourn the loss of this great service. 

 

As I speak to this Assembly this morning, boxes are being 

packed, leased equipment is being returned, furniture is being 

given to other non-profit organizations. To the selfless, 

dedicated people who have served at Working for Women 

throughout its existence, I say thank you publicly. Thank you 

for caring about these too often forgotten Saskatchewan 

women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Black History Month in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to report 

on a ceremony I attended last month but today seems the 

appropriate time to mention it. I was proud to represent the 

government at an event honouring Black History Month in 

Saskatchewan, a joyous event which featured speakers, 

musicians, and dancers performing dances from the Caribbean 

including the limbo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a diverse cultural 

representation, as we know, but numerically people from black 

cultures are a small minority. It would be easy for them to get 

lost in the cultural mix. 

 

As well, I suspect most of us make the hasty assumption that a 

black person in Saskatchewan is simply an American Black 

who travelled north. And certainly there is a connection going 

back to the underground railway of the pre-Civil War period. 

 

But black culture in Saskatchewan and in Canada is much 

richer and varied than that. We have people with Caribbean 

backgrounds and African and Asian, and I was happy to see last 

month their efforts to sustain their culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a black historian wrote, “If a race has not recorded 

history, its achievements will be forgotten and finally claimed 

by other groups.” I am glad to see that one more group in our 

society recorded its contribution. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tisdale Bantam Ramblers Hockey Team 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My constituency 

is notorious for its hockey, and today I want to recognize yet 

another very dynamic hockey team from Tisdale. The Tisdale 

Bantam Ramblers advanced to the SAHA (Saskatchewan 

Amateur Hockey Association) Bantam B provincial final for the 

second straight year after defeating Southey 12-4 in the 

semi-final series last week. 

 

The Ramblers are the defending provincial champions that will 

now meet the winner of Drake and Lucky Lake in the provincial 

Bantam B final. Please join with me today in congratulating the 

Tisdale Bantam Ramblers, coaches Colin McPeak, Wayne 

Hoffus, and manager Loren Forer, and wish them the best of 

luck in the final provincial series. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Project in Guyana 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, today is International Day to 

Eliminate Racial Discrimination; yesterday was budget day in 

Saskatchewan. The juxtaposition of those two days for a social 

democratic government is not a coincidence. 

 

There are many things to praise in this budget, but two stand 

out: its prudence and its humanity. It is balanced, responsible, 

and it furthers our commitment to improve the lives of those 

who deserve to share our advantages. 

 

But social democrats, Mr. Speaker, look beyond their 

immediate borders with the same combination of prudence and 

compassion. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to associate 

myself with the efforts of one of our Crown corporations to aid 

in the development of one of the poorest countries in our 

hemisphere. 

 

I am speaking of the SaskPower project in Guyana. I am proud 

of that project. 

 

If we believe in eliminating racial and economic discrimination, 

we must back it up with action — talk the talk and walk the 

walk. 

 

Unfortunately, because some people don’t like this initiative, I 

also need to point out that SaskPower’s investment is risk 

insured, so the people of Saskatchewan will not lose. They will 

almost certainly profit from this enterprise, financially and 

altruistically. 

 

Because of our investment, Guyana, a country with less than a 

million people, will be able to improve their life circumstances. 

Like Saskatchewan in the ‘40s and ‘50s, they will be electrified 

by SaskPower. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



316  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

Fund-raiser Banquet 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night, 

as many of you know, I, along with many members of the 

Assembly, attended a fund-raiser banquet downtown in Regina. 

Everyone, everyone had a good time. Mr. Speaker. I honestly 

didn’t think I could draw that large of a crowd. All went very 

well though. The food was good, the company was good, and I 

hope the entertainment was good as well. 

 

Next year, when the Deputy Premier has his event, I’m hoping 

that the Premier will show up because I think it would be a big 

boost to the Deputy Premier’s leadership bid. Really though . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Probably not. Really though, Mr. 

Premier, I think it would be . . . I think it’d be much easier if we 

just, if we all just nominated the Deputy Premier as the pope. 

That way, all of his colleagues would only have to kiss his ring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dinner Theatre in Pasqua 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This coming 

weekend in my constituency, the people of the community of 

Pasqua will once again be challenging the system. Visitors to 

Pasqua’s newly renovated community hall will be able to see 

two or more dinner theatre performances of the Pasqua 

Community Club’s five-act play, which is called Challenging 

the System. 

 

Funds from these performances will go to finish renovations to 

the stage in the community hall. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, in, well a new role for me as critic for 

live dinner theatre productions in the Thunder Creek 

constituency, I joined with many of your constituents in fact to 

watch an enjoyable event. Not only were we well entertained, 

but also we were treated to a good country meal. 

 

I’d like to congratulate the writer and producer, Larry Shaak. 

Congratulations are also due to the Gadd, Champion, Rose, 

McDowell, Bespalko, McDougall, Ringer, Greenwood, 

Gorgichuk, Pion, Best, Aitkin, and Gill families for their hard 

work and dedication to their community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Decorum in the Assembly 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know that as 

Speaker you have made every effort to improve the decorum of 

the House. I would like to call your attention to a disturbing 

situation which occurred during yesterday’s proceedings. 

 

With so many guests on the floor of the Assembly it would be 

easy for an event like the budget speech to become disrupted 

due to people moving about unnecessarily. I was pleased that 

during the Finance minister’s reading of the budget speech this 

did not occur. All members on both sides of the House 

remained in their seats throughout the entire speech, as did the 

invited guests. 

Unfortunately the situation changed dramatically when the 

member for Melfort rose to give his response on behalf of the 

official opposition. Ten government members, fully one-quarter 

of the NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus, left the Assembly 

during the member from Melfort’s speech . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 

knows that for debating purposes, reference to attendance or 

absence of members is not permitted. 

 

I also want to remind the member that there is a forum for 

raising points of order, and that members’ statements are not to 

be used; they are not intended to be used for that purpose. 

 

It’s sounding very much to me as though the hon. member is 

making a statement which is more appropriate to points of 

order. I’ll let him continue but I want to advise him that if it is 

in the same vein, that it will be out of order and I’ll rule that 

way. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Highways Funding 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today my question is for the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, before your government came to power in 1991, 

you told the people of Saskatchewan that our highways were 

Grant Devine’s golf courses — they’re 18 holes to the mile — 

and the people agreed with you. The highways were in terrible 

condition. However, since taking office your government has 

cut $187 million from the Highways’ budget 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, will you stand in this House today 

and confess that the sprinkling of monies for highways 

announced in yesterday’s budget will do little more than water 

the fairways in what have become your golf courses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I realize how difficult it 

is for the opposition this morning to attack the good-news 

budget that the Minister of Finance delivered, and in the 

consequence, we get this form of a question. 

 

I leave it to the people to judge whether or not $2.5 billion over 

a 10-year program for highway rebuilding and restructuring is a 

sprinkling, or whether it is a major rebuilding of the 

infrastructure. I think judging by the reaction of the public and 

by the journalists and by those in the business community and 

in the labour community, they’re going to accept the Minister of 

Finance’s approach and this government’s approach: $2.5 

billion over 10 years without a penny of assistance from the 

federal Liberals’ infrastructure — without a penny of assistance 

— is a tremendous step forward to making sure our highways 

infrastructure is in good shape. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

the Premier. I’ll tell you, in the upcoming days we’re going to 

be explaining very well what this two and a half billion over 10 

years is really going to mean. 

 

Mr. Premier, the two and a half billion dollars to be spent on 

our highways over the next 10 years is less than half of what 

you will collect in fuel tax and licensing fees. In fact your 

government will have a two and a half to a three and a half 

billion dollar surplus over that same time period while our 

highways continue to crumble. 

 

Mr. Premier, you know that this amount of money will not even 

maintain the highways in their present state of disrepair. Will 

you stand in the House today and ensure the people of 

Saskatchewan that your government will stop siphoning the gas 

tax from the Highways’ budget and use it for the reasons it was 

raised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this is voodoo 

economics at its worst — or at its best. What the hon. member 

for the Liberal Party is saying, that approximately $350 million 

— is it, Minister of Finance, in that neighbourhood? — raised 

with respect to fuel tax should be dedicated to Highways in its 

entirety. How his minister . . . his critic of the Department of 

. . . ministry, will get up and square that circle today when he 

criticizes the budget in terms of spending money for hospitals 

and health care — I’m sure his line is going to be, it’s not 

enough. 

 

How you’ll square that in terms of saying that our tax cut is not 

enough. How he’ll square that with respect to balancing the 

budget, in other words, tackling the debt and keeping it down, I 

don’t know. But I’ll tell you one thing, the economics and the 

math simply doesn’t work with that kind of logic. 

 

And this is going to be an interesting test about the credibility 

of the Liberal caucus. Because right after question period, I 

want the journalists and everybody in Saskatchewan to pay 

attention how that question — $350 million dedicated; even if 

you could spend it, you couldn’t in one year — squares with 

what the Liberal critic is going to be saying in his criticism. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, this tells you all that you need to know 

about the incredibility of the Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier is correct. The 

figures don’t add up, because you’re still only spending 32 per 

cent back into our highways from what you raised from those 

fuel taxes. 

 

Mr. Premier, through the freedom of information, through the 

freedom of information, my colleague from Thunder Creek has 

discovered that your Department of Highways ordered close to 

7,000 bump and warning signs for the past year, and only you 

know how many bump and warning signs have been ordered for 

this year. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you assure the people of Saskatchewan that if 

your government is not prepared to spend enough money to fix 

our highways, that at the very least you will commit enough 

money to purchase and install the adequate supply of bump and 

warning signs to alert our drivers there’s the potholes in this 

highway system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the only pothole that 

anybody should take note of is the pothole that the hon. member 

finds himself in this morning as a result of the question that he’s 

put. He is in such a big political pothole on this question. How 

in the world he can object to $2.5 billion, 25 million a year, 

going into highways — how he can object to that, I don’t 

understand. 

 

And I’m going to be asking again the press and the members of 

this Assembly to watch how that expenditure call by him 

squares with the official critic of the Liberal Party on the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that it is also the same Liberal Party 

that wants — according to the Leader-Post, November 26th, 

1996 — tax harmonization. They want the GST (goods and 

services tax), their federal tax, to blend with the PST (provincial 

sales tax). That is a tax increase. That’s what he wants. 

 

And yet on the other hand, he wants an expenditure in the 

numbers which he gives us with respect to highways. It is 

incredible. That may be the Liberal Party position — tax 

harmonization, doubling the tax levels, as they are in central 

and in eastern Canada, Atlantic Canada — it is not ours. Ours is 

the balanced approach and that’s exactly this budget stands for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Funding 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, when this government 

delivered its budget yesterday, municipal governments were 

crossing their fingers that they would receive a reprieve from 

the massive downloading that has been a constant under this 

government. Unfortunately what they received was anything 

but. Urban revenue-sharing grants have been slashed by $17 

million, while revenue-sharing grants have been cut by another 

12 million. These cuts represent a 30 per cent reduction in 

revenue sharing that our communities depend on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has indicated that the time has 

come to invest in people; yet they continue to divest themselves 

of programs and services that local governments provide. Will 

the minister explain how she and her government can possibly 

justify another 30 per cent reduction in funding for our local 

governments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Here they go again, Mr. Speaker. 

Here they go again. Let’s total up this now. Somebody get a  



318  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

calculator out. We’re going to do it. 

 

We got the so-called Highways critic, the Liberal member from 

Wood River. He would ask us to spend $325 million a year on 

highways — there couldn’t be that many companies building 

and constructing highways. 

 

Now we’ve got the member from — where is he? Saltcoats? — 

the Liberal member getting up. He wants more money for the 

municipalities, notwithstanding the fact that they’re going to get 

a tax credit obviously in their purchases from 9 to 7 per cent; 

notwithstanding the fact that there is additional funding by way 

of the infrastructure program of $35 million being dedicated; 

notwithstanding the fact that the Minister of Municipal 

Government will, in the next several days, get the details with 

respect to revenue sharing and the like — all of those. He wants 

more yet. 

 

Just keep totalling it up. We’re almost at about a half a billion 

more in expenditures. Now get up, one of you, and call for a 

further tax reduction and make that square. I tell you, if you can 

make that circle square, you are a Houdini. Unfortunately — or 

fortunately for the people of Saskatchewan — nobody’s 

believing in black magic from you people over there in the 

Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, municipal governments 

would have been just satisfied if the downloading had’ve quit. 

But no, that didn’t happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this question I must direct to the Minister of 

Municipal Government. Because of the government’s latest 

exercise in offloading, some municipalities will see their 

present funding levels sink to less than 50 per cent of what their 

funding was when this government came to power. This latest 

round of cuts, on top of previous offloading, will put dramatic 

pressure on local governments, with no option but to raise local 

mill rates dramatically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have two alternatives for the Minister of 

Municipal Government. Number one, resign her cabinet post to 

show her colleagues on that side her disgust with what she is 

continually being forced to do to cities, towns, and RMs (rural 

municipality); or two, cross the floor and cleanse your soul, 

Madam Minister; feel good about yourself. We’ve already 

moved one seat from there to here. Join the wave, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Will you finally do the first positive thing since 1991 for 

municipal governments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning 

this is going to be a very tough day for the opposition with 

respect to the budget. And that question proves it, all right. 

 

He points out that we’ve already lost one member from our side 

over to the Liberal Party. And I know he’s so warmly received  

by all the members of the Liberal caucus that you use him as an 

example. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reality is that the Liberal solution to all of this, 

apart from wanting to spend now about a half a billion dollars 

more in the budget, their solution is harmonization. That’s their 

solution. And where it’s been harmonized, the GST and the 

PST, by Liberal governments in Atlantic Canada, the tax 

increase has doubled. That’s his answer. 

 

And he wants us now, in addition to the Highways department, 

to add more, notwithstanding all that I’ve said has been given to 

the municipalities. They know how to handle it. They are 

efficient and they can do it and they’ll rise to the task. 

 

Believe me, there’s no resignation coming from this side of the 

House on this budget. If anybody should resign, it is the entire 

Liberal caucus for putting out these contradictory messages. 

 

And by the way, the next questioner from the Liberals, will you 

please ask me in the question . . . indicate in the question 

whether you still favour harmonization. Do you or not? Tell us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

was quite a day. First the Liberals adopt the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) gambling policy — a province-wide referendum 

— then the NDP adopt the Conservative PST policy, and cut it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Madam Minister, the hundreds of petitions we 

tabled over the past two weeks called on you to go one step 

further. The people who signed our petition also want you to 

table a long-term plan for further reduction in the PST in years 

ahead. That’s what was missing in yesterday’s budget, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Since you’re in the mood to adopt PC policy, will you table 

your long-term plan for further cuts to the PST? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

categorically, we do not — I said this yesterday; I repeat again 

and I underline — we do not accept PC tax policy. Because we 

. . . well and the Liberals say they can believe it because they’re 

in the same camp virtually, the same, Liberals and 

Conservatives. 

 

It doesn’t matter. When the Conservatives are on the rise all the 

Liberals run over to you. When the Conservatives are on the 

downfall, all the Conservatives run over to the Liberals. So it’s 

the same group. But we will not buy that policy and I’ll tell you 

why we won’t buy it. We see evidence of it in Ontario and in 

Alberta. That’s what we see. We see a hack-and-slash policy. 

We see a tax policy in Alberta and Ontario that says we’re 

going to cut basic services to Ontario people and give them a 

tax cut at the same time. 

 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

We see Mr. Charest saying he’s going to give them a tax cut 

and the numbers don’t even make sense. Believe me, the last 

thing that we need is PC tax policy. What we need is the policy 

we’ve adopted — balanced, debt reduction, program 

enhancement, PST reduction. Every tax reduction that we give, 

as we did yesterday, is here to stay so long as this government’s 

in office; it’s going to be responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious from the 

Premier’s comments that he’s thinking more about the federal 

election than the provincial election upcoming, or concerns 

himself more about that. I would wonder why he’s so worked 

up about the federal election. 

 

It’s been quite an amazing transformation, Mr. Speaker. For 

years we could not get the NDP to admit that the PST will cut 

. . . or will create jobs. Now you can’t seem to shut them up 

about it. There’s no one as devoted as a new convert though, I 

guess, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel the same pride as when one of my children 

would learn an important lesson. Of course it doesn’t take my 

kids six years to learn something as simple as the fact that 

cutting taxes will increase employment. 

 

Madam Minister, the CFIB (Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business) is calling for further cuts. The taxpayers’ 

association is calling for further cuts. The PST coalition is 

calling for further cuts. Will you do what everyone across this 

province is looking for and asking for? Will you come forward 

with a plan and a time frame for further cuts and the ultimate 

elimination of the PST? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, now we have the 

Conservatives. There they go again, back to the future. Let’s 

just give the tax cuts. Let’s just cut. And when asked, where 

does the money come from, the Tory answer is, don’t worry, 

the money will look after itself. 

 

Well I tell you, we will not follow PC tax policy. I’ll tell you 

what our policy is. Our policy is to make a tax cut when we can 

afford it, when the people of Saskatchewan can afford it. 

Because we will never, ever allow this province to nearly drown 

in the ocean of red ink that we found this province in on 

November 1, 1991, thanks to PC-Liberal tax policy. 

 

You ask, what’s the game plan? I’ll tell you what the game plan 

is. We said it right from 1991 when we were sworn in. We’re 

going to reduce taxes when we can afford it. Because when we 

reduce taxes, they are reduced for ever to benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s when we’re going to reduce taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Funding 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also  

for the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, not everyone is 

completely happy with your budget. SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) president, Murray Westby, 

says provincial finances may have turned the corner but they 

haven’t come into town. 

 

Madam Minister, municipalities appear to be one of the groups 

that were overlooked in yesterday’s budget. SUMA president 

says there’s been another 42 per cent cut to urban revenue 

sharing. That means increases to property taxes, increases that 

could offset the positive impact of your PST cut. 

 

Madam Minister, you could address this problem by simply 

living up to your commitment to give 10 per cent of the VLT 

(video lottery terminal) revenue to municipalities. Will you do 

that today, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this is a similar question 

to the ones raised by the Liberals, and my answer therefore has 

to be similar. 

 

I believe that many of the urban leaders will say, when they 

take a look at their calculations on the reduction of the PST 

from 9 to 7 per cent, that there’s a huge savings. I believe in 

fact the mayor of Prince Albert says that that alone is likely to 

be a saving in Prince Albert of over $100,000. 

 

I’ve already indicated — the question — also about the answer 

respecting $35 million for infrastructure which is going to go 

back to the municipalities, and other benefits as well which are 

sprinkled throughout this budget, as the Minister of Municipal 

Government will indicate in the due course in the elaboration of 

the budget and during the course of the budget debate. 

 

Municipalities will be able to handle this budget well enough. 

They’ve done it in the past. They’ve been very much partners 

with us in helping us overcome this difficulty, and our 

contribution to them has been as good as we can make it. I can 

tell you one thing in closing — it’s one heck of a lot better than 

what we see happening in Tory Ontario to municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  It’s probably very true that municipalities 

have been a great partner because they’re the ones that have 

been caught carrying the load in the end. So I guess they 

deserve all the credit. So we agree with you on that. 

 

Madam Minister, even if you account for the fact that the $28 

million cut to revenue sharing is partly offset by the elimination 

of hospital levies, municipalities still come up about $14 

million short. This year VLTs are expected to suck about $130 

million out of Saskatchewan communities, so even a return of 

just 10 per cent would just about cover the revenue-sharing cut 

and help councils to hold the line on property taxes. 

 

Madam Minister, the Manitoba government recently announced 

it is going to give back 10 per cent of VLT revenue to 

municipalities and allow municipalities to decide how that 

money should be spent, based on their own priorities. Madam 

Minister, will you follow Manitoba’s example, give 10 per cent  



320  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

of VLT revenues to municipalities, and let them decide how 

they want to spend it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well again, Mr. Speaker, I hope that 

the House, and those who watch the proceedings of this House, 

will see the fundamental contradictions in both of the official 

opposition parties . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 

Leader of the Conservatives says it’s not true. Of course it’s 

true. You got up and you congratulated the Liberals a few 

moments ago about adopting the PC policy to do away with 

VLTs, and yet your member gets up and says, hey, let’s take the 

money from the VLTs and give it back to the municipalities. 

 

I mean if this isn’t a fundamental contradiction, I don’t know 

what is a fundamental contradiction. You can’t walk both sides 

of the street you know, and say I’m for VLTs sometimes, and 

sometimes I’m against VLTs. I’ve got two hip pockets — 

sometimes I’m for it and sometimes I’m against it. 

 

Now I know I’ve got the Leader of the PCs actually riled up on 

this thing, but listen to the answer. Listen up. One hundred per 

cent of the money that we get from VLTs goes back to the 

people in the community. It doesn’t go to my pockets; doesn’t 

go to your pockets. Everything that is raised comes back by 

way of tax reduction, more for health care and more for 

education — more to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s our 

policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges’ Salary Dispute 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

dearly love to get into this debate about finances, especially 

when we see the Premier talking about fiscal responsibility 

when he’s added more than half — double the amount — that 

was added in the ‘80s as far as total debt. But I’ve got another 

important question that’s got a . . . that we’ve got to raise here 

this morning. 

 

I see, Mr. Speaker, that drew a response and I expected that. 

Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order now. Order. Order. The 

Chair’s having a great deal of difficulty being able to hear the 

hon. member from Moosomin put his question. I’ll ask all . . . 

Order. I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the hon. member from 

Moosomin to put his question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on a 

serious note, a question to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, 

you’ve been ordered by the court to provide information 

regarding your handling of the judges’ salary dispute. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as we hear this morning, the minister is refusing to 

provide much of this information by trying to hide behind the 

doctrine of cabinet secrecy. 

 

Mr. Minister, we can support cabinet secrecy to a point. But,  

Mr. Speaker, we cannot if it stands in the way of justice. Mr. 

Minister, the cabinet certainly isn’t above the law. You’ve been 

ordered to disclose information to the judges’ lawyers. Mr. 

Minister, will you today provide that information that has been 

required of you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Here, I’ll take this question and 

answer it on behalf of the government. First of all, the obvious 

answer, which the hon. member I am sure will accept, is that 

this is before the courts and it has to be played out by the courts 

eventually, through the courts of Appeal, maybe even the 

Supreme Court. 

 

Without speaking to the issue in specifics, I simply want to say 

that I am a believer in the parliamentary tradition of cabinet 

confidentiality. That is the way in which public policy decisions 

are made. It is the way deliberations can be honestly 

undertaken. You cannot have a situation where the deliberations 

in contentious and difficult public policy are going to be 

scrutinized all the time, perennially and perpetually, by either 

the courts or by the Assembly. The accountability is here 

through question period or in the way that we have the 

legislature operate. 

 

Now that’s a very long-standing principle of parliamentary 

democracy. I think it’s a principle worth defending here in 

parliament and in the courts. In the meantime, with respect, now 

returning to the judges’ case, let the judges decide what that 

issue determines and in due course we will comply with the 

appropriate orders as they finally are completed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

University Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 

morning is for the minister responsible for Post-Secondary 

Education. 

Yesterday’s budget provided the reinstatement of some funding 

for Saskatchewan universities. I take that as an admission by 

this government that it was wrong to cut funding last year. 

Despite suggestions by the Finance minister that the university 

funding in this year’s budget might help students escape further 

tuition hikes, the universities say that’s not likely because they 

are trying to operate on the same level of funding as was 

provided in 1995, and they are coping with additional 

inflationary costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister admit that the operating grants provided by 

the government will likely still not be enough to prevent further 

tuition hikes this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, there they go again; 

there they go again. This time they have turned off their ears 

totally to what the people in the university community are 

saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know what the Leader of the Opposition is saying. But 

here’s what the president, Don Wells, says, of the University of 

Regina, “For universities in this province, this is by far the best 

budget we have had in a decade.” 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

We’ve only been in office since six years. 

 

Here’s what Natashia Stinka, a University of Saskatchewan 

students’ council leader from Saskatoon says: 

 

It is really encouraging to see that the government has 

reinvested in the university and has given students priority. 

 

And here’s what Rick Jamison, U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) budget manager, says: 

 

It’s possible tuition increases might be reconsidered. I am 

sure that with this announcement (Mr. Jamison says) there 

may very well be some reconsideration of that tuition set. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well now, that’s what the public says. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Terrific. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The Leader of the Opposition says, 

terrific. If it’s terrific, why didn’t you say that in your question? 

Admit that this is a terrific budget, pure and simple. Because it 

is a terrific budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, if the Premier would have been 

listening, he would have noted that our comments about the fact 

that indeed a burden has been lifted from some of the cuts that 

were imposed by this government last year is correct. But we’re 

not looking ahead. The Premier is blind to the fact that there are 

additional costs. The universities are of course, very, very 

grateful that indeed that cost has been eliminated. 

 

What I’m looking for, Mr. Speaker, is whether the Premier or 

the minister can explain to this House what strategy will be put 

in place to ensure that a quality, affordable post-secondary 

education is available to all students in this province. Answer 

that question, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the strategy has been 

already unfolding before the member’s eyes. We asked Harold 

MacKay . . . By the way, he is a member of the Liberal Party, 

for the hon. member’s remembrance. 

 

Still, still, still, in spite of your position, Mr. MacKay delivered 

his report which talked about the necessity of the universities to 

cooperate. And that is now working. 

 

In addition . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member says he 

doesn’t like that. Nothing is good enough for the member 

opposite. He says, what’s the strategy? I’m telling him the 

strategy. 

 

We’ve laid out the game plan, pursuant to Mr. MacKay. We’ve 

laid out in yesterday’s budget the increased funding for the 

universities, which the presidents and the managers of the 

universities are welcoming, and the students are welcoming. 

 

Where’s the beef? What in the world is the complaint by the 

Liberal Party? You can stand up and say for ever that it’s not  

good enough, that it should be more and more and more and 

more and more. You can be contradictory all that you want. But 

please, let’s get real. Get realistic and acknowledge the fact that 

this budget compared to where we were five years ago . . . 

Forget about five years ago — this budget will be unmatched by 

any government in Canada in 1997. That’s what I say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of Bill No. 30, The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3l — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of Bill No. 31, The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

Bill No. 32, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory 

Reform) Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statues Consequential 

Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of Bill No. 33, 

The Miscellaneous Statues Consequential Amendments Act, 

1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

Bill No. 34, The Young Offenders Services Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 



322  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

Bill No. 35 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur 

les victimes d’actes criminels 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

Bill No. 35, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 202 — The Balanced Budget 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 

No. 202, The Balanced Budget Amendment Act, 1997 be 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 203 — The Direct Debt Reduction Act 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 

No. 203, The Direct Debt Reduction Act be introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, The 

Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 37, 

The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 38, The Municipal Employees’ 

Pension Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, 

The Multiculturalism Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1100) 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order 

regarding decorum in the House, I bring to the Speaker’s 

attention, Mr. Speaker, what I believe is to be an inappropriate 

and disrespectful behaviour by members during special events 

such as the budget speech yesterday. 

 

While the member from Melfort was speaking in response to 

the budget speech, a number of government members left their 

seats, both to leave the House and to wander around the 

chambers. At that point in time, Mr. Speaker, a large number of 

the guests that were invited to the floor also left. It’s very 

disruptive, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it shows disrespect to the 

institution of this legislature. I would ask that you review and 

make a ruling on that. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order! If hon. members 

want to put their remarks on the record regarding the point of 

order raised by the hon. member for Cannington, then they are 

permitted to do so now. Otherwise I’ll ask that they refrain from 

making their remarks. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak to this point 

of order. If the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is concerned 

about the quorum, I think we ought to consider the quorum 

question in total. We ought to consider the quorum question 

about the members in attendance at votes that have been held in 

this House over the past, and it should not be done in a forum of 

this type but it should be done and proceeded to the proper 

place, and that is to the Rules and Procedures Committee, at 

which we could look at the attendance of the government 

members, of the opposition members, and of the members in 

the Conservative and third parties. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I want to endorse the comments of 

the member for Prince Albert Carlton and add one or two 

additional comments. 

 

I was Finance critic for some four years in opposition. I’ve an 

idea of what you go through. It is rather difficult. When the 

Minister of Finance has concluded her remarks and the speech 

is done, the cameras start rolling and some of the members need 

to make comments outside. So do some of the guests. It is a 

difficult role to fill because you’re speaking to a room which is 

emptying on you, and it is difficult. 

 

However it is a day when there is more news interest in this 

place on that day than any other. Of all the days we sit, this is  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

the epitome of interest. And members have to make statements 

and the public have to do so as well. 

 

It’s difficult to do, but it has been ever thus. It was thus when I 

was speaker. You just simply have to give your remarks to a 

Chamber which is emptying and keep in mind that the larger 

audience is on TV, and don’t see it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say 

that my personal concern — I echo the House Leader of the 

government in this — was not so much the members who left 

because at least they departed from the Chamber and were not a 

problem. My personal concern was with those government 

members who milled around in the Assembly, visiting, chatting, 

and of course encouraging the guests to do the same. So the 

guests also were visiting, chatting and milling around. 

 

I don’t think our guests would have been so rude had not the 

government members in fact started it and encouraged it and 

initiated it. I think our invited guests would have had far more 

decorum and respect had they not been given such a poor 

example. 

 

So while I understand, as the Government House Leader has 

said, that some hon. members, especially the Minister of 

Finance, may well be called out to . . . they may well be called 

out and have to leave the Assembly, my concern is not for the 

members who left the Assembly. My concern is for those 

members who stayed in this Assembly and, I think, conducted 

themselves in quite a disgraceful manner and encouraged our 

invited guests to behave likewise. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, having 

been a member who has sat on both sides of the Assembly, I 

just want to make a comment or two regarding the procedure 

yesterday and just make a correction. First of all, we’re not 

talking about quorum or votes and procedures. We’re talking 

about decorum. We’re talking about this institution and how it 

operates on special days such as the Speech from the Throne or 

budget presentation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was on the government side of the House when a 

number of budgets were presented. I was on the government 

side of the House when the current House Leader for the 

government was the Finance critic and made speeches, and I 

heard the criticisms that were levelled at that time. But at least, 

Mr. Speaker, as I recall, I recall, Mr. Speaker, a time when most 

members, if not all the members, sat and while you may not 

have appreciated the comments that have been made by 

members, you respected the institution that we are here 

representing and the people we represent. 

 

And. Mr. Speaker, I also was quite cognizant of some of the 

comments being made by some of the guests behind me about 

the milling and the fact that they had a hard time hearing what 

the member from Melfort was saying in his address, in his 

response to the budget speech yesterday. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think whether or not there’s a specific 

rule that states members should show respect, I think it just 

comes naturally, Mr. Speaker. If we were to ask the students  

that were here, ask the other guests, they would expect that we 

would show respect; we showed respect to the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

I think the members would all recognize that, and I think there 

is a forum we follow as well that allows the Finance critic of the 

official opposition to then make a short response to the speech 

and then allow for the mingling afterwards with the guests. 

 

And so that’s the thing that we’re addressing here, Mr. Speaker. 

The fact that there is a decorum that we believe should be 

followed by the institution. 

 

And we would ask, Mr. Speaker, that you take the time to 

review this matter and come back to this Assembly with what 

you would perceive would be a proper understanding of the 

whole question so that it doesn’t happen in the future. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I’ve listened carefully to the remarks of all 

hon. members and am prepared to make a ruling now. 

 

If members refer themselves to the rules of the Assembly, they 

will note that rule no. 20 deals with the matter of decorum in 

our House. And I would encourage all members to make 

themselves familiar with the rule on decorum and to use that not 

only as a guideline but as a requirement of conduct in the 

House. 

 

Now in looking at rule 20, members will recognize that rule 20, 

decorum, deals with, as it’s expressed in our rules, with the 

authority of the Speaker, with conduct of members when the 

Speaker is on his feet, with the interruption of members, and 

passing between the member speaking and the Chair, and with 

respect for the symbolism of the mace, and as well with respect 

for the Chair. 

 

It may very well be that the members of the Assembly would 

see it as appropriate to revisit the rule on decorum and to give 

further definition to that as befits the conduct of this House. 

 

Having said that, I think it has been an appropriate airing of 

concerns of members of both sides. It is often the case when 

reflecting on conduct and behaviour, that it is most convenient 

to reflect on the conduct and behaviour of other members, and 

oftentimes most appropriate to reflect on the conduct and 

behaviour of ourselves. 

 

And I would ask all hon. members to give serious thought to the 

member’s comments made in the point of order raised by the 

hon. member for Cannington, to reflect on those, and to commit 

ourselves to conduct ourselves in a manner that is befitting the 

respect for the House and its proceedings. 

 

I know that all hon. members are honourable — I have no doubt 

about that — and would want, through our conduct, to reflect 

the importance of this institution. Having said that, I simply 

offer that as advice for reflection by members; but in the  



324  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

context of the rule on decorum as it applies to our House, the 

point of order is not well taken. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of open, 

accountable, and responsible government, I am pleased to table 

a response. 

 

The Speaker:  For item no. 1, is tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s a 

great pleasure for me to pick up where I left off yesterday in 

terms of the budget response. But I also would like to go a little 

bit more in depth into the real numbers that lie behind the 

rhetoric we heard from the Minister of Finance yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I always find the titles the Finance minister 

assigns to her budgets to be very interesting. A couple of years 

ago it was A New Day Dawning. Last year we heard the 

government was Preparing for the New Century. And this year 

the Finance minister chose Investing in People as her theme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what these titles have in common with each other 

are, they’re all being authored by the Finance minister with an 

obvious diversion from reality. A new day did not dawn in 

Saskatchewan. The problems that have plagued our province for 

so many years are as present today as they were then. 

Saskatchewan, unfortunately, is still the poor cousin of the 

western provinces. 

 

As I alluded to you yesterday, our most valuable export today, 

just as it has been for many years under this government and 

others, is our people. And why is this, Mr. Speaker? Why do 

our young, our talented, our best, our brightest all feel the pull 

to other provinces? Why don’t they stay in Saskatchewan to 

start their careers, raise their families, and enjoy all the good 

things that this province really does have to offer? Simply put, 

Mr. Speaker, they can’t. 

 

They are forced to leave Saskatchewan because this province 

does not afford them the opportunity to pursue their 

professional lives here at home. That was true under the Tories, 

who if anything made it even more untenable to stay here, and 

that trend continues under the government opposite. 

 

This is a government which probably tries very hard to create 

meaningful jobs here. I’m sure there’s no one more frustrated in  

the province than the Economic Development minister every 

month when the job stats are released. I’m sure that the 

members opposite are trying to create jobs. The problem is, 

they don’t have a clue how to do it — not a clue, Mr. Speaker. 

And with this budget it doesn’t look as if they’re going to learn 

the error of their ways any time soon. 

 

At the same time, and as the Minister of Economic 

Development was releasing fancy documents such as the 

Partnership for Growth and the Partnership for Renewal, this 

same government was busily enacting job-killers, such as The 

Labour Standards Act and the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. The Economic Development minister’s 

self-professed desire to create jobs simply does not square with 

the other actions the government has done — nothing but harm 

small business, kill jobs, and send our children packing. 

 

The numbers don’t lie, Mr. Speaker, so let me repeat them for 

the government members. Last year in Saskatchewan this 

government created a mere 1,000 jobs. That’s the number, Mr. 

Speaker — 1,000. Next door in Manitoba, 24,000 jobs were 

created. Why the great difference? 

 

I still haven’t heard the Economic Development minister 

properly explain that, because he probably can’t. Because 

there’s no logical reason why Manitoba is doing so much better 

than we are, but it’s the reality, Mr. Speaker. And this 

government, this Premier, this Finance minister, can’t hide from 

those simple facts. 

 

In February 1996 the unemployment rate for youths between 15 

and 19 was 11.7 per cent. One year later, it stood at 15.7 per 

cent. That’s a one-third increase, Mr. Speaker. And what about 

the quality of the jobs that have been created here? — low 

paying and part time. 

 

The Canadian Labour Congress stated that Saskatchewan has 

more low-paid, part-time workers than any other province. 

Fully 72,000 women work part time, and Saskatchewan women 

lead the nation as multiple jobholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Federation of Labour president, 

Barb Byers, recently told the Leader-Post that nearly half of 

those female employees earn less than $7 an hour and 82 per 

cent have no pension. And according to Ms. Byers, over the last 

15 years the number of women who hold down more than one 

job has increased by 372 per cent. 

 

In the North there’s an overall unemployment rate of 25 per 

cent, yet this government does nothing to promote sustainable 

economic development or job creation for those living in the 

North. 

 

This government’s job creation record is nothing short of 

miserable, and the bulk of the jobs that are being created are 

low-paying, low-quality jobs. It’s a shameful record, Mr. 

Speaker, but they stubbornly cling to The Labour Standards Act 

and the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement like they 

were their own children to be protected no matter what the cost. 

And the cost has been high, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

The government’s long-overdue move to set back the PST to 

the same level it was when they took power is not the answer. 

And I hope that they see it. Yes, it’s part of the puzzle, but it’s a 

long way from the whole answer to our job creation problems. 

 

Saskatchewan taxes are still highly uncompetitive, and we still 

pay nearly $800 million more today in taxes than we did five 

years ago. In his column today Bruce Johnstone aptly sums up 

what many are thinking: 

 

So inured are we to the pain of high taxation that we 

rejoice at the first sign of relief, forgetting for the moment 

who inflicted the pain in the first place. 

 

Saskatchewan still has the highest income tax rate west of the 

Maritimes. Only Quebec and Newfoundland collect more in 

gasoline taxes. And even with this cut, the government tax take 

for the average family is the highest in the country outside of 

the Atlantic provinces. 

 

And if they need more numbers to drive that point home, Mr. 

Speaker, here’s more numbers. Let’s look at employment in the 

retail trade sector. Between 1992 and 1996, that sector grew by 

3 per cent in Saskatchewan. And before the members opposite 

begin cheering that figure, Mr. Speaker, they should look again 

at our neighbour to the east. Between 1992 and 1996, 

employment in Manitoba’s retail sector grew by 14 per cent — 

nearly five times the rate of growth in Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s look at the service sector. Between 1992 and 1996, 

employment in Saskatchewan service sector grew by all of 1.8 

per cent — less than 5,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker. In Manitoba, a 

6.6 per cent increase — over three times our rate. Will the 

reduction in the PST help these sectors? Yes, Mr. Speaker, it 

will. Is it enough? Absolutely not. 

 

As I stated in my brief remarks yesterday, we are pleased to see 

the sales tax rebate on building materials and equipment for 

livestock and agricultural activities. This will no doubt help to 

build the hog industry in Saskatchewan, which seems to be a 

goal of this government. But I think the Minister of Finance 

should have expanded her view a little wider. 

 

As I stated yesterday, the tax rebate should have included the 

construction machinery institute and industry. The numbers 

over the last number of years show us that this industry has 

been particularly weak in Saskatchewan. Between 1991 and 

’95, investment in manufacturing in Saskatchewan fell a 

whopping 82 per cent, Mr. Speaker. At the same time, our 

friends in Manitoba saw a 75 per cent increase. Clearly, this is a 

sector of the economy that needs a lot more help than this 

government is willing to give it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very interested to see that the Department of 

Economic Development has changed its name, probably out of 

shame. So now it’s called the department of economic and 

cooperative development. Are we to believe that this 

government is going to concentrate on only one form of 

economic development from now on — on cooperatives? Are 

we to believe that small business, the main engine of our 

economy, is now going to be left out of this government’s  

plans? If they ever were part of the plans, I suppose, to begin 

with. I suppose it’s not surprising, but it’s a shame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I move to specific line departments, I want 

to touch on an issue that’s been of major concern to the people 

of Saskatchewan for many, many years. It’s the issue of 

government accountability and openness. 

 

(1115) 

 

In the ’80s, we saw the Tory government running rampant with 

little regard for the accountability to the legislature, to the 

people, or to anyone. It was a period of secrecy. It was a time 

when even the Provincial Auditor was constantly denied access 

to government information — information the people had the 

right to know. 

 

It is also a time when the budgets were presented well into the 

fiscal year and special spending warrants were used over and 

over again to circumvent the scrutiny of the legislature. And 

looking at the financial record of that government, one can see 

why the Devine Conservatives were so concerned about letting 

anyone know what they were up to. 

 

In 1991, the situation has improved to some extent. Frankly it 

couldn’t have gotten any worse. But from where I see it, we still 

have a long way to go for complete openness and accountability 

and a complete financial picture. It’s not good enough for the 

members opposite to say that they have a good record in this 

area simply because they’re better than the regime that preceded 

them. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know exactly how the 

government is spending their tax dollars every step of the way. 

It’s simply not good enough when up to 40 per cent of the 

government’s financial activities are set apart from the budgets 

we see in this House and hidden under the Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

The Provincial Auditor himself has professed deep concerns 

about this government’s accounting practices when it comes to 

the use of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) money to operate the government. The days of 

keeping two sets of books, one for line departments and one for 

Crown corporation activities, have got to come to an end and 

we have to have a complete financial statement. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to see the whole picture when it comes 

to government activity, and that’s not the case at the present. 

 

It’s especially true given the important role these entities play at 

budget time. Last year we saw the government use cash from 

the sale of Cameco shares to balance the budget. This year, the 

government dipped heavily into the Liquor and Gaming fund to 

balance the budget. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the government took 

almost four times more money out of this fund than it did last 

year. That’s a big whack of cash, Mr. Speaker, and the people 

of Saskatchewan simply aren’t given the opportunity to 

scrutinize it. 

 

And speaking of the Liquor and Gaming fund, I was just a little 

distressed last night when I watched on the television news to  



326  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

hear that the government now considers the Liquor and Gaming 

fund its very own stabilization fund. It makes one wonder about 

the standards of the government members opposite when 

gambling revenue and liquor sales are considered our security 

for the future. 

 

I’m also concerned about the use of special warrants, one of 

which we learned only about days ago, just prior to the 

resumption of the legislature. It’s starting to look a lot familiar 

to the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now wish to touch on some of the important line 

departments in a little greater detail than I was able to touch on 

yesterday. We heard the minister stand in this House and give 

us a glowing account of increased spending in very important 

government departments such as health care, Education, Social 

Services, and Highways. And again I wish to touch on these as 

well. 

 

But first I want to talk about a department that wasn’t 

mentioned in yesterday’s budget speech, Mr. Speaker. And little 

wonder. The Municipal Affairs department received yet another 

unbelievable cut-back in the budget. I’m sure there were mayors 

and reeves throughout Saskatchewan who are still reeling from 

the continuing gutting of local governments: revenue-sharing 

grants to urban municipalities will fall to under $27 million 

from 43 million; grants to rural municipalities will fall to $20 

million from $32 million last year. 

 

Yes, the government will explain away part of this reduction by 

pointing to the removal of the hospital levy. This is the way the 

NDP put it, Mr. Speaker: take it out of one pocket and pretend 

to put it in another. Local governments have shown this 

government the way when it comes to lean and efficient 

government. With every budget brought down by this 

government, local government leaders have had to learn to be a 

little more creative in order to spare their ratepayers from 

excessive tax hikes or service cuts. 

 

But this year’s budget could be the final nail as far as sparing 

local taxpayers from steep tax hikes or deep service cuts. In fact 

Murray Westby, president of SUMA, said yesterday that 

because of this government’s actions, tax hikes are inevitable 

now. That will more than take care of any cut in the PST for 

municipal taxpayers. Again, Mr. Speaker, the government puts 

the money in one pocket while it takes it out of another. 

 

We see this in other areas as well. Let’s look at education. The 

government claims it is giving our K to 12 schools an $8 

million increase in the coming year. On paper that may be true, 

but let’s look a little deeper. 

 

Last year the government negotiated a new contract with 

Saskatchewan teachers. The cost of the wage increase are borne 

directly by the cash-strapped school boards. So what are these 

costs? Eight million dollars, Mr. Speaker. So essentially what 

the government is doing is helping to cover the cost of its own 

handiwork. There’s no new money for schools. 

 

We’ve just seen six schools slated to be closed in Regina. With 

no new money being spent in this area, I’m sure we can expect  

more schools to close in the future. As others have stated before 

me, many of these schools aren’t being closed for lack of 

students, Mr. Speaker, now it’s a lack of money — pure and 

simple. And this budget doesn’t do anything to cure that. 

 

In fact a new contract for teachers will soon be negotiated. I 

don’t see any money here to help boards cover the cost of the 

coming wage increase. Again students will be the ones left to 

suffer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The story is much the same for our universities. Last year the 

government announced the universities would receive a cut this 

year. Yesterday, the Minister of Finance announced that the cut 

had been cancelled. Obviously that’s good news for our 

university students, but it’s hardly what I’d call a spending 

increase. 

 

This is a government that wants to be looked at as seeing 

towards the future. But if our schools and our universities are 

such a low priority for this government, I’m scared to see the 

future under the NDP. And this illusion, this carrying more 

money, carries on and on. 

 

We’ve heard about a $2.5 billion program to fix our provincial 

highways. Well, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is it’s 

exactly the same budget our highway crews are working with 

now, with a little more sprinkling on top of our potholes, with 

30 million more will be spent in the coming year — only $30 

million. And that only represents 40 per cent of what the 

government takes in in gas taxes and registration fees. 

 

Over the next 10 years, while the government spends its 2.5 

billion, it’ll collect much more than that in surplus gas taxes and 

registration fees. So essentially what they’re saying to 

Saskatchewan residents is to take a good look at their highways 

as they stand today, because that’s about as good as they’re 

going to get. 

 

And that’s simply not good enough, Mr. Speaker, not when 

school buses are travelling longer distances. And it’s not good 

enough when ambulance drivers are telling us they’re 

concerned about transporting the sick and elderly over these 

disgraceful roads. 

 

And what about the sick and elderly, Mr. Speaker. What’s here 

for them? Not much. Overall, the health care budget will climb 

about $16 million, not the $51 million the government claims. 

Most of that increase was spent last year to quell the unrest that 

had cropped up in Saskatchewan. That’s about a 1 per cent 

increase — 1 per cent, when we see people marching in the 

streets against the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s going to take a lot more than money to cure 

what ails the health care system. The system this government 

has set up virtually ensures services in smaller centres will 

eventually close, with most services centralized in the larger 

centres. All people in this province deserve an adequate level of 

health care, and too many are having to go without, Mr. 

Speaker. This 1 per cent increase will do nothing to fix that 

problem. Only a major rethinking of the entire health system 

will be sufficient to let people feel secure again. 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

Yes, it’s true the government spends nearly a third of its budget 

on health care, but that’s meaningless unless the money is 

getting to the people who need it. We need much more of a 

commitment by the government for increases in acute care 

services and long-term care, especially in rural areas. And that 

won’t happen unless the present system and the present funding 

formula are changed. 

 

I’m sure my colleague from Arm River will have much more to 

say on this in the days ahead because I know he is getting as 

many calls from citizens concerned about the government’s 

health care policy today as he ever was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to touch briefly on social services. While 

the member from Humboldt will speak much more in depth in 

this area, there are some things that I wish to point out today. 

By the way, I agree with the Regina Leader-Post, which went 

out of its way to commend my colleague for Humboldt for all 

of her care and work in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the NDP’s promises to rid our province of 

child poverty in its first term, the problem is even worse today. 

Yesterday’s announcement of $13 million for a child action 

plan is welcome news. However I want to point out to the 

members opposite that in many areas of this province there are 

no hot meal programs and so forth. We have to watch for 

poverty in all parts of the province, not only in the cities, 

because poverty is all around us. And unless we take serious 

action against it, the problems of youth crime and child 

prostitution will not be solved. 

 

I hope the government is true to its word that it is now ready to 

tackle these problems. Especially when one looks at the welfare 

numbers. In December 1992, there were 57,199 people on 

social assistance in Saskatchewan. Last year that number was 

down to 81,000. Clearly more has to be done. The fact the 

Social Services department is actually receiving a reduction in 

funding this year, however, doesn’t fill me with a lot of hope. 

 

Let me quote from Lorelee Manning of the Regina council for 

social development. She said, and I quote: 

 

What this budget will continue to do is deduct a portion of 

the child tax benefit from people on social assistance, and 

that should’ve stopped. That’s a federal initiative to fight 

child poverty and the province is taking it back. This 

government is taking it back away from the people most 

vulnerable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the glowing words to the contrary from the 

Minister of Finance, I don’t believe this budget invests in 

people who are still paying taxes that are too high and receiving 

far too vital services for their trouble. 

 

This budget does take a few small steps to where we should be, 

but it’s not nearly enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do of course support parts of the budget. I 

support the PST reduction, but there are many other things I 

simply cannot support. There is much work to be done for our 

people, but judging from their past actions, I have no  

confidence that this government will ever make a true 

investment in the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the minister from 

Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the budget motion be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following substituted: 

 

recognizes the modest tax relief set out in the 

government’s budget but regrets that the government 

continues to impose the highest levels of taxation in 

western Canada; and further regrets that the government 

has failed to show a financial commitment in the areas of 

highways and transportation, municipal government, 

education, health care, and social services; and further 

regrets that the government has again failed to take 

adequate measures to improve the climate for small and 

medium-sized businesses which are the engine for growth 

in a modern economy. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Given the frivolous nature of the 

amendment, we were thinking momentarily of voting it off 

forthwith and getting back to the true amendment. But it might 

not have been thought to have been sporting without a bit of 

warning, so we won’t do that. It momentarily occurred to me 

we might just vote this off right now and get back to the 

motion, but we didn’t do that. 

 

I do want to enter into the debate however, briefly, Mr. Speaker. 

I have been . . . I am the, I am the . . . I think I’m the only 

person who’s been a member of Treasury Board from 1991 

continuously through to 1997. I’ve been a part of each of these 

budgets. 

 

(1130) 

 

I remember the devastation with which we were left by the 

Conservatives in the 1991. I ask myself sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker, what would have happened if the Conservatives . . . 

what would the Conservatives have done with the budget had 

they been re-elected. 

 

My initial thought was there would probably have been a fire 

sale of the Crown corporations. However when we gained a true 

measure of the enormity of the problem, I truly believe that if 

the Devine government had been re-elected, this province 

would probably have defaulted on its obligations. I think we 

were that close to total disaster. It truly was. We had some bad 

moments with the budget. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to give some of the credit where the credit 

is due — to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you may 

recall one of our members, one of the members saying, I’m 

going to support this budget; I think it’s going to defeat me, but  



328  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

I’m going to support this budget for my children and my 

children’s children. I remember that comment being made by 

one of our members. Said it very sincerely. This person was 

prepared to face defeat to deal with what was truly a crisis. 

 

What was so heart-warming, Mr. Speaker, about the process 

was that as difficult an issue as this was for New Democrats, 

who had a great deal of difficulty coming to terms with 

downsizing government — that’s not what we put countless 

hours into the election for — what was so heart-warming for me 

was the reaction of the public. Like so many stoic soldiers, they 

shouldered the load, carried on, accepted deep, deep cuts, some 

of which hurt — hurt a lot. They accepted it. They shouldered 

the load. And today indeed the sun has shone again. 

 

But it was a very difficult period for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I was truly, truly impressed by the extent to 

which Saskatchewan people were prepared to make sacrifices, 

prepared to accept some awfully tough medicine, including all 

of the changes to the health care. I know that it’s been 

controversial. 

 

But I truly believe if members opposite were elected — and I 

think they’re a little ways from that actually; I made some 

comments the other day which suggested they’re politically a 

little ways from it, and I’m not sure they’re quite ready for 

office either —but even if they were elected, I think there would 

be few of the changes in health care which at the end of the day 

they’d change. As critical as they may be, I don’t think they’d 

change a whole lot, what we’ve done in health care. 

 

All of this, the public accept it with a realism, and in fact 

returned this government to office with the largest majority of 

any second term government in the history of the province. 

Now that is a pretty fair record when you consider how deep, 

how deeply we cut the budget. That’s a pretty fair record. It 

speaks not to this government’s political skills, although I like 

to think that we have a few, but I think it speaks more to the 

public acceptance of the need to deal with deficits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was said of Mao Zedong, the Chinese general 

secretary, said of the French Revolution: prior to the French 

Revolution, no one had ever dared found a nation on freedom, 

equality, and fraternity; after the French Revolution, no one 

dared found a government on any other basis. 

 

Our first budget was a little like that. Prior to that budget of 

1992, when we cut so deeply, no one had ever dared truly tackle 

a deficit. All governments paid lip-service to it. No one dared 

do it. 

 

After we did it, Mr. Speaker, governments dared not do 

anything else. Governments which didn’t tackle the deficit were 

defeated. Governments which honestly faced up to the 

difficulties were re-elected. And so somewhat like the French 

Revolution, we changed public attitudes towards deficits in 

Canada. And it happened here in Saskatchewan, something I 

think members of this Assembly and the public of 

Saskatchewan can be truly proud of. 

 

There was a journalist who isn’t always unflatteringly . . .  

unstintingly flattering of the NDP, Paul Martin, who said in a 

column the other day that Saskatchewan is the soul of Canada. I 

think that’s true in many ways. It has been true in many of the 

social movements, Mr. Speaker. It was here in this Assembly 

that Canada’s health system, which is so important to 

Canadians, was born. It was here in this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was here in this room that the tidal change 

in public attitudes towards public debt in Canada occurred. No 

one had ever honestly tackled debt until we did. After we did it, 

no one dared found a budget on any other basis but a realistic 

tackling of debt. Even, I may say, Mr. Speaker, even the 

Liberals eventually came on board. Even the federal Liberals 

have begun to make a bit of a dent in the federal deficit. I think 

that’s a testimony, not as I say entirely to the . . . It’s not only 

the political skills of this government, it’s a testimony to the 

reserve, the deep reserve of good sense that the Saskatchewan 

public have. I was very proud yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I didn’t want to take a very long period of time. I 

just wanted to rise in my place and congratulate the public of 

Saskatchewan. I do so. It goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that 

I’ll be voting against the amendment and in favour of the 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

certainly my great pleasure to rise and speak in support of the 

budget. First of all I would like to thank the finest Finance 

minister in Canada for a very, very good budget yesterday. It 

was just a great news for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Equally important, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the 

many people in the Department of Finance for the many hours 

of work that they did in preparing this budget, and in particular 

the deputy minister, Mr. Jones, and Larry Spannier, and the 

other fine people in the Department of Finance that have 

worked on this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is about investing in people. It’s about 

prosperity and jobs, which increase our quality of life. It’s about 

lower and fairer taxes built on sound financial management. It’s 

about keeping promises. We always said when our financial 

house was in order, we would provide a balanced management 

approach for the people of Saskatchewan. This balance, Mr. 

Speaker, as we outlined a few years back, is a third of the 

so-called surplus dollars going towards debt; a third going 

towards government programs and services; and a third towards 

tax cuts. 

 

Speaking of our debt, Mr. Speaker, we have a very strong 

economy because we have our deficit under control. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the fourth straight budget that we have balanced 

here in Saskatchewan, and we predict three more to come 

before the end of the century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone who has a loan or debt knows what 

interest can do when it gets out of control. And certainly the 

interest here in Saskatchewan over the past number of years has 

been a real millstone around the necks of the people of  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

Saskatchewan. Fortunately interest rates have dropped in recent 

years, but back in 1994-95, Saskatchewan people paid $870 

million annually for interest expenses. Last year it was 790 

million. We are predicting it will be down to 760 million in this 

coming year. And hopefully by the year 2000 we could be 

under $700 million. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we just think what we could do with all that 

money if we had it to spend on hospitals, schools, education, 

roads, and other programs for the people of the province. 

However we have that debt. We inherited it through 

mismanagement by the previous government, but we are headed 

in the right direction. 

 

Speaking of debt, Mr. Speaker, we are very pleased to be able 

to pay down $150 million in our crop insurance program debt 

which will make crop insurance more available and more 

acceptable for the people of Saskatchewan. In fact farmers can 

insure their crops for as little as $1 an acre. 

 

People often ask, well what do we spend the money on, Mr. 

Speaker? Well we have consistently spent one out of three 

dollars on Health — about 33 per cent of our budget goes to 

Health. Nineteen per cent goes to Education. And sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, the next highest consumer of our budget is interest 

costs, which is a total of 15 per cent of our budget. Social 

Services take 10 per cent of our budget, and all the other 

programs, such as Agriculture, Highways and my department, 

consume the other 24 per cent of the budget. So, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s not a lot of room to work around in spreading out these 

dollars, because all of these areas are very important. Another 

third of our surplus budget dollars will go towards government 

programs and services. 

 

And again, we have a sound economy. We have done a great 

job in investing in the people of Saskatchewan. And to prove 

this, Mr. Speaker, we know that business investment in 

Saskatchewan is up 18 per cent; housing starts are up 40 per 

cent; retail sales, up 8 per cent, three times higher than the 

Canadian average; unemployment is 6.6 per cent, the lowest in 

Canada; manufacturing shipments are up 10 per cent. Again, the 

highest in Canada. 

 

We will be spending new dollars on infrastructure and services 

for the Saskatchewan people. We will be spending another $23 

million to municipal infrastructure; $117 million for 

Saskatchewan training system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, jobs are very important and there’s many 

opportunities. We must direct people to where the jobs are, and 

to do this we need training and expertise in a number of areas, 

and we’re working in that direction. 

 

There’ll be $640 million to build an upgrader infrastructure. 

And — this is really important to people in rural areas — $2.5 

billion for roads over the next 10 years. This year alone $200 

million — an 18 per cent increase in Highways’ budget — will 

be spent on roads and highways. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are adding another $57 million to 

our health system. School operating grant is up 22 million over  

the next two years. School capital funding, up 40 per cent, and 

along with university capital grants to purchase equipment and 

technology. 

 

Enhanced government programs give better quality of life and 

lead by example. For an example, we are back-filling federal 

cuts to university operating funds. Mr. Speaker, I find it passing 

strange that the federal government sees fit to spend hundreds 

of million of dollars to register legitimately owned firearms by 

citizens of Canada, and yet they are prepared to take money out 

of important things like education. 

 

Transition funding for the national child benefit program, a 

brainchild of the Saskatchewan government here and the people 

of this province, is important and will receive money. We will 

double the funding for the action plan for children. 

 

For our communities, Mr. Speaker, we will be putting $11 

million into the Canada-Saskatchewan agriculture infrastructure 

program. Community-based health services will receive another 

$11 million. And lottery licence fees are down $4.5 million, 

which means that money will go directly to the sports and 

recreation organizations which are very important to our 

various communities around the province. 

 

We will be directing money, Mr. Speaker, towards things like 

the Western Development Museum, which needs repairs, in 

Saskatoon. We will continue to put another million dollars into 

the 911 emergency phone service. 

 

Our increase of $1 million to RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) services in rural Saskatchewan, which is again very 

important to the people of rural Saskatchewan. And in the 

North, Mr. Speaker, we are very pleased to put another $6 

million into social housing and northern sewer services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final third of the so-called surplus dollars will 

go to tax cuts, and this will encourage growth for tomorrow and 

enhance the well-being of today. And, Mr. Speaker, as you well 

know, since 1992 this government has been offering tax 

reductions and incentives to various businesses, and the people 

as well. 

 

We’ve reduced the income tax rate for small businesses; 

removed sales tax on 1-800 numbers; we’ve reduced the 

manufacturing process tax to 10 per cent. We’ve improved the 

tax benefits for Saskatchewan truckers; and aviation fuel taxes 

dropped from 7 to 3.5 cents a litre. 

 

(1145) 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the new tax cut enticements include an 

investment tax rebate on new and used manufacturing and 

processing equipment, new sales tax rebate for materials used 

for livestock and horticultural facilities. And the list goes on. 

 

Businesses however are not the only ones to receive benefits in 

the way of tax cuts. A few years back we introduced the 

personal income tax cut of up to $300 per family. That will be 

continued. Also education and health tax exemption will be 

extended to medical devices, which are very important to some  



330  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

of those who really use them. 

 

And probably the biggest announcement yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, and the largest commitment to tax reduction was the 

reduction of our E&H (education and health) tax from 9 to 7 in 

’97. 

 

Saskatchewan now has the smallest manufacturing business tax 

rate in Canada. 

 

Our friends opposite often like to compare Saskatchewan with 

Alberta. Well, Mr. Speaker, with yesterday’s budget the effect 

of small business manufacturing tax in Saskatoon, rate would 

be 36 per cent, versus Calgary, where there’s free enterprise, at 

43 per cent. So indeed, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is a better place 

to invest than in Calgary. 

 

Also on a personal basis, Mr. Speaker, a young person in 

Alberta can spend upwards of $3,000 to insure their vehicle, 

compared to around 6 or $700 in Saskatchewan. Alberta doesn’t 

have a sales tax, but they do have health care premiums. Sales 

tax for a family in Saskatchewan with a $50,000 income is 

$715. Health premiums for the same family in tax free . . . sales 

tax-free Alberta is over $800. Obviously the Alberta family is 

paying more than the Saskatchewan family in taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan last year was cited as the best place 

in the world to live, and we certainly agree with that. And that 

is why our population is growing. We have the lowest job rate 

and many other signs to prove that Saskatchewan is the best 

place in the world. 

 

A comparison of taxes and household charges also show that 

Saskatoon is the lowest place in Canada to live — even lower 

than Calgary again, Mr. Speaker. We are very proud of the fact 

that we do not tax things such as children’s clothing, electricity, 

home heating fuel, restaurant meals, and other essential 

services. But we do find that it’s strange that the Liberal Party 

opposite supports the federal Liberal Party in their goal to 

harmonize the sales tax with the provinces. 

 

Under the Liberal harmonization in the Maritime provinces, Mr. 

Speaker, the annual sales tax rates average $1,500 for a family, 

and here in Saskatchewan, 715 — less than half. And perhaps 

the members opposite may wonder why we do not support sales 

tax harmonization. I think it is very obvious when our tax rates 

are half of what the people that do experience harmonization 

have to pay. 

 

People of Saskatchewan have worked together; they have stuck 

together. And following the very irresponsible and senseless, 

runaway spending of the 1980s, today we are proud to reap the 

benefits of five years of tough choices, of cut-backs, of doing 

more with less, and of sacrifices. The people of Saskatchewan 

have earned and deserve the many positive aspects of this 

budget, the most noticeable being again the sustainable sales tax 

cut from 9 to 7 in ’97, a tax cut that every resident of 

Saskatchewan will benefit from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly comment on the  

Environment and Resource Management budget highlights. 

And again I would like to use this opportunity to thank the very 

find people in the department. I have never worked with such a 

more dedicated and hard-working group of people, ranging 

from the office staff to the environmental protection people, the 

fire fighters, conservation officers, the people that run our 

parks, and many other aspects of this department. They are a 

great group of people doing a great job for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be spending an extra $490,000 on 

inspection and regulating funding for the environment. Our 

environment is very important, and we want to ensure that it’s 

managed and looked after in the best way possible. 

 

Big game crop damage. A prevention program will be 

reinstated. It was slated for cancellation, however we’ve 

recognized that the issue of big game damage is very real, 

especially the last two years, Mr. Speaker, and that $325,000 

will remain in that budget. And we’ll be talking later in this 

session about the big game damage program which we have 

initiated, and there’s very good, positive results coming from 

that. 

 

Forest fire suppression. Forest fires are a thing that happens 

every summer here in Saskatchewan. And to combat this 

natural phenomena, which does cost millions of dollars in the 

loss of timber and impact on the wildlife, we will be increasing 

the fire suppression budget by $5 million. More recently we’ve 

been able to take the opportunity to purchase two planes for 

fire-fighting purposes. They cost $7.2 million. They are Canada 

Air CL-215s. They will be very useful in the upcoming fire 

season and future years as well. 

 

Probably one of the most important, and things that I am 

certainly proud of in our budget, is an increase in the capital 

spending for our provincial park systems. We’ve gained $1.7 

million, Mr. Speaker, for our infrastructure replacement in our 

parks. And with 2.4 million visitors using our parks annually, 

again virtually everybody in Saskatchewan will benefit from 

this expenditure. It’ll create jobs, provide recreational 

opportunities, and preserve our wonderful park system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  All in all, Mr. Speaker, this is a good news 

budget. The people of Saskatchewan throughout this province 

were talking about the various aspects of this budget which will 

make their lives better, make the province of Saskatchewan a 

better place to live in. And we will continue to be the best place 

in the world to live. And it is certainly with great pleasure that I 

support this budget and look forward to the debates that will 

continue. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and let me say at 

the outset how happy I am to be joining in this budget debate. 

And I want to say at the outset, because it’s been some time 

since I actually made a speech outside of question period or 

estimates in the House, how proud I am to represent the very  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

fine and hard-working people of Saskatoon Mount Royal, my 

riding. I’m very pleased to have the honour to come to this 

place to represent my neighbours. And I think they will be 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, with what we have done in this budget. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, very briefly, looking back to 1991 

when I was first elected to the legislature, many people looked 

at the problems we had in our province and many people said, 

Mr. Speaker, that the province should declare bankruptcy, 

because we were in such bad financial circumstances that 

people didn’t believe that we’d ever be able to get out of them. 

 

And I remember the tough decisions that had to be made at that 

time. They were tough, and some of them were depressing, and 

many of them were regrettable. But as the member from Regina 

said earlier this morning, they were decisions that had to be 

taken so that we could arrive at the point that we’re at today, 

which is a point where we have a good budget, a positive 

budget, a budget that will bring us more jobs, more money for 

social programs, less taxes, and less debt. And who can argue 

with that, Mr. Speaker? More jobs, better social programs, less 

tax, less debt — not bad. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think this is a budget that has 

in it, vision and action — vision for the future; actions being 

taken today which will ensure that we have a positive future. 

 

I want to quote verbatim, a report that was on CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) at 4 o’clock yesterday afternoon, 

contrasting the New Democratic budget here in Saskatchewan 

with the Liberal budget in Newfoundland. 

 

CBC had this to say: 

 

It is budget day in two provinces. In Newfoundland the 

news is dismal — 1,700 public sector workers will lose 

their jobs and there is no sign of a tax break for one of the 

poorest, most highly taxed provinces in the country. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the picture is a lot brighter though. There 

is more money for health, education, and social programs, 

and some tax relief as well. The most surprising 

announcement is a cut to the provincial sales tax. Midnight 

tonight it drops from 9 per cent to 7. Universities will not 

only not be cut, the government is back-filling all of the 

federal cuts to those institutions. School boards will also 

not be cut, and instead they are going to receive $8 million 

more in operating expenses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more jobs, more money for social programs, less 

tax, less debt. That’s the record of this government; that’s our 

commitment. 

 

I want to take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to contrast that kind 

of record with the record of the Liberals, who are of course in 

power in Ottawa. I think a recent headline in The Hill Times, 

which is a newspaper that covers Parliament Hill, Mr. Speaker, 

says it all. It says this: “In power, Grits sing different tune.” 

 

And how true that is, Mr. Speaker, because they always say one 

thing in opposition, something quite different in government.  

We’ve seen the Liberals in power in Ottawa opposing the 

Mulroney agenda when Mulroney was in power, Mr. Speaker, 

saying that they would do things differently on free trade, on 

the GST, which they said they’d get rid of; on social programs 

and on jobs. 

 

And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you what they did, 

in the words of Brian Mulroney, who said they’re doing a better 

job of carrying out the Mulroney PC agenda than we did, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what they’re doing. 

 

The Liberals here talk about . . . oh, they’re always saying we 

should have more money for health care, Mr. Speaker. And this 

government does put more money into health care. But what do 

they do? I tell you what they do. They cut $7 billion out of 

health, education, and social services. That’s what they do. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Million or billion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Billion with a B, not million with an M. 

 

And this year, Mr. Speaker, to contrast Liberals with New 

Democrats, the Liberals in Ottawa, who last year took $47 

million out of our health care budget in Saskatchewan, this year 

will take another 53 million out — $100 million lost to health 

care by the Liberals in two years. 

 

What are we going to do, Mr. Speaker? We’re going to put that 

money back in, and more so. We’re going to back-fill every 

Liberal cut in health care, in education, and social services, and 

then we’re going to put some more money in on top of that, 

because we believe in public medicare, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to remind the Liberal Party of something that hasn’t 

been raised in this House lately, or at all, perhaps. And that is, 

the Prime Minister, who of course is a Liberal, set up a . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Are you sure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, or a Conservative. It reminds me of 

what my mother said when I asked her what is the difference 

between the Liberals and Conservatives. And you know what 

she said? She said, well when one’s in, the other’s out. And 

there is no other difference because the Liberals govern like the 

Conservatives governed, except maybe they’re even worse, Mr. 

Speaker. If it’s possible, they might even be worse. 

 

But I want to tell the Liberals that the Prime Minister of this 

country set up a national forum on health care a few years ago 

to advise the Liberal government what they should be doing in 

health care, and that committee was chaired by the Prime 

Minister. And the Prime Minister has been strangely silent, Mr. 

Speaker, since that committee reported, because you know what 

they reported? 

 

That committee reported that the Liberal cuts to health care 

should stop. That committee said that the level of funding for 

health care from the federal government should be frozen at the 

‘96-97 amount. Which would mean, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Liberals would have to put in $53 million in this new fiscal year 

into health care in Saskatchewan and they’d have to put big  



332  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

amounts of money into the health care budgets of every 

province. 

 

But they’re not going to do it. They are not going to take the 

advice of their own national forum that was chaired by the 

Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker. And I say that that is shameful, 

Mr. Speaker. And what we get from the Liberals instead is 

opposition to public medicare. And I’m going to get into that in 

a minute. They have a long-standing opposition to medicare — 

and further cuts to the health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party will do everything it can to 

convince people that well, if they were in power things would 

be different. And I have to say, don’t listen to what they say, 

look at what they do, Mr. Speaker — what they do. 

 

When the New Democrats proposed medicare originally, they 

opposed it. New Democrats will propose public medicare; 

Liberals oppose. New Democrats will build public medicare; 

Liberals will cut public medicare. Liberals will gut medicare, 

Mr. Speaker; that’s where they stand. And that’s the difference 

between the Liberal Party in Canada and in Saskatchewan, and 

the New Democrats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1200) 

 

And I want to say that I was surprised to see the member from 

Arm River get up the other day and say this in this House, he 

said: 

 

Our leader (referring to Dr. Melenchuk) is a strong 

proponent of one-tier health system . . . We do not believe 

in cash register medicine, (he said.) 

 

That’s what he said. But I want to refer the House, Mr. Speaker, 

to what Dr. Melenchuk said. This is in the Leader-Post, 

November 27, 1996. He said this, “Private surgical clinics 

should be permitted to open in the province.” That’s what he 

said. So that the Liberals in the House say we should have 

public medicare, one-tier medicine. Dr. Melenchuk, outside the 

House says no, we should have private medicine. 

 

Now the Liberals . . . I want to say something else that Dr. 

Melenchuk said. He said, private hospitals would not be 

two-tiered, he said. It’s a safety valve, he said. 

 

And of course on November 27, 1996 in the Leader-Post, he 

was talking about private clinics delivering the same service as 

hospitals and making a profit. And you know what he said 

about that, Mr. Speaker? He said, “I don’t have a problem with 

that.” That’s what he said. He said we should privatize the 

hospitals or at least have private hospitals competing with the 

public hospitals. 

 

And then the member from Arm River says that we’re 

misleading people when we say they’re in favour of two-tier 

private medicine. Now who do we believe? Do we believe the 

Leader of the Liberal Party or do we believe the member from 

Arm River? Because they don’t have their facts straight and 

they don’t have their stories straight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to mention something else. This government introduced 

a Bill in the House last spring which outlawed two-tier 

medicine. It was called The Health Facilities Licensing Act. 

And that Bill was also put before this House in 1995 but not 

passed by my predecessor Minister of Health. And when that 

Bill was introduced in the spring of 1995 outlawing two-tier 

medicine, do you know what Dr. Melenchuk said? He said this, 

it was “. . . a significant threat to the fundamental principles of 

freedom and choice.” That’s what he said. 

 

Because his idea of freedom and choice, Mr. Speaker, is the 

freedom to go without medical care if you don’t have a lot of 

money to pay for it. That’s the kind of freedom that they have 

in the United States where 40 million Americans have no health 

care coverage. Is that our idea of freedom? No, it is not our idea 

of freedom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now returning to the member from Arm River who says he 

doesn’t like two-tiered medicine. On STV (SaskWest 

Television), May 1, 1996, he said this: “If there are people that 

are prepared to pay, then I think we have to let them pay,” he 

said. 

 

Now I might add the Conservative leader chimed in at that point 

and said this the same day, if people want to and are prepared to 

pay for the services, why wouldn’t you allow it? 

 

Well I’ll tell you why we won’t allow it, Mr. Speaker. Because 

our vision for health care is that everybody in our province is 

equally entitled to health care services regardless of how much 

money they have, Mr. Speaker. And we are not going to allow 

either the Liberals or the Conservatives to bring in a system 

whereby you get better service or faster service if you have 

more money. We’re not going to allow it. 

 

And then we have the member from Arm River saying in the 

House on March 17 that they want to repeal The Health 

Districts Act because, as they said in the House yesterday, they 

try to pretend they want more democracy and local control in 

health care. But what they’re proposing, Mr. Speaker, is to do 

away with 30 democratically elected health boards and replace 

those boards with 450 boards, as we had before, all appointed 

by the Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

And I want to refer members, Mr. Speaker, to the Hansard for 

March 17 where at page 226, in the first column, the member 

from Arm River said four times in one paragraph that the 

members of health boards should all be appointed. I don’t think 

the people of the province are going to accept that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to take issue with something else the Liberals have 

said, and this fits in with what they’ve said about the failure of 

the Liberal government in Ottawa to support health care, and 

that is, they say that the federal government has no obligation to 

support Canada’s medicare system. That’s how far the Liberals 

have gone, Mr. Speaker. And on March 17 the Liberal from 

Arm River said: 

 

(As) Our leader has . . . stated, Mr. Speaker . . . the 

provision of health care in Saskatchewan is a provincial  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

obligation . . . 

 

So in other words they say, don’t worry about the Liberals 

cutting health care and the Liberals gutting health care and the 

Liberals being opposed to public medicare — that’s your 

problem, they say. And we say, no. We say Canadians, from 

one end of the country to another, should be able to look to the 

federal government, even if the Liberals are in power, to 

support the medicare system. 

 

And the Prime Minister’s national forum, Mr. Speaker, which 

the Prime Minister is not listening to, said that that would mean 

that in Saskatchewan this year the Liberals should put in 

another $53 million. But they’re not going to contribute that 

money, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately. 

 

But I want to turn now from the fairly dismal, and I have to say 

disappointing, record of the Liberals in office, to something that 

I think is much more positive, Mr. Speaker, and that is what has 

been announced in the budget of yesterday that was presented 

by the Minister of Finance. 

 

And I want to provide the members and anybody watching with 

a contrast because, unlike the Liberals, who are cutting health 

care spending, health spending in the budget that was presented 

yesterday will see an additional $56.5 million of new money go 

into health. Because we are on our way to achieving our goal — 

not the Liberal goal of getting rid of medicare, but our goal of 

the NDP — to having a sustainable health system. 

 

And I want to recognize, Mr. Speaker, the tremendous effort 

that has gone into getting us where we are today. It has not been 

easy to get the health system on a secure and stable foundation, 

but we’re there. And we’ve achieved this despite the cuts of the 

federal Liberals to our social programs. We’ve kept our health 

system strong while at the same time we’ve been engaged in a 

tremendous effort to get the province’s finances in order. 

 

Last year we added $40 million new money to help districts 

reduce debt and manage the pace of change. Now we have the 

opportunity to do even more. There’s more funding to 

strengthen every part of the health care system. Funding to 

district health boards, Mr. Speaker, is going to go up by more 

than $50 million, which will be approximately a 4 per cent 

increase — something we haven’t seen for a long time; 

something you won’t see, by the way, in Liberal and 

Conservative provinces. 

 

The new funding will allow us to do several things. It will allow 

us to secure and sustain hospitals and nursing homes, to enable 

that home care and nursing homes are available to everybody 

who needs them, to strengthen rural emergency health services, 

and to continue to build more effective wellness programs, 

home care, and community services, and also to improve 

workplace stability in the health system. 

 

And I want to say a few words about that, Mr. Speaker, because 

30,000 of our friends and neighbours in Saskatchewan work in 

our hospitals, nursing homes, home care, and community health 

services. And those workers have raised some issues during the 

last few years. They’ve experienced some insecurity and  

changes in the working environment. They experience a lot of 

pressure on the job, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes they have felt 

unable to provide the kind of caring, compassionate services 

they want to give to people. And we want this situation to 

improve. 

 

We want health workers to be able to do the kind of job they 

want to do, Mr. Speaker. We want them to give us their ideas 

and suggestions, to stop worrying about their jobs. We want to 

increase funding in the hospitals and nursing homes and the 

home care and community services. And at the end of the day 

we want the health care workers to give people the kind of 

caring and compassionate care that they want to give. Overall 

therefore, we’ll be increasing funding to hospitals by about 

$22.3 million and we’ll be increasing funding for nursing 

homes by $10.9 million or about 4.4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue doing what we’ve been 

doing to make our medicare system sustainable, to keep the 

system that we pioneered in this province and that we have. 

That’s our vision. And our vision is not going to be deterred by 

any federal Liberal cuts to medicare. And our vision is not 

going to be deterred by what the Leader of the Liberal Party 

says and what the Liberals say in this House about getting rid of 

public medicare and setting up a two-tier system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we simply will not allow that to take place and 

neither will the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We’re going to increase funding to health 

care to sustain and support quality health services in every 

corner of the province, whether you’re talking about specialized 

surgeries or MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in Regina and 

Saskatoon or primary health services in Buffalo Narrows and 

Beauval. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 30,000 people that 

work in our health system are excellent people. We have good 

doctors, good nurses, and good support staff. And day after day 

we listen to the Liberals say in the public that our health system 

is in crisis. That’s not what the Prime Minister says. That’s not 

what people are telling us from all over the place. 

 

But I want to put this challenge to the Liberals. If the Liberals 

say that we don’t have a good health care system, as they like to 

say to people because they engage in fearmongering about 

health care, as they always have, I put this challenge to them: 

you get up in this House and tell us and tell the people of the 

province where in the world they have a better health care 

system than we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’d like to hear them say that, Mr. Speaker. 

And they won’t get up and say that anybody has a better health 

care system, because there is no such place. 

 

I was shocked when one of them got up in the last session and 

said to this House, and to the people of the province, that she  



334  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

had some concerns about our health care system and why didn’t 

we provide compassionate care like they did in the United 

States. 

 

Now imagine, Mr. Speaker, anybody making that kind of 

statement. I got up and I mentioned to the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Liberal who said that the United States 

system was better, what about the 40 million people that have 

no health care coverage? What about the fact that health care 

costs are the biggest cause of personal bankruptcy in the United 

States? What about that? And that’s the kind of system that the 

Liberal Party thinks is compassionate? 

 

Does this explain why, when medicare was introduced, the 

Liberals opposed it so strenuously? Does this explain why the 

Liberals voted against The Health Facilities Licensing Act that 

outlaws private medicare? Does this explain the Liberals saying 

that they agree with the federal cuts to the health care budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these questions must be answered by the Liberal 

Party. If the Liberal Party hopes to regain any credibility with 

the people of the province, the Liberal Party is going to have to 

reconcile its stand in favour of private, two-tier medicine with 

some of the rhetoric that we hear in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to say to the members opposite that there is 

nowhere in this country and nowhere in this world where you 

will get better health care treatment than right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That’s been the case in the past, 

that’s the case today, and that will be the case in the future, Mr. 

Speaker, as long as we never, ever, put our health care system 

in the hands of people that advocate private health care. It 

should never happen. 

 

(1215) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  And I feel confident, Mr. Speaker, that it 

won’t happen. Because the people of this province, my 

neighbours in Saskatoon Mount Royal, are going to have a look 

at this budget, people from all across the province — city, rural, 

northern, southern — and they’re going to say, what are the 

Liberals complaining about? This budget gives us more money 

for health care, more money for education, more money for 

social services, less tax, less debt. And I don’t know why, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberals are opposed to this budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  To introduce guests, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, my very 

efficient constituency assistant, Loretta Ritchie, and her friend, 

Deanna Armbruster, whose family are constituents of mine  

from the fine constituency of Saltcoats. I would ask the 

members present to please welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to say in closing 

that I recently put out a newsletter in my constituency, and in it 

I had excerpts from a new book called Life Before Medicare: 

Canadian Experiences about the hardship that people had 

before we had our medicare system. And also in that book, here 

in my newsletter, is some information about the current United 

States experience. 

 

Now the Liberals are fond of advocating a U.S. (United States), 

two-tier-style medicare system. I want to read a letter into the 

record, Mr. Speaker, that I’d put into my newsletter, and it says 

this – it’s from Neville Nankivell, an American, and he says: 

 

As an American and a survivor of this system, let me 

enlighten those Canadians so inclined (to the U.S. system). 

 

I paid Blue Cross and Blue Shield premiums for many 

years. In 1984, I was diagnosed with cancer and as a result 

had a kidney removed. This procedure cost me personally 

$42,000 over and above the amount paid by Blue Cross, 

totalling $160,000. I was then refused further health 

insurance due to what was described as a risk factor. 

 

As a result I now have no insurance, no job and no money. 

My only hope is to survive 10 years when at age 65, I shall 

be eligible for (U.S. senior’s benefit) . . . which in itself 

only allows partial coverage. 

 

Please let the word go out to those Canadians who hearken 

to the propaganda of the medical lobby, (and he could have 

added the Liberal party) be it in the U.S. or in Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the sort of system that the Liberal 

Party fought for in 1962. That’s the sort of system you have if 

you listen to what the Liberal Party says today. And I can see 

them protesting. All I would do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

The member says don’t talk about 1962. 

 

Well then let’s talk about 1995 then, Mr. Speaker, where the 

current Liberal leader, Dr. Melenchuk, had this to say: “Private 

surgical clinics should be permitted to open in the province,” he 

said. 

 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

Let’s talk about 1996, where the member from Arm River, the 

Liberal member, said, if people want to pay, then I think we 

have to let them pay. That’s what they said in 1996. Or further: 

“. . . it’s a provincial duty to fund health care in this province.” 

No money from the federal government, he says. 

 

Let’s have a look at what the Leader of the Liberal Party said 

when we outlawed private medicine. He said . . . This is what 

he says to outlawed private medicine and U.S.-style Medicare, 

Mr. Speaker. He says it’s “ a significant threat to the 

fundamental principles of freedom and choice.” 

 

Well I don’t care, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the Liberal 

record, if you’re talking about 1962 or 1995 or 1997; the 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education said it the other day — a 

Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. And they will never change, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  But as long as we’re on this side of the 

House, we’re going to have the vision to take our system 

forward and we’re going to have the dream that everybody is 

entitled to medicare regardless of their income. 

 

And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, with a quote from Joel 

Barker, who said this. He said: 

 

Vision without action is merely a dream. Action without 

vision just passes the time. But vision plus action can 

change the world. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is my pleasure to speak on the budget, and I want to commend 

the Minister of Finance for the budget, as well as the Premier, 

and of course all of my colleagues. And I don’t think that the 

amendment this morning by the House Leader — I see he’s 

kind of chuckling himself; he’s sort of chuckling himself — 

was a serious amendment. I don’t think that he really believes 

that his amendment is in step with where Saskatchewan people 

are at. 

 

At any rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to especially thank the 

people of Saskatchewan for their sacrifices over the years, and 

secondly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we’ve always 

made it clear that we made some very tough choices. But with 

the support which was evident in 1995 in the election, the 

support of Saskatchewan people, they didn’t believe, the 

Saskatchewan people did not believe, that you could cut taxes, 

as the Liberals were promoting, and have an 8 per cent growth 

rate every year, every single year. And they kept erasing the 

figures and putting new figures in. The Saskatchewan people 

didn’t buy it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of knocking on a lot of 

doors in my constituency this past fall, and of talking to a lot of 

my constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the  

commitments that were in the budget, investing in people, 

enhancing programs for improving the quality of life, and 

giving some tax relief were the priorities — in that balanced 

way — were the priorities that people told me at the door were 

their priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the best . . . this my ninth year in this 

Assembly and this is the eighth budget that I’ve had the 

pleasure of, well I guess the pleasure of hearing, because it is a 

pleasure to be here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over those eight budgets, there have been some 

times when there were some faces that were pretty long, and 

some down times. Yesterday was not one of those times. There 

was a different mood in the Assembly yesterday and outside, 

than I have seen in any other budget, although we saw some 

indication of that kind of mood changing in the last budget or 

two. 

 

It was an indication that the sacrifices and the hard work has 

paid off, where we are able to continue investing in the 

economic development and the economic activity and the jobs 

for people, enhancing the quality of life, lowering the taxes, and 

of course continuing with that theme of sound fiscal 

management. 

 

We saw this morning where the opposition would want to spend 

another half a billion dollars and even cut more taxes, and I 

don’t know how the numbers will add up. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t believe the mood out there 

yesterday. Last evening, last evening, because I knew I was 

going to speaking today, I made a point of watching all of the 

TV stations, listening to the radio stations. And, Mr. Speaker, 

here’s a bit of a sampling of what I heard on the news last night. 

And I was channel flipping to make sure that I caught all the 

stations. 

 

I saw Michael Rushton say, and I quote, “The government 

accomplished their goal of financial stability.” That was a direct 

quote from Michael Rushton. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Yes, good for the people. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Good for the people is right. That’s what I 

said. That’s what we’ve been saying. Because in Saskatchewan 

we do it together. 

 

Lloyd Boutilier, chamber of commerce, was quoted as saying 

— I took notes as he was speaking — he said, a very good 

budget, very positive, good for business, best budget in a long 

time. And then he referred to the E&H reductions, he referred to 

the PST cut, the tax credit, and so on. 

 

University students. University students said they appreciate the 

investment in education. That’s what university students said 

last night on the news. 

 

Mr. Harrison from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) said, a very good budget, very positive. Very 

positive, he said. The Regina mayor said he is not unhappy at  



336  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

all with the budget. Dr. Wells, University of Regina, said, a 

positive budget, the best budget in a decade. And the university 

are saying they will reconsider their tuition fee increases. 

 

I was trying to find a group that is unhappy. I couldn’t do that. 

Casey Davis, chamber of commerce . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  No, just the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Well just the Liberals. Just the Liberals. Even 

the third party leader wasn’t unhappy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Casey Davis, chamber of commerce, pleased that the 

government is responsive to business. A merchant at Southland 

Mall here in Regina said, quote, “This will help my business.” 

 

Chair of the Regina Health Board said, the good news, we’ll be 

able to manage well; in the Regina Health Board, we’ll be able 

to manage well. 

 

Now I realize that the opposition members view the elected 

health boards as puppets, and I’ll speak to that in a few 

moments. But the Chair said, the Chair said, we’ll be able to 

manage well. 

 

Dan Kelly, Canadian Federation of Independent Business said, 

“there will be significant new jobs created based on the 

budget.” 

 

Lorilee Manning, representing poverty and women’s groups 

said, “they’ve targeted money to the needy families.” She was 

on a panel last night. She said, “a good beginning, in fact I 

applaud this good beginning.” Her worry . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  But . . . 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Yes, but, is right. Her worry is that the federal 

Liberals will not put their money there for the child benefit. 

That’s what she said. 

 

Barb Byers, Saskatchewan Federation of Labour said, “a very 

good budget, the best budget in 15 years.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t go into all the articles about the 

headlines. Star-Phoenix: “Budget recognizes province’s 

sacrifices,” “Budget shows promise,” “Province’s priorities in 

the right place,” “Child benefit scheme welcomed.” If we had 

some federal help, it’d even be better. “Funds will help 

exploited children.” All the things that they have been calling 

for. “Initiatives draw praise.” 

 

One could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. But these views, the 

views that I’ve talked about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the 

various perspectives, from the Federation of Independent 

Business, to the chamber, to poverty, to women’s groups, to 

university presidents, to small business, to students, everyone 

would have to agree, I think, that that’s a pretty good 

cross-section of the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Those comments, the only people standing alone are the 

Liberals, which is why they didn’t ask one question yesterday  

about the budget. They didn’t ask one question. At least the 

Tories were asking about the PST. They took credit for it, 

which is kind of funny. As my colleague from Redberry says, 

that the Tories had everything to do with the PST going from 7 

to 9 per cent and absolutely nothing to do with the PST going 

from 9 to 7 per cent. And that’s exactly right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  I thank the member from Redberry for that 

piece of wisdom, because that is very true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but those views that I quoted from, a cross-section 

of public opinion, are all positive and they’re hopeful and 

they’re optimistic. Mr. Speaker, that’s the Saskatchewan way. 

These were examples of people dealing with reality out in their 

communities, wherever they . . . whatever group they represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those comments, I think, help give people a sense 

of hope. They speak to the sense of opportunity to community 

and they sort of foster and convey us a positive mood in the 

province. Mr. Speaker, even the national press — and there’s 

been lots of national press; yes, I watched the TV for a long 

time last night — the national press was very positive too. And 

the reason they were positive about the Saskatchewan budget is 

because they were comparing the Saskatchewan budget — the 

balanced approach of program enhancement, tax relief, and 

money towards the debt; that balanced, fair approach — to what 

the provincial Liberals are doing in their provinces and to what 

the federal Liberals are doing nationally. 

 

(1230) 

 

And of course the House Leader of the opposition talking this 

morning about job losses . . . in today’s paper we see that 1,200 

job losses in Newfoundland, Liberal Newfoundland. In fact it 

said on TV last night, 1,600 job losses in Liberal 

Newfoundland. 

 

Well no wonder he didn’t make any comparisons to the Liberal 

provinces when comparing our job record. He had to pick a 

Manitoba or an Alberta example where he had the facts all, he 

had the facts all mixed up. But that’s another point. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we’ve done it in a way that’s 

balanced and fair, and not like the federal Liberals. And I’ll talk 

about that in a minute. 

 

What we’re trying to do is strengthen families. Good families 

make strong communities and vice versa. We’re trying to 

strengthen communities. And I’ll give a few examples in a 

minute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unlike the federal Liberals . . . And you would have to, any 

objective person would have to acknowledge — I know the 

minister . . . the member from Melville will agree with this; he’s 

a fair person — will have to acknowledge that by the federal 

government eliminating the Canada Assistance Plan, they have 

removed a 30-year guarantee of five basic rights for low income 

people. I know that the member from Melville would 

acknowledge that. 



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

They’ve taken 7 billion, the federal Liberals, $7 billion out of 

human service programs, as was pointed out by the Minister of 

Health. They’ve put back into child poverty, maybe the middle 

of next year; we haven’t seen that yet. They cancelled their 

national day care program, so who knows about this one. Taken 

out 700 . . . $7 billion and they’re willing to put back 600 

million, which is one-thirteenth of what they’ve taken out — 

one thirteenth of what they’ve taken out. 

 

Now you would not see that as supporting low income people. 

And we know that in the last four years the number of families 

and children living in poverty in Canada during the regime of 

Mr. Chrétien has doubled. Family poverty has doubled, has 

doubled in the last four years under that regime. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got no transportation policy 

nationally. Then they’ve got the nerve — no national 

transportation policy, the only country in the western world 

without a national transportation policy — they’ve got the nerve 

to criticize a 2.5 billion provincial transportation initiative. I 

don’t know where they get off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Over 10 years. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Over 10 years. Yes, well what is the federal 

. . . Table your phone calls to the federal government asking for 

their national transportation policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve pulled out of social housing. They’ve 

abandoned first nations — $50 million increase cost to this 

province by the federal Liberals abandoning their commitment, 

their constitutional guarantee to first nations on social 

assistance. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, who is dismantling Canada and contributing to 

the absolute erosion and dismantling of all the social programs 

that have defined this country over the years as the greatest 

country in the world to live in? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing I take exception to is the 

misinformation — if I can say it that way — the misinformation 

that the Opposition House Leader was conveying to the House. 

I think it wasn’t done intentional; I’m not suggesting that. I 

think it just is such poor research that they’re getting from Dr. 

Melenchuk that they need to hire someone who is qualified in 

research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it keeps talking about out-migration. Well there’s 

a chart in the budget that is factual that in fact shows that 

in-migration has occurred for the last 14 quarters, the last 14 

quarters, so that we now have 1.024 million people. So, Mr. 

Speaker, migration is back into Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He also says that we do not have a clue, he says that we do not 

have a clue in how to create jobs. How does that explain the 

fact that we’ve got the lowest unemployment rate in Canada? 

He says it’s explained by the fact that everybody is moving out. 

Well, they’re moving back, Mr. Speaker — 6.2 per cent, I 

believe . . . 6.6 per cent. 

 

And he talks about how well Manitoba is doing. Their  

unemployment rate is over 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Alberta’s 

rate is not even as low as ours, Mr. Speaker. And he hasn’t even 

mentioned any of the Liberal provinces. Mr. Speaker, I 

understand why, because as I said, Newfoundland has just laid 

off either 12 or 1,600 people, or will over the next two years. 

But we’re not about to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then the House Leader talked about low paying 

jobs, the one’s that we’ve created have been low paying jobs. 

That’s not true to start with. But then he also then in the next 

breath was criticizing us about our labour policies where we’re 

trying to give benefits to people working part time and to bring 

everyone up through a better minimum wage increase and so 

on. They oppose all of that. 

 

On the one hand they try to have it both ways — criticize us for 

the kind of jobs we’re creating and then well we’re trying to lift 

people up, and then attack those policies that would in fact lift 

people up. So I don’t understand where they’ve coming from. 

 

He also talked about, and I have to counter this, he talked about 

the no-commitment to education. Well he clearly wasn’t 

watching the news last night, because that’s not what the 

students were saying and that’s not what the presidents of the 

universities were saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And he also talked about the social assistance case-loads going 

up. Again that is poor research because the social assistance 

case-loads have gone up in this province. Everybody knows that 

is willing to be objective, because of the federal government 

offloading on status Indians, and secondly on the massive cuts 

— four cuts by that federal Liberal government in the last four 

years to the UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) 

program. Everybody knows that, which has dumped people 

back onto the social assistance case-loads in every province. No 

province is happy about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this doom and gloom that we heard yesterday 

from the Opposition House Leader, and this morning, I know 

that it embarrassed some of his colleagues. I know there were 

some announcements in the budget where the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena and North Battleford were applauding, 

were clapping. And I really respect that. I appreciate that. I 

respect that because they were willing to . . . well they want to 

get re-elected, for one thing, and they were willing to at least be 

fair about the budget. 

 

And the member I think lost all credibility though when he 

started talking about this out-migration, which is not the case 

any more. He talked about Manitoba’s job creation rate which is 

24 times higher than Saskatchewan. That is nonsense. That just 

isn’t true. They talked about the roads and no commitment to 

the roads, to our transportation system. 

 

I think what really though, Mr. Speaker, I have to comment on 

— and I know this was alluded to by the Minister of Health this 

morning — where the Liberals continue to say that the health 

boards, the elected health boards, are puppets of this 

government. I can’t think of anything more offensive to say to 

Saskatchewan people and communities, that electing people to 

represent them, that they’re puppets of the provincial  



338  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

government. 

 

As the Premier pointed out yesterday, one of the members in 

the . . . the elected members on the Regina Health District is the 

Liberal Party president of Saskatchewan. I wouldn’t presume to 

say that she was a puppet of the Liberal Party. She’s elected by 

Regina constituents. And I think if you don’t respect the fact 

that elected . . . people have a right to elect their representatives, 

and then you call them puppets of the government, that says 

something about your view of democratic elections. So I think 

that . . . I hope they quit doing that. 

 

The other thing is, that perhaps explains the reason why the new 

Liberal leader would fire all of these people, which is what he’s 

saying. Because he says that you need more expertise and 

understanding than ordinary people can give. And I heard one 

of the members says from their seat this morning that the reason 

Dr. Melenchuk is so qualified is because doctors know the most 

about health care. 

 

Certainly doctors know a lot about medicine, but I wouldn’t say 

that they know the most about health care necessarily. But 

collectively, everybody coming together, is what has built a 

good health care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, one more point about the 

Opposition House Leader’s comments is he says that — I heard 

him say this last night on TV — he said that at 2 per cent there 

was no proof that a 2 per cent reduction in the PST would result 

in more jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member:  He didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  That’s the essence of what he said. I’m 

paraphrasing, but that is what he said. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Oh, no, no, no, that was another person. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Yes, he did. I took notes at the time. Then he 

went on to say, in the next breath, that the Liberals were calling 

for a reduction in the PST in 1995 because it would create jobs. 

 

So where does he stand on that issue? Where does he stand on 

that issue? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the thing I found the most strange about what they 

. . . And he’s the only one that’s spoken, so he’s the only one 

that I can draw any comments from because nobody else has 

spoken because there’s not much they can say in a negative way 

about the budget. 

 

But what I found strangest of all is what he said about health 

care — in this sense, pretending he was interested and 

concerned about health care. He criticized this province, the 

provincial government, for back-filling 100 per cent of the 

Liberal cuts, and then adding 51.3 million, which is a 5.2 per 

cent increase over the approved budget last year. Yet he had the 

gall to defend the Liberal cuts in the first place. 

If there’s two parties in the health care — I know the member 

from North Battleford will understand and agree with this — if 

there’s two parties in the health care system contributing to the 

money, to the revenue, how can you criticize one party that 

back-fills the cuts of the other and then adds some more, but 

then not criticize the party that actually makes the cuts? I fail to 

understand that. 

 

So this goofiness, I think, is why nobody was quoting from his 

speech last night. I flipped around on all the stations to see if 

anybody was quoting from the Opposition House Leader’s 

speech and nobody was quoting from it because it didn’t make 

any sense. It didn’t make any sense. Mr. Speaker, it didn’t make 

any sense because of his inconsistency. Not only that, people 

sitting behind him were laughing during his speech because 

they’re better informed than he was. They knew that the stuff he 

was talking about was simply nonsense, as I’ve tried to expose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I think . . . they were laughing yesterday, but 

I think what they’ll be realizing today is that he’s not 

responsibly carrying out his duties because he’s not sticking up 

for Saskatchewan people; he’s sticking up for Ottawa, who are 

making the cuts. And we’re back-filling and adding money and 

he’s criticizing us. Well people can see through that. The 

Saskatchewan electorate is much more astute than that. 

 

An Hon. Member:  You bet they will. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Yeah, you bet they will. 

 

I want to make a comment as well on what the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone has been saying. She was the Liberal 

leader. She was a Liberal when it was clear that Working for 

Women was going to lose their funding. Now she’s pretending 

she’s concerned about that and introducing petitions and tabling 

petitions and making a statement today. I would like to know 

how many times, I would like her to tell me, how many times 

she has given a phone call to her friend Morris Bodnar, MP 

(Member of Parliament), or Georgette Sheridan about the cuts 

for Working for Women. These are not provincial cuts, they’re 

federal cuts. I’d like to know how many phone calls she’s made 

to Ottawa. I bet she hasn’t made one phone call to Ottawa, and I 

bet she hasn’t made one phone call to Georgette Sheridan, her 

close friend, or to Morris Bodnar about the cuts for Working for 

Women. If she’s really concerned, she’ll take her concerns to 

the right place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the balance of my comments — I’ll just be a 

few more minutes — I want to talk a little bit about some of the 

social initiatives that I think were . . . define the difference 

between this Saskatchewan government and the people of 

Saskatchewan, than the budgets from other provinces, Tory, 

Liberal, and certainly from the federal budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s in it for families? Twenty-one, 20 . . . in 

addition to all of the other things that I won’t refer to like the 

PST reduction, education investment, infrastructure, roads, and 

so on, $24.7 million additional money into the action plan for 

children. Mr. Speaker, that translates into family income benefit 

increases, 3.3 million; supplementary health benefits for low  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

income working families; more money to child development 

and nutrition grants; more money to northern community 

development funding; money into child care in terms of the 

improvements to the facilities and the equipment 

improvements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve put new money into child care every year 

— I know the member from North Battleford agrees with that 

— every single year, new money into child care. The federal 

Liberal government abandoned their national day care program, 

which was a cornerstone of the 1993 platform; and the reason 

they’re not being held more accountable for this is that the child 

care community is not a powerful lobby group. But it’s a very 

important group in terms of the support to families and the 

quality of support that families need. But we put new money in 

every year and again this year as well, into the salaries for child 

care workers. 

 

(1245) 

 

Housing initiatives for northern residents, which opposition 

members say was needed. Transitional money, 6 million into 

the national child benefit, where we’re putting our money up 

front, begging the federal government to join us because we 

need their support. The low income provinces, poorer 

provinces, need the support of the federal government. We’re 

calling for a national child benefit. More assistance to helping 

people obtain child support orders. More community-based 

outreach programs for young people and young women 

prostituting on the streets, which again is what the opposition 

has been calling for. Further development on the 

community-based alternatives for juvenile justice, again which 

they’ve been calling for. Additional money for children that are 

challenged, with challenging behaviours. Additional money to 

the child advocate’s office. Again I want to remind members 

opposite that Saskatchewan is the only province that has a child 

advocate that reports directly to the Assembly, to the 

independence of the Assembly. And we set it up that way so 

that the child advocate’s office could monitor the progress of 

children’s services and public policy related to children and 

families without any fear of interference by ministers. 

 

As we know, the Alberta Minister of Social Services fired the 

child advocate a couple of years ago. No other province that has 

a child advocate has the advocate report directly to the 

Legislative Assembly, and I’m very proud of that because we’re 

not afraid to be monitored. In fact we view that as a way to 

make more responsive government. 

 

But expansion of that office; expansion of the successful 

mothers’ support program; additional money to early 

intervention supports; the expansion of the teen-infant centres, 

Mr. Speaker, foster home rate increases. And one that I am very 

happy about because it was 10 years ago that I was the 

provincial . . . And we worked together, the provincial president 

of the Saskatchewan human services association, where we 

were trying to work towards good salaries and benefits and 

stable funding for the NGOs (non-governmental organizations), 

now called community-based organizations. 

 

I talked to several of my friends in that sector yesterday. They  

are very delighted that we’re making great strides on their 

salaries, their benefits, their pensions, and new money to some 

fixed-cost funding for those organizations. And many of those 

people are — because of the low wages over the years — have 

really been low income families themselves, as you would 

know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m very excited about that and I look forward to that 

three-year plan where we try to bring those . . . bring everybody 

up instead of dragging everybody, pushing everybody down, 

which is what the House Leader of the opposition did this 

morning by attacking working people and the labour policies 

that would support bringing them up. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention a couple of quick things 

related to the federal budget, because again this defines the 

differences, and these people aren’t sticking up for 

Saskatchewan people and criticizing the federal government. 

But I want to talk about one Liberal MP that I have a lot of 

respect for, who is talking about reality, and this is an article in 

the Star-Phoenix, January 18, ’97, says, “Former minister 

critical of Liberals”: 

 

Former Liberal defence minister (and I quote) David 

Collenette says government cuts (that is federal 

government cuts) are threatening the integrity of social 

programs. 

 

He said — I’m continuing to quote — he says: 

 

In dealing with (our) . . . deficit, (this) . . . government “has 

created some pretty rough justice — we have to be honest 

about that,” . . . 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

. . . social programs such as education, health care and 

pensions, arts and culture are being sacrificed and national 

standards are being weakened. 

 

“The reason kids go to school hungry is because their 

parents don’t have jobs . . .” 

 

Collenette also criticized his party’s cuts to the funding of 

CBC, which he said has been crucial to the survival of 

Canadian culture. 

 

Well at least Mr. Collenette, who’s part of the Liberal 

government — he doesn’t even live in Saskatchewan — he’s 

being honest about the situation. 

 

And let’s repeat what he said. He said that the social program 

cuts . . . 

 

. . . he said social programs such as education, health care 

and pensions, arts . . . are being sacrificed and national 

standards are being weakened. 

 

He’s saying that about his own government, and you people 

won’t even stand up and say that from the Saskatchewan 

perspective. So who’s standing up for Saskatchewan? 



340  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1997 

I want to quote one other article, I want to quote one other 

article about the federal Liberal approach. And again, I know 

that the member from Melville will appreciate this. There’s no 

point in the member from Melville sticking up for the federal 

Liberals. You ran as a Reform Party member in the last election 

federally. You won’t get to the Senate anyway. You’re not a 

legitimate candidate to go to the Senate so you might as well 

stick up for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I have another quote here from Mel Gill, who is the executive 

director of Children’s Aid Society in Ottawa. Mr. Gill was the 

Co-Chair of a recent national forum on poverty, where 

Saskatchewan, by the way, was given a national award for the 

action plan for children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gill says, he says, I quote: 

 

Poverty has grown under the Liberals in Ottawa. (He says) 

they’ve taken $7 billion out of the former Canada 

Assistance Plan, which affects programs like child 

protection. 

 

He also says that Canada has the second highest rate of child 

poverty among the developed countries next to the United 

States. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mel Gill is saying this. David Collenette is 

saying this. Everybody is saying this. So the federal Liberals are 

getting off the hook by this group here, the provincial Liberals. 

They’ve got no economic development plan. Over 10 per cent 

unemployment in Canada, 4 per cent higher than the 

Saskatchewan unemployment rate. Do you think we’ve 

contributing to the Canadian unemployment rate? 

 

So the feds have no unemployment economic development 

strategy. They’ve got no transportation plan for Canada. 

They’ve pulled out of active participation to supporting 

education, health, and social programs. There’s no national 

poverty strategy federally. They’ve reneged on their agreements 

around the GST and the day care program. And you’re 

defending them and you’re defending them. 

 

The bottom line is that under the federal Liberals . . . child 

poverty has doubled under the federal Liberals in just four 

years. We put $6 million in this year and they’re perhaps going 

to put some in in a year and a half. And you criticize us. Table 

the calls you’ve made to Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the inequalities are expanding and increasing 

under the federal Liberals. As Collenette, Mr. Collenette, said, 

we’ve had some pretty harsh justice. And I agree with him. So I 

don’t understand why these opposition Liberals are not 

speaking out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can’t wait for the federal Liberals. Like 

in medicare we couldn’t wait, we can’t wait in other areas as 

well. So we’re . . . We’ve developed the economic development 

strategy where this is the fourth or fifth year. I won’t go over 

the retail sales and all the housing starts and all the other 

indicators that are very positive. My colleagues will do that. 

 

We’re continuing to . . . and we’re continuing to progress on 

health care, which everybody else is trying to model, except 

Alberta and Ontario, because they’re decimating health care. 

We’re continuing on the farm support policies, where the 

federal government has abandoned farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re doing our own thing on the family poverty strategy, and 

we’ll just have to hope that when the federal Liberals see that 

we’ve got something good here they’ll say, me too, which is 

what those members will do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition Liberals criticize what we’re doing 

at their own peril. As long as they do, that doesn’t bother me 

because they will be over there and we’ll be over here. So as 

long as they’re over there, Saskatchewan people will continue 

to build. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this budget 

does. It continues to build. I want to close on a quote that was 

relevant in November ’96, when it was made. It is even more 

relevant today. This comes from The Globe and Mail, 

Saskatchewan five years later. You’ll remember this. I quote: 

 

Five years ago, the province of Saskatchewan was in crisis. 

When the New Democrats took office on November 1, 

1991 they inherited a burden of heavy debt, even heavier 

than they’d imagined. Mr. Romanow and his government, 

those high-spending, irresponsible, weak-kneed, 

bleeding-heart socialists, resolved to clean up the financial 

mess left by Grant Devine and his Conservatives. 

 

Last week, five years later (well this is six months later, 

which is even better) we were reminded of their success. 

Are there lessons here? Yes. The government identified the 

danger signs immediately and addressed it. It set its course; 

it plotted its course, its destination, and every step of the 

way it ensured it had the support of its constituents. 

 

I have no doubt — after watching all the news last night, I’m 

really excited about getting home today and talking to my 

constituents — I have no doubt, after hearing the budget speech 

and the comments last night, that we will continue to have the 

support of our constituents for many years to come. Therefore 

I’ll be supporting the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m mindful of the 

time, and I have a fair number of comments I want to make on 

this budget and obviously on the Liberal motion. What I’d like 

to do today is make a few preliminary comments, and then 

obviously the bulk of my comments, I’ll make on Monday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budgets are fundamentally documents about 

choices. Budget statements define governments. And I think 

they define the political movements behind the parties that are 

in these offices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am delighted today to be able to stand and 

support this budget presented by this New Democratic  



March 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

government at this time. Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget 

that is, I think, embraced, and is very much in tune with where 

Saskatchewan people are coming from. 

 

We all know that five years ago — almost six years ago now — 

when this government took office, it took office with a very 

difficult agenda ahead of it, a very difficult road. And it had to 

make very difficult choices. 

 

I say, as a member of this caucus who joined in 1995, that it is 

with the greatest of thanks and the greatest of respect that I have 

for the more senior colleagues who served during those difficult 

years and made the very heart-wrenching, difficult decisions 

that have brought us today to this wonderful point in our history 

— to this turning point for Saskatchewan’s economy, for 

Saskatchewan’s people, and for the Saskatchewan experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that with the utmost sincerity and thanks to 

each colleague individually because I know it was difficult. 

And I am extremely proud, as a new member, to have joined 

this caucus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit 

about some of the choices that that caucus made and this caucus 

has made now. In comparison to what’s happening in other 

parts of our country, I found it interesting, reading through The 

Globe and Mail, to take a look at two particular items. 

 

First of all, yesterday, apart from it being Saskatchewan’s 

budget day, it was also Newfoundland’s. Now we all appreciate 

Newfoundland has difficulties — we all appreciate 

Newfoundland has difficulties. 

 

The Liberal government of Newfoundland put forward a 

budget. And I think it’s very interesting, because it’s based on 

the same right-wing Tory philosophy that we saw in this 

province for years. 

 

Let me just quote for you from The Globe and Mail yesterday. 

The Finance minister says, and I’m quoting now from The 

Globe and Mail: 

 

He told reporters that the province could have been in a 

position to balance the budget this year, but chose instead 

to expand spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this before. We saw this before with 

the Conservative Party in office that could have balanced its 

budget, but instead decided to expand spending to the point that 

they were spending $1.2 billion more a year than they were 

taking in in revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was the approach embraced by the 

Conservatives; this is the approach embraced by Liberals; this is 

the approach of the right-wing. And we hear this on the side 

opposite today even as they say, well you could have spent 

more, you should have put more in in spending. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Tax-and-spend Liberals. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  It’s interesting, one of my colleagues says 

that they are tax-and-spend Liberals; in fact federally, it’s worse 

than that. They’re tax-and-cut Liberals — tax-and-cut Liberals. 

Because what we have seen come forward from the Liberal 

Party, Mr. Speaker, in office federally, whether it’s in office 

provincially, whether it’s in the opposition, is a proposal that 

says taxes will increase to consumers, that they will increase 

spending — which are simply deferred taxes. When you have 

deficits, it’s simply deferred taxes. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

approach of the Liberal Party. 

 

Now I want to go into this at some length in terms of talking 

about the different approaches we have, particularly in terms of 

our tax structure today that we’ve introduced to stimulate the 

economy, to help rebuild the economy, to help create jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think I would prefer to embark on this on 

Monday. So at this point, I would move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  It now . . . also having reached the normal 

time of adjournment, we’re really adjourned. And I want to 

wish all hon. members an enjoyable weekend with your 

families and in your home constituencies. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 313 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 313 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 313 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 313 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 313 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 313 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 313 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 314 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 314 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 314 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 314 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 314 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 334 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 314 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 314 

 Closure of Working for Women 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 315 

 Black History Month in Saskatchewan 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 315 

 Tisdale Bantam Ramblers Hockey Team 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 315 

 SaskPower Project in Guyana 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 315 

 Fund-raiser Banquet 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 316 

 Dinner Theatre in Pasqua 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 316 

 Decorum in the Assembly 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 316 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Highways Funding 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 316 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 316 

 Municipal Government Funding 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 317 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 317 

 Provincial Sales Tax 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 318 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 318 

 Municipal Government Funding 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 319 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 319 

 Judges’ Salary Dispute 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 320 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 320 

 University Funding 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 320 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 320 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 1997 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 321 

 Bill No. 3l — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 321 

 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 321 

 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statues Consequential Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des modifications 



 

corrélatives à certaines lois 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 321 

 Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 321 

 Bill No. 35 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes d’actes criminels 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 322 

 Bill No. 202 — The Balanced Budget Amendment Act, 1997 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

 Bill No. 203 — The Direct Debt Reduction Act 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

 Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

 Bill No. 37 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

 Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 322 

 Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 322 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 322 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 323 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 323 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 323 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 324 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 324 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 327 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 328 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 330 

  Pringle ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 335 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 340 

 

 


