



















































Hansard: March 26, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 447 

 March 26, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of people throughout Saskatchewan 

who have been impacted by big game damage in the province. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more care and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, shrubs 

and trees, which are being destroyed by the overpopulation 

of deer and other big game, including the elimination of 

the $500 deductible; and to take control measures to 

prevent the overpopulation of deer and other big game 

from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are mostly 

from the Wood River constituency — communities such as 

Mankota, Ponteix, Ferland, Kincaid, Hazenmore, Meyronne, 

and some from Bengough. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 

read and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 

reverse the municipal revenue-sharing reduction; 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, the cabinet travel 

accountability Act. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I give notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the 

government the following question: 

 

Regarding the 1,000 wooden penises purchased by the 

Education department: (1) please provide a list of any 

provincial government departments and/or organizations 

outside Saskatchewan that have purchased wooden 

demonstrators from Saskatchewan Education department; 

which household-name firm purchased wooden  

demonstrators from the Saskatchewan Education 

department; and provide a list of Saskatchewan schools 

and health districts that purchased 46 wooden 

demonstrators. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Energy and Mines: in 

the 1995-96 annual report for Saskatchewan Energy and 

Mines, page 32, under petroleum and natural gas, the 

listed expenditures are $11,378,907. Included in this 

amount is an expense of $7.714 million in out-of-court 

settlements to resolve lawsuits against the Crown. What 

were the individual amounts of each of these settlements; 

who were the recipients of these settlements; what are the 

circumstances involved in each of the settlements; are 

there any lawsuits still pending against the Crown with 

regard to SaskEnergy and Mines; and (5) what are the 

amounts for the out-of-court settlements that have been 

settled since the end of 1995-96 fiscal year? 

 

And I have similar questions for the 1992-93 year, 1993-94 

year, and 1994-95 year. And I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the members in the House, I’d like to introduce to you 

four very hard-working and dedicated members of the Naicam 

volunteer fire department that are in our Assembly today: Denis 

Sunderland, Carl Peterson, Rick Meyer, and Rodger Hayward. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure for me today to introduce two . . . to make two 

introductions. The first is on behalf of my colleague, the 

member for Regina Elphinstone, and this is a group of students 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are 14 grade 8 

students from Herchmer School. 

 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Aaron Anderson, 

and by a teacher associate, Mrs. Wanda Warner. They will 

spend some time in the Chamber, and I look forward to meeting 

with them later on, on behalf of the Deputy Premier. So I ask all 

members here to extend a warm welcome to them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Also seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, there 

are two people I’d like to introduce to you. One, Peter 

Chartrand, is a constituent of mine, and I would ask him to 

stand, and he’s accompanied by Bill Oxtoby. Now members 

will recognize Peter because he is the executive chef and the 

manager of the cafeteria board. And Peter and his staff have 

been very innovative and creative in the changes they’ve made 

to the cafeteria. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



448  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

Ms. Murray:  And I was particularly pleased when they 

added bagels to the menu. And also Bill Oxtoby, who is with 

Peter, is the accountant in charge of the money. So thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 

privilege this afternoon to introduce to you, four people seated 

in your gallery. John and Eleanor Shriener who farm just south 

of Martensville, and Rob and Sharon Shriener, who farm near 

the south-west corner of my constituency. We’d like to 

welcome them to the legislature and to Regina this afternoon. 

Please join me in giving them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

privileged this afternoon to introduce a group of individuals 

who have joined us. A couple of the individuals I’m going to 

introduce are actually international guests from the country of 

Japan. I’d like to introduce in the east gallery, a family from 

Whitewood who are acting as hosts, and their guests. And first 

of all I’ll start with our hosts, Pat and Darlene Santo, their 

daughter Tracy and son Robin, special friend Julie Houtman, 

and then our two special guests all the way from Japan, Risa 

Owa and Asuka Tekawa. 

 

We want to welcome you and extend a warm welcome and 

invite the members to welcome these special guests. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly, one of the leaders in our constituency, Bev 

Kimble, the mayor of Lucky Lake. You may have heard me 

speaking yesterday in my address to the budget speech about 

the successes of Lucky Lake. Well the mayor is sitting in your 

gallery and I’ll ask her to stand. 

 

And Bev Kimble is also the mother of one of Saskatchewan’s 

great hockey players, Darin Kimble, who has played for a 

number of teams in the NHL (National Hockey League) and is 

currently playing with Kansas in the International Hockey 

League. 

 

Bev is a farmer, has been a long-time community activist, 

supporter and worker with the Red Cross, and has been 

recognized for her leadership in her present role as mayor and I 

welcome her to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to welcome a face that I’m sure is very familiar to 

most everyone here, the general secretary of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Fred Herron, in your gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the government members I too want to join the Acting Leader 

of the Liberal Party in welcoming general secretary Fred Herron 

to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our 

caucus I too would like to welcome Mr. Herron to our 

legislature this afternoon, and hope he enjoys the proceedings. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Tisdale Trojans Champions 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

constituency is becoming noted for its hockey excellence, not 

necessarily this year, the Melfort Mustangs, but today that I 

want to introduce and recognize a very dynamic team from 

Tisdale. 

 

The Tisdale Trojans AAA Midgets captured the provincial title 

on Monday night in Tisdale. They defeated Yorkton by a score 

of 7 to 3 in front of their home town crowd. The Trojans now 

advance to the western regionals in Manitoba on April 3. 

 

Please join me in congratulating the accomplishments of the 

Trojans — the players, their families, fans, and in particular 

their coach, Carl VanCamp. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Opening of Bioriginal Processing Plant 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Monday I, 

along with the Minister of Crown Investments, had the pleasure 

of attending the grand opening of a new and innovative 

agricultural industry. 

 

I am referring to the opening of the Bioriginal Food and Science 

Corporation in Asquith, Mr. Speaker. The objective of this new 

organization is to produce a novel value added product — 

gamma linolenic acid, or GLA, which is an oil utilized in many 

health foods and other pharma-medical products such as 

cosmetics and veterinary foods. 

 

GLA, Mr. Speaker, is produced from one of the many speciality 

crops being grown in this province, borage. 

 

Bioriginal Food and Science Corporation is demonstrating that 

Saskatchewan has the researchers, producers, processors, and 

distributors to successfully market a new product 

internationally. They have provided Saskatchewan producers 

with another market option, which can only be positive for our 

agricultural industry. 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

I want to congratulate the achievements of the Bioriginal Food 

and Science Corporation on the opening of its Asquith plant, 

and I know that all members of this Assembly will want to wish 

them great success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wooden Demonstrators Exported 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let it never be 

said that the PC (Progressive Conservative) opposition does not 

do its part to promote Saskatchewan exports. In today’s paper 

we learn that the Saskatchewan government has now unloaded 

its 1,000 wooden penises. 

 

I note with interest the comments of deputy Education minister 

Craig Dotson who said: 

 

We made no particular concerted effort to sell them. I had 

a number of telephone calls because of all the publicity. 

 

Of course the worldwide attention to this great Saskatchewan 

penis surplus was initiated by the member from Rosthern. I 

think he should be congratulated for helping the government get 

rid of this prickly problem. 

 

We do have one concern, however. We’re not real happy that 

Saskatchewan is now going to be known as a major exporter of 

5-inch wooden penises. It seems to be another case of the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) selling our province short. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Junior Citizen of the Year 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize a young girl from my constituency, from the 

community of Prud’homme, Candace Triol. Candace was one 

of eight individuals to receive Junior Citizen of the Year awards 

at the annual convention of the Saskatchewan Weekly 

Newpapers Association last September. 

 

The Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year awards program 

recognizes outstanding youth between the ages of 8 to 18, and 

consideration is not limited to excellence in academics, 

athletics, or the arts. The adjudication criteria strongly 

emphasizes participation in home, church, school, community, 

the environment, and humanitarian activities. There is also 

consideration given to nominees who have persisted in times of 

adversity. 

 

Candace is an individual that fits into that criteria. She is at the 

top of her class academically and excels in music. Candace is 

involved in her church, in raising money for Telemiracle, and in 

improving the environment. Although she has had a heart 

problem and tires very easily, she seems to have a lot of energy 

when it comes to helping other people. 

 

So congratulations, Candace, on this achievement, Junior 

Citizen of the Year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Opening of Tri-Sum in Canwood 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

people never cease to amaze me. Last year the government’s 

economic strategy, Partnership for Growth, identified value 

added processing as a cornerstone for our provincial economy 

in the new century. 

 

This past Friday, Mr. Speaker, I attended the grand opening of a 

new food processing business that will create jobs in rural 

Saskatchewan, in the village of Canwood. 

 

Tri-Sum, located in Canwood, Mr. Speaker is operated by 

Jeannette and Don Dziurzynski. Their product is called 

Tru-fruit, a delicious yoghurt bar. Tru-fruit are made using an 

innovative freeze-dry technology that retains the natural 

nutritional value, colour, aroma, and flavour of raspberries, 

blueberries, and strawberries. And best of all, Mr. Speaker, 

these bars contain no artificial colouring, no artificial flavour, 

and no artificial preservatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and the members of the Assembly to 

join me in congratulating Don and Jeannette and their staff of 

Tri-Sum quality products for their contribution to the renewal 

and growth of the provincial economy. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Business Openings 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, making 

members’ statements in the legislature affords all members the 

opportunity to point out to colleagues extraordinary or special 

events that take place in their constituencies. We are able to use 

these opportunities to highlight something out of the ordinary. 

And I underline, highlight something out of the norm in our part 

of the province. 

 

And the members opposite do that regularly, Mr. Speaker. 

Those members use these statements to point out good 

economic news stories from their constituencies on almost a 

daily basis. 

 

While we’re all glad to hear things are happening economically 

in all areas of the province, I find it interesting and telling that 

the members opposite regard such instances in their 

constituencies as unusual and that they warrant special 

statements in this House. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to hear of innovative entrepreneurs 

who prosper despite this government, but I’m looking forward 

to the day when we get to a point in this province when 

business openings and expansions are considered the norm and 

not some exception. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



450  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

Regina Jumps Into Spring Horse Show 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to recognize an event that has a long history in this 

province. 

 

This week, Mr. Speaker, is the 73rd year of the Regina Jumps 

Into Spring Horse Show. This event, presented by the 

Saskatchewan hunter jumper association, allows people 

throughout the province to enjoy some of Saskatchewan’s and 

our nation’s most promising young riders, and of course their 

talented horses. These young riders will compete for $10,000 in 

prize money. 

 

Spectators will be doubly impressed this year, Mr. Speaker, as 

Canada’s 1996 Olympic Summer Games entry, the horse 

Advantage Chrysler, will be part of the competition. As well, 

distinguished Spruce Meadows’ equestrians Albert Kley and 

Dayton Gorsline will also take part in the celebration. 

 

I say celebration, Mr. Speaker, because this event not only 

celebrates a 73-year-old tradition of show jumping in Regina, a 

tradition that is as exciting and alive today as it was during the 

1920s, but this event also celebrates the rebirth of spring in our 

province and indeed the entire prairie region. 

 

I look forward to being part of this event with its traditions and 

excitement and I ask all members to join me in wishing 

organizers and participants, both riders and horses, the best of 

luck during the rest of this week. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dual Marketing 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 

often pointed out that the Alberta government is far more 

progressive than our Saskatchewan government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  In today’s . . . in today’s Globe and Mail we see 

that the Alberta official opposition is also far more progressive 

than Saskatchewan’s official opposition. Alberta Liberal Party 

Agriculture critic Ken Nicol, said most producers prefer dual 

marketing, and even blamed the Klein government for not 

doing enough to promote dual marketing. That’s a far cry from 

the position of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan; simply 

echoes the NDP’s opposition to dual marketing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the Alberta Liberal 

Agriculture credit for . . . critic for taking a stand. And I’d like 

to encourage his Saskatchewan counterpart to give him a call. 

He might learn a little bit about what Saskatchewan and western 

Canadian farmers want and deserve— dual marketing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Todd McLellan Wins Award 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Swift Current  

Broncos of the western junior hockey league are one of the 

organizations of which we are justifiably proud. They have won 

the Memorial Cup and they are consistently a threat to repeat. 

Hope springs eternal as we know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This year we have another reason to be proud. Todd McLellan, 

head coach and general manager of the Broncos, has been 

selected as the Western Hockey League Executive of the Year. 

He was also selected as Coach of the Year for the east/central 

divisions of the league and runner-up for the whole league. 

 

At 29 years of age, he is the youngest head coach and general 

manager in the league; and this is his third year as a coach. He 

knows the league well because he played in it, as well as 

playing on the Canadian national team. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is another reason for mentioning this 

award and congratulating Todd McLellan; Todd’s father Bill is 

one of the ushers in the legislature. And will come in no 

surprise to the hon. members on this side of the House, that Bill 

is an usher on the government side. A wise choice of sons and a 

judicious placement in the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  I congratulate Todd McLellan, and express on 

behalf of our community, our appreciation for his work in 

restoring both competitiveness and dignity to the Swift Current 

Broncos. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Midwifery Services 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, this government announced 

today that it will be taking the first steps toward legalizing 

midwifery in Saskatchewan. On the premiss that such services 

can be offered in a safe and properly regulated environment, we 

support this option for our expectant mothers. 

 

The Minister of Health has indicated however that health 

districts will be free to hire midwives if they determine there is 

a need for service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one problem we see with this point is the fact 

that these services will not be universally available in this 

province. Those districts which have the financial resources to 

hire midwives may do so, but those who are walking a financial 

tightrope will not have this option. 

 

Can the Minister of Health explain how his government will 

ensure that this option is available to all Saskatchewan women 

who favour this alternative? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’m pleased to report to the member, 

Mr. Speaker, that we intend to back-fill every Liberal cut to 

health care. And I think the member will be pleased to know,  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

Mr. Speaker, that despite the fact that the Liberals are cutting 

back on health care spending, contrary to the advice they’re 

receiving from their own National Forum on Health, we’re 

putting the money back in and the health districts this year and 

next year will end with surpluses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Arm River got up the other day and said that 

the health districts would have deficits. I want to correct the 

member for Arm River. Cumulatively the health districts across 

the province will have a surplus of $2.5 million this fiscal year, 

and a higher surplus next year. And I can assure the member 

that despite the Liberal cut-backs to health care, the New 

Democrats will put enough money into the system that we can 

hire midwives and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Evidently the 

minister didn’t understand the question so I’ll repeat it. Can the 

Minister of Health explain how his government will ensure that 

this option is available — and that’s midwifery — to all 

Saskatchewan women who favour this alternative? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to assure the member and the 

House, Mr. Speaker, that this morning I attended the meeting of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, and I 

want to assure the member and the House that services will be 

continually delivered through health districts. Because I had a 

discussion with the health districts about the Liberal plans to 

abolish health districts and go back to 450 separate health 

boards hand-picked by the Leader of the Liberal Party, and I 

can assure the member that the health organizations are not in 

favour of that Liberal policy. They are in favour of 

population-based funding. They are in favour of the New 

Democrats back-filling the Liberal cuts to health care. 

 

We will continue to take those steps, Mr. Speaker, which will 

ensure that women will have access to the services that they 

need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, this government has gutted our 

health care system to such a point that our maternity wards have 

a better resemblance to chicken hatcheries than maternity 

wards. 

 

In our rural areas there is so little faith in the present health care 

system that physicians continue to leave in droves. I brought to 

the attention of the House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 

Eatonia’s only doctor has announced he will soon be departing 

that community. His decision was brought on by the uncertain 

future of rural health care in the province. 

 

The head of the Touchwood Qu’Appelle Health District has 

already indicated that legalizing midwifery may help in areas 

where there is a physician shortage. Will the minister explain if 

midwifery may in time be the only choice available to women 

in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to assure the member and assure the 

House, Mr. Speaker, that a full range of physician and hospital 

and health centre services are going to be available in all parts 

of this province. 

 

Because we reject the plan of the Leader of the Liberal Party to 

adopt an Australian model, which says that we should have 

hospitals only in Regina and Saskatoon, and that we should not 

have hospitals outside of those centres. And we reject the model 

that says that physician services should only be available in 

communities of more than 10,000 people. That is the plan that 

the Leader of the Liberal Party in his leadership bid said that he 

favoured, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can assure the member that we’re going to continue what 

we are doing, and that is to ensure physician services across the 

province. And just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member will be 

interested to know, we announced the physician recruitment 

coordinator. We’re going to take a lot of steps, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to be putting in place new recruitment practices for 

the health districts. We’re going to be working with the College 

of Medicine, physicians, and the health districts to improve our 

physician supply in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highway Maintenance 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 

today, Mr. Speaker, is for the Minister of Highways. Mr. 

Minister, last Friday there were several vehicle mishaps near 

the community of Ponteix. Damage to vehicles ranged from 

hundreds of dollars to total vehicle write-offs. 

 

The problem, Mr. Minister, was that rising flood waters had 

extensively damaged a bridge on the highway leading into the 

community. Mr. Minister, not only were these people caught by 

surprise, but obviously you and your Department of Highways 

were also caught by surprise. There were no warning signs, no 

danger signs, nothing, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you ordered almost 7,000 warning flags last year 

and probably more this year. However either there aren’t 

enough flags, or you’re saving them. Which is it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

House, it’s a good time I think to give a little report on the flood 

situation in Saskatchewan and on road locations. 

 

Nine kilometres south of Bushell Park there’s water on the road 

and we’re recommending reduced speed; 24 kilometres north of 

Kamsack to 15 kilometres south of Pelly there’s water on the 

road, Mr. Speaker; 16 kilometres west of Aneroid to 17 

kilometres east of Cadillac there’s a local detour — the road is 

closed, the bridge is out, and reduced speed required to be 

prepared to stop. 

 

But I’m not going to continue. I think what I want to show, Mr.  



452  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

Speaker, is that the Department of Highways is certainly on top 

of the situation, a very serious situation. In fact if people would 

call the highway road information line at 787-4986 they would 

get updated information on an immediate situation and we’ll 

continue to do that — to provide the service that Saskatchewan 

people deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, perhaps an 

answer to the question instead of a ministerial statement would 

have been more in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, one of the vehicles damaged was 

driven by Kathy Knox of Ponteix. Kathy was taking her son 

Dylan to school Friday morning when her vehicle was damaged 

so bad that the frame was bent, the transmission crushed, not to 

mention wheels, axles, on and on. Kathy says she didn’t see a 

thing until it was too late. There were no flags, no warning 

signs. 

 

Mr. Minister, this problem is the result of your government’s 

continuing to downsize and underfund the highway crews in 

Saskatchewan. Is this what you would call safe and acceptable 

for people taking their children to school? Is the safety of our 

children not a priority to this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly I would encourage the 

lady that you mentioned to contact the department, and/or my 

office door is always open. You certainly can bring me the 

information. We’ll look into the matter. 

 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that this government has 

committed $2.5 billion to highways in this province over the 

next 10 years. And what does the member opposite do? He 

criticizes that, Mr. Speaker. He says, oh, we would have spent 

more and we would have cut more in taxes. And you know 

what we would have gotten? The same thing as we had 10 years 

previous, Mr. Speaker — huge debts and huge deficits and huge 

interest payments. 

 

And we don’t govern that way, Mr. Speaker. We committed 

$2.5 billion to the highways in the province of Saskatchewan 

and we’re going to keep that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, whether you 

want to admit it or not you are responsible for the highways in 

Saskatchewan. When people such as Kathy Knox have their 

vehicles damaged as a result of the highways that your 

government refuses to fix and repair, the cost can be enormous. 

In addition to the repairs, people are faced with the deductibles 

on their insurance claims and further costs when they need to 

lease vehicles while theirs are being repaired. These costs and 

repairs are not the fault of Saskatchewan drivers, Mr. Speaker. 

They are your government’s fault. 

 

Will you stand in your place today and agree to pay all costs  

that people face, when it is your highway system at fault? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, it’s quite interesting, this 

line of questioning. You know, I’ve listened to the budget 

awhile back and everybody in Saskatchewan . . . the majority of 

people are really happy with the budget — 2 two per cent 

reduction in sales tax; $2.5 billion to roads. And we have a 

Liberal Party on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that 

criticizes it every day. They’re trying to look for something, I 

guess, a hole in it, or something. I don’t know. I guess we 

surprised them. 

 

But what I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we have asked the federal government to contribute or join 

with us – all the provinces – on the national highways program. 

And we get a no. That’s what we get. 

 

Now I know Mr. Goodale, in an interview recently said: 

 

The federal government has been willing to work on this 

issue but it is an area of the provincial jurisdiction, and 

we’ve been told, quite frankly, to keep out of it. 

 

This is what Mr. Goodale said. But the editor in this case had to 

correct Mr. Goodale and he’s got an editor’s note: 

 

The current federal government announced a national 

cost-shared program for highway improvements early in its 

mandate after Saskatchewan and the other provinces drew 

the plans for highway improvements to be cost-shared 

between the provinces and the federal government. 

 

And it’s the federal government that withdrew from the offer, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, how could the minister stand 

in this House and say we want a shared program with other 

levels of government and you can’t even get flags up over 

potholes. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, among the vehicles that 

received a rough ride over the Ponteix bridge was the Wald 

Ambulance of Assiniboia. Luckily, the ambulance had not yet 

picked up their patient because the driver and his assistant were 

thrown around the vehicle and the assistant smashed his head 

into the windshield. The owners of Wald Ambulance are Alice 

and Stu Wald of Assiniboia, and they say they are fed up with 

the horrible condition of the roads that they have to transport 

their patients on. 

 

Mr. Minister, it was a painful experience for the people of rural 

Saskatchewan when your government closed our rural 

hospitals. Do you not agree that at the very least your highways 

and roads should be safe for the sick, the elderly, and those in 

need who must now receive their health care elsewhere? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to give the  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

number to the member opposite again, and if he wants 

information on the highways in his area he can call the highway 

road information line at 787-4986. 

 

I want to mention too while I’m here, Mr. Speaker, that 10 

kilometres west of Ponteix grid to 10 kilometres east of Val 

Marie, we need to reduce speed there because there is water on 

the road as well. That’s on Highway No. 18. On Highway No. 

37, 19 kilometres north of the U.S. (United States) border to 4 

kilometres south of Climax, there’s also water on the road. 

 

On Highway 332, 43 kilometres east of Cantuar to Hazlet, we 

need to reduce speed there, Mr. Speaker. There’s flag persons in 

attendance and we have to be prepared to stop because there’s 

also water on the road there. Highway 339, Mr. Speaker, from 

16 kilometres west of Avonlea to 27 kilometres south of 

junction Highway 39, you have to reduce the speed there too, 

Mr. Speaker, because there is also water on the road. 

 

So I believe that the department has things under control, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly I would . . . if the member from Wood 

River would call the hot line, he would get information on an 

updated basis throughout the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Jaw Implants 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Health minister. Mr. Minister, Sharon Schriener underwent 

surgery 12 years ago for a large tumour on her jaw. Because of 

the size of the tumour, part of Sharon’s jaw had to be removed. 

Today, because of bone degeneration resulting from the 

surgery, Sharon requires jaw implants. You can imagine Rob 

and Sharon’s surprise when they were informed that such 

implants are not covered by the Health department and are 

considered cosmetic and that they’re expected to pick up the 

bill that will run somewheres between 7,500 to $10,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is not a face-lift, this is not an eye job, or 

some other optional cosmetic surgery that is understandably not 

covered by health care — this is a wellness matter. This is not 

cosmetic surgery. We’re talking about a necessary medical 

procedure needed because someone had a tumour removed. Her 

doctor said that she would be a dental cripple by 55 if this 

procedure is not done. 

 

Why are you refusing to cover Sharon’s implants, Mr. Minister? 

And will you please meet with the Schrieners after question 

period? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I very much regret that the 

member did not apprise me of this situation because I certainly 

would want to look into it, and the member raises it for the first 

time in the legislature. I want to assure the member that I would 

be very happy to look into it and I’d be happy also to talk to the 

Schrieners. 

 

And I also want to assure the member if at any time one of his 

constituents has this kind of problem, and in performing his 

duties he wishes to speak to me about it, I think the member  

knows, Mr. Speaker, that my door is always open to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, another 

question regarding the Schriener case . . . But first of all I’d just 

like to remind the minister of the fact that on numerous 

occasions when their party was on this side of the House, they 

dragged in all kinds of people into this Assembly. 

 

I would like to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, when we have 

talked about cases, we have talked to individuals, we have 

contacted individuals who have contacted the department and 

have not got an answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, number one, will you meet with the Schrieners? 

And, Mr. Minister, as well will you support a Bill that I propose 

to introduce right after question period that will give people an 

opportunity to talk to an ombudsman, someone outside of 

Health, to negotiate or to discuss these types of matters? Will 

you provide Saskatchewan families with a badly needed health 

care ombudsman, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I think the other member 

knows, because he has been in this legislature for more than 10 

years, that if matters are brought to the attention of the Minister 

of Health those matters will be looked into. And that member 

has not brought this matter forward as part of his 

responsibilities as a member of this Assembly either. But I’ve 

already indicated to the House, Mr. Speaker, that I will meet 

with the Schrieners in an effort to look into this situation. That’s 

what should properly be done. And I will certainly do so. 

 

I think what the member should know, Mr. Speaker, is that in 

every health district there is a client representative, or 

quality-of-care coordinator whose job it is to handle complaints 

and problems with the health system. The member does not 

acknowledge that there is already an ombudsperson in every 

health district, Mr. Speaker. And the member also could have 

taken advantage of that situation. But notwithstanding the fact 

that the member has never brought this matter forward to me, 

I’ll be very happy to look into it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Reductions in Business Regulations 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. 

Minister, your study on the competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s 

business climate promised in your Partnership for Growth 

document is already behind schedule. It’s not the only target in 

your Partnership for Growth that isn’t being met. You 

promised to cut business regulation and red tape by 25 per cent 

over the next 10 years. And that’s a pretty modest target, Mr. 

Minister — just 2.5 per cent per year. 

 

However we see no evidence that even this 2.5 per cent target  



454  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

has been met. We see no evidence that you have cut business 

regulations at all over the last year. Mr. Minister, would you 

table a list of the business regulations you have eliminated over 

the past year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Economic Development, who is out of the city on 

government business, I want to tell the Leader of the Third 

Party that we are committed to taking a look at all regulations. 

Not only regulations which affect business, but all regulations, 

because there is a tendency of governments, whether they’re 

Progressive Conservative or Liberal or New Democrat, to just 

accumulate the regulations over a period of time. They remain 

on the books. Many of them are not valid and not relevant to 

public policy. 

 

And we are now engaging in a major review of all regulations, 

including those that affect and impact on business. It is quite an 

intensive study. I don’t know when we’re going to be able to 

give you the specific number of regulations which are going to 

be called, but in due course we’ll have to make a full report 

obviously to the House. I can simply report to the members and 

the public this process is well under way now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan’s 1993 Budget Crisis 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since 

the budget the Finance minister and the Premier have stated that 

the province was on the brink of bankruptcy in 1993. In the 

same breath they’ve indicated that they will soon be making a 

trek to international investment bankers to negotiate on behalf 

of our province. My question is to either the Finance minister or 

the Premier this afternoon. 

 

Given that underwriting may have been under consideration at 

the time of the so-called potential default, was full and complete 

disclosure made to the financial community regarding possible 

default of Saskatchewan’s debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll be going to New 

York and to Toronto to deal with the rating agencies and those 

who buy Saskatchewan bonds. The question that the minister 

answers has to be answered . . . asked, I’m sorry, the member 

asks, has to be answered very, very simply and clearly. And it’s 

patently obvious. The answer is yes. 

 

There is no way that any government in Canada, provincial or 

federal, doesn’t have its books scrutinized by the rating 

agencies for creditworthiness. They come up here once a year 

for two or three days and take a look at the books. That’s why I 

go down there to explain what the budget’s about. 

 

I might also point out for the member’s edification that in April 

1996 the Bank of Canada had a provincial credit rating study. 

I’ve got a copy of it. It says this, quote: 

 

Based on Standard and Poor’s ratings, the long-term debt  

of Saskatchewan was downgraded in five steps between 

1986 and 1992 from AA plus to BBB plus. The number of 

prospective institutional buyers of Saskatchewan bonds is 

estimated to have fallen from 125 to 140 when the 

province’s rating was AA plus, to about 25 to 30 at the 

current rating of BBB plus. 

 

Now people say that this is not a serious matter. It’s crisis. It’s 

an extremely critical matter at the time. If you’re reduced to 25 

borrowers, all you need to do is get one more downgrade . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, I am not surprised by the 

Premier’s response, but I think perhaps that he and his Minister 

of Finance should get on the same page. And I’m going to quote 

the Leader-Post, Monday, March 24. And this is the Minister of 

Finance for the province of Saskatchewan speaking, sir. Quote: 

 

And then he (meaning Don Mazankowski) talked about 

what they could do and how they could funnel money into 

the province without it becoming apparent. Because the 

most dangerous part of that scenario is that it becomes, in 

any sense, public, because then it can really undermine 

your credit rating. 

 

I guess I need to ask the question again, because I liken this 

very much to a man going to the bank for a new loan only to 

brag to the manager that four years prior, Mr. Speaker, he got a 

previous loan and that he was on the brink of bankruptcy at that 

time but didn’t bother disclosing it. 

 

Now which in fact is true? What the Premier has just stated, that 

they were making full disclosure to the financial banking 

institutions, or they were not, as the Finance minister has said? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, with the greatest 

of respect to the member from Greystone, the answer that I gave 

still applies. And may I add also that The Globe and Mail, 

March 25, 1997, page A5, in a very correct description of the 

circumstances, if I may add, says the following: 

 

Mr. Mazankowski, then a member of prime minister Brian 

Mulroney’s cabinet, said in an interview yesterday that 

publicly discussing Saskatchewan’s problem could have 

worsened fiscal problems faced by the province. 

 

That’s what Mr. Mazankowski said. It only stands to common 

sense that it would have. We were not going to allow this 

province to go into bankruptcy. We were going to do everything 

that we had to do in order to make sure that it wouldn’t fall into 

bankruptcy. 

 

But I’m telling you that when you’re reduced from 140 

prospective borrowers to 25, thanks to the mismanagement of 

the provincial Conservatives, by Mr. Mazankowski’s yardstick, 

by the Bank of Canada’s yardstick, because they had emergency 

measures into place, this was — you pick your word 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

for it — crisis, near bankruptcy. You describe it however you 

want to describe it. It was a very serious matter which, thanks to 

the people of Saskatchewan, we turned around and today we’re 

able to report the good news budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  My question to the Premier or to the 

Minister of Finance is very simple, Mr. Speaker. And that is, do 

you believe, Mr. Premier, that the comments that you and your 

Minister of Finance have made in the recent days has placed the 

province’s credibility at risk in any way, and that this may lead 

potentially to higher bond yields with dealing with future 

underwritings, given the circumstances under which this was 

disclosed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 

question is just as obvious, if I may say so, as the first question. 

The answer is no. No, it doesn’t put anything at risk. 

 

I said in the first question, as I say in this question, the rating 

agencies know exactly what our books are and what the transfer 

payments are. This, if anything, will strengthen the position of 

the province of Saskatchewan. It will demonstrate to the rating 

agencies that we had a game plan when we took office on 

November 1, 1991, a game plan which we followed — which, I 

might add, you criticized every step of the way and the 

Conservatives criticized every step of the way, and the current 

Liberals still criticize every step of the way. A game plan which 

we followed with the help of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, which allows us today to say, we’ve turned the 

corner. If anything I’m able to go to Toronto, to New York, and 

to say, look what all the people of Saskatchewan have done 

together in cooperative effort. It’s going to help us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 206  The Saskatchewan Health 

Ombudsman Act 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that Bill 206, an Act to establish a health care system 

ombudsman be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 213 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 1997 (FREE VOTES) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move an 

Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act (FREE VOTES) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that no. 

27 be converted to a notice of motion for order for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker:  Item no. 1 is converted to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m extremely pleased to enter into this budget speech debate 

today and to express my support for what is indeed a good news 

budget. 

 

Before I begin that, I want to first of all congratulate the new 

member from the Battlefords for his election to the legislature. I 

had an opportunity to do a little campaigning in that by-election 

and I note that the member was able to win the seat by a slim 

margin of some 200 votes. I know that the people of North 

Battleford and area will be watching himself in the legislature 

with great interest. And I’m sure that the member will bring 

some debate to this legislature and I look forward to serving 

with him in the next couple of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge the people of my own 

constituency of Saskatoon Nutana for their ongoing support of 

myself and this government. I particularly want to thank the 

activists in my constituency who over the years have helped this 

government and myself come to the point where they have an 

NDP member of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my constituency assistant, 

who like all of our constituency assistants, is back at home 

operating on our behalf, dealing with our constituents when 

we’re here sitting in the legislature. Our constituency assistants 

get hundreds of phone calls and requests for information and 

they have to endeavour to do casework. And I think that all of 

us need to acknowledge from time to time the work that they 

do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is indeed good news for Saskatchewan 

people; it’s good news for Saskatchewan’s future. And while 

this is indeed a good news budget, Mr. Speaker, we must never 

forget the challenges that Saskatchewan people have had to face 

and overcome in these past five years. 

 



456  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

In 1991 this province had the highest per capita deficit in 

Canada — the legacy of 10 years of Progressive Conservative 

fiscal mismanagement. Annual interest payments were 

consuming a growing share of the provincial budget each year. 

We were on a financial path that was simply not sustainable. 

And we were mortgaging the future of Saskatchewan and the 

future of our young people. 

 

But together we in this province rolled up our sleeves and we 

got to work. We set clear objectives and we stuck to those 

objectives. We decided we’d get our fiscal house in order. We 

ensured that our finances stayed in order well into the future. 

We thought we could provide tax relief as it was affordable and 

sustainable. And we targeted any additional available resources 

to key areas like jobs, education, social programs, highways, 

and health. 

 

That is what our government set out to do, Mr. Speaker. That is 

the plan that we developed with Saskatchewan people and that 

we consistently communicated to them. And that is exactly 

what we’ve done. Together we’ve overcome the financial 

disaster that was the legacy of the previous PC government. 

And together we have also overcome the challenges of the sharp 

reduction in federal transfers by the Liberal government to all 

provinces for health, post-secondary education, and social 

programs. That is why today, Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan 

people are able to share in the benefits of the 1997 provincial 

budget. 

 

When our government took office we made a solemn promise 

to the citizens of this province. We promised compassion, we 

promised cooperation, and we promised a commitment to the 

future of this province. We promised to restore financial 

responsibility, we promised to rebuild our economy, and we 

promised to invest in programs and services for our people. Mr. 

Speaker, we have kept that promise and this budget proudly 

invests in our people. 

 

During the course of this budget debate over the last several 

days, Mr. Speaker, I have listened with great interest to the 

remarks of the opposition members. I will be particularly 

interested to hear the remarks now that they have had a chance 

to learn what their own constituents think about this budget. 

And I’ve had an opportunity to review some of those remarks. 

 

At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, how will they vote on the 

budget? This budget. Will they vote for a budget that provides 

more money for the action plan for Saskatchewan children? 

How will they vote on a budget that provides more money for 

education, that provides more money for highways this year and 

a solid plan into the future; on a budget that provides more 

money for job training, police services, and health care, Mr. 

Speaker? How will they vote, Mr. Speaker, on this budget 

which reduces the total overall debt of the province and which 

sets out a sound plan for future balanced budgets and still puts 

more towards debt reduction? And finally, Mr. Speaker, how 

will the members opposite vote on this budget which provides 

the single largest and most broadly based tax reduction in the 

history of our province? 

 

I will be watching. I will be watching their vote on this budget  

with great interest, Mr. Speaker, and so will their constituents 

and all of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now before turning to specific comments about the Department 

of Education’s budget, let me first say a brief word about the 

men and women who work so conscientiously in our public 

education system. Mr. Speaker, we have thousands and 

thousands of dedicated staff, teachers, and trustees who work so 

effectively in schools and classrooms all across the province. 

 

Unlike the situation in some other provinces, Mr. Speaker. In 

Liberal Newfoundland they just laid off close to 500 students 

. . . or 500 teachers. In Quebec, Mr. Speaker, they have cut 

educational spending dramatically to the point where property 

taxes are going to increase overwhelmingly, particularly in 

places like Montreal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike these other provinces, Saskatchewan 

people hold our public education system in high regard. And 

last week, Mr. Speaker, was Education Week, an appropriate 

time for all of us to celebrate the many accomplishments of our 

schools, our teachers, and our students. 

 

We celebrate the dedication and compassion for those who 

work in our community schools, providing special services to 

some very special children. We celebrate the flexibility of those 

who serve smaller rural schools with multi-grade classrooms, 

ensuring that every young person receives a high quality 

education no matter where they live in this province. 

 

We celebrate the energy of those who work so effectively with 

our middle-year students, the exciting and challenging young 

people at the beginning of adolescence. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

celebrate the effectiveness of those who work with our high 

school students, young men and women preparing to enter the 

broader world beyond school, the broader world of work, 

further education, and adulthood. 

 

Saskatchewan people are extremely proud of their public 

education system. And Saskatchewan people are committed to 

ensuring that our public education in this province is second to 

none in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this government, my colleagues 

on this side of the House, share that commitment to education. 

And this budget demonstrates that commitment. 

 

In order to get the most out of their education, students need 

schools that are clean, safe, and healthy. That takes capital 

funding to provide for repairs, renovations, and necessary new 

construction. This budget increases, Mr. Speaker, our annual 

capital investment in schools by over 40 per cent. We provide 

an additional $5 million to upgrade and modernize our schools 

and our classrooms. 

 

And operating grants, Mr. Speaker, to schools are increasing by 

$8 million this year and a further $6 million in the following 

year. This represents an important turnaround from just a year 

ago, Mr. Speaker, when the budget last March predicted further 

cuts in school operating grants. In fact with this new budget, 

operating grants over the next two years will be significantly 

higher than school boards had expected and will be $22 million 

higher than the actual level this past year. That’s good news,  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

Mr. Speaker, for everyone in public education. And it’s good 

news for our province. 

 

But our government’s commitment to public education is 

demonstrated not only in the absolute funding levels. It’s also 

demonstrated by the fact the provincial operating grants are 

increasing as a proportion of total expenditures. The figures 

announced and published in the budget address clearly 

demonstrate that from the year now ending through the next 

two years, provincial operating grants to schools are increasing 

as a proportion of total provincial budgetary expenditures. 

 

(1430) 

 

Now let me summarize the highlights. A 40 per cent increase in 

capital funding; an $8 million increase in operating grants 

coming this year and an additional $5.8 million in the following 

year; continuing strong support for our made-in-Saskatchewan 

core curriculum, which was developed cooperatively by all of 

our partners in education and which is now being implemented 

cooperatively in all of our classrooms. 

 

And our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to increase the share — 

listen carefully — increase the share of total education costs 

borne by the provincial government as our financial resources 

permit, in order to reduce the share borne by local property 

taxpayers. Our Premier has made that commitment and our 

government has made that commitment. 

 

We hear a great deal, Mr. Speaker, about the imminent arrival 

of the new century, moving into the 21st century. And as we 

reflect on the many changes that we have in store for ourselves 

and for our society, we must remember our young people, our 

students. 

 

The students who are today in our elementary and secondary 

schools will spend their entire lives in the 21st century. Today 

more than 80 per cent of the schools in the province are 

connected to the Internet, and the number is growing every 

month. Access to a window on the world and to the information 

highway is critical in order to prepare our students to be 

well-informed and productive citizens moving into the next 

millennium. 

 

But technology alone, Mr. Speaker, is not the answer, and it 

never can be the answer. For our students need more. Above all, 

Mr. Speaker, our students need the support of their parents, they 

need the support of their teachers, and they need the support of 

our whole community as they address the single most critical 

task of human beings — growing up into mature, healthy, 

caring, and responsible adults. 

 

They need the support of a quality education system, the kind of 

supports that are enhanced through this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

The 1997 budget is indeed good news. It’s a budget for the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker, because the people of this 

province have made sacrifices in order that we could get to this 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the teachers in this province have made sacrifices 

in order that we could get to this day. Our civil servants have  

made sacrifices. And taxpayers have made sacrifices, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’ve been asked to pay more in order to get 

our fiscal house in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly proud that this is a good news 

budget for our schools and our classrooms, for our teachers and 

our students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to indicate that I had the opportunity to 

read with great interest some of the remarks made by the Acting 

Leader of the Liberal Party, the Leader of the Liberal Party in 

the House, who also happens to have an interest in education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I read — because I wasn’t 

here to hear his speech — I read with interest some of his 

remarks, particularly as it pertained to the provincial sales tax. 

And I just want to put it on the public record, Mr. Speaker, that 

I and my colleagues on this side of the House were aware for a 

few weeks that there would be a lowering of the provincial sales 

tax. But I want to put it on the record, Mr. Speaker, that I did 

not change my shopping patterns and neither did my colleagues, 

and that I take great offence, I take great offence to whatever 

was insinuated. Whether it was a joke or a jest or whatever, I 

take great offence. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this House, if we 

are to increase the elevation of politics and how people view 

politicians in this province, that we need to be careful about 

what we say to each other, particularly on the floor of the 

legislature. 

 

It seems to me that when we go to some of the functions that 

we’re all invited to, that there seems to be a great deal of 

collegiality and there is civility. And I would ask that all of us 

be mindful that there are people watching us, and they’re 

watching us with interest. And what’s important is that we 

conduct ourselves on the floor of the legislature and not in any 

sense impugn the integrity of each other. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the weeks ahead . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, in the weeks ahead, I 

know we will have great debates. I know that we will have 

occasion when we will agree with each other and we will vote 

on similar pieces of legislation that will have the support of all 

members of the legislature. 

 

There will be debate when we vehemently disagree with each 

other. But I would ask, as a longer serving member of the 

legislature, someone who’s been here practically 11 years, that 

came here as a young person who’s rapidly growing into a 

middle-aged woman, that we treat each other with respect. And 

I’m sure that when we leave this House, if we can manage to do 

that, that the citizens of this province will have a higher regard 

for their political leaders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am going to vote in favour of 

this budget. I am going to vote for a budget that has reduced the 

debt. I’m going to vote for a budget that reduces people’s taxes,  



458  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

and I am going to vote for a budget that puts money into key 

public priority areas like health, like education, like highways, 

like jobs, and other social programs. For my part, Mr. Speaker, 

I can assure you I will be voting in favour of this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with the 

indulgence of the House, before I begin to speak I would ask 

leave to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 

question period I had the opportunity of just talking to the 

guests I had introduced earlier, and in the process I ran into a 

family from Minnesota who happened to be sitting here 

observing the proceedings today — the Nicola family from 

Minnesota. And they’re visiting family and friends over the 

Easter break, and their daughter as well had just informed me 

that she’s looking forward to visiting their state legislature next 

week. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we certainly want to welcome them to 

our province, to our Assembly. We trust that you’ll find the 

state legislature just as civilized as this legislature here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and we certainly welcome you and 

let’s show our traditional welcome to our American guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

intend to take a lot of time this afternoon in speaking to the 

budget speech but I do want to take a moment to put a few 

things on the record. I found with interest as I listened to the 

Minister of Education speaking as she wrapped up her speech, 

some interesting comments about procedure in the Assembly. 

 

And what I find very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is having been 

here and having been elected in 1986 and having sat on the 

government side of the Assembly and now to sit on the 

opposition side of the Assembly, I observe and I’ve observed 

the procedure as it was when the former government was in 

place and many of the members, including the Minister of 

Education, were on this side of the House. It was interesting to 

note how all of a sudden we’re supposed to be just a very calm 

and well-mannered group of individuals. 

 

And while I believe in that, Mr. Speaker, we all know that there 

are times that the debate certainly draws all individuals into the 

debate. And there have been many times when I sat on the other  

side of the House, and while I think the comment was made 

about growing from a young woman into a middle-aged 

woman, I think, Mr. Speaker, we’re kind of all showing our age 

a little bit. I don’t know what it is but . . . what it is about this 

place, but . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of how the debate takes place in 

this Assembly. And I find it interesting that now current 

government members feel that this place should be a lot quieter. 

Well the unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, if we were all to 

succumb to that, we may as well pack up our bags and go home. 

 

I think that’s what the government’s basically saying with their 

budget speech. They’re basically saying, pack up your bags and 

go home; it’s such a good news budget. We’ve offered the 

people of Saskatchewan everything they asked for. We’ve 

offered people, the people of Saskatchewan, tax reduction; 

we’ve put more money into health care; we’ve put more money 

into . . . more money into education. We’re putting more money 

into highways. We’re putting . . . we’re offering a tax break to 

the agricultural producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that someone in the 

opposition side at least stand up and address some of these 

concerns. Regarding the 2 per cent tax reduction, Mr. Speaker, I 

will join my colleagues, and we have already indicated that we 

are very well supportive. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we raised that 

concern. We went to the public in 1995 in the general election 

suggesting that the income tax . . . or the PST (provincial sales 

tax) could be reduced from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing is, why were we at 9 per 

cent? We were at 9 per cent because this government had 

increased the provincial sales tax to 9 per cent. And we offered 

the people of Saskatchewan . . . And the members are asking 

why. And I appreciate that because I look forward to getting 

into more debate as to the why’s, as to the why’s they felt . . . 

And just to point out that much of the problems that were faced 

by the former government can be laid right at their feet. And as 

well, Mr. Speaker, there were many choices that were made to 

indeed address the deficit during the ’80s. But we’ll get into 

that in a moment. 

 

But when we get back to the provincial sales tax, as my 

colleague, the Leader of the Third Party, had indicated, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Kindersley, we were certainly 

pleased to see the government had finally listened to the 

taxpayers of this province and to the third party of this province 

in reducing the provincial sales tax. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker? Because if you look around you, and if 

every resident in this province takes a look at what has 

happened, while the Minister of Finance and the Premier of this 

province have told us that we haven’t increased your taxes, the 

facts are since 1991 taxes have gone up $1,400 for every family 

in this province. And the Minister of Finance says, well we 

didn’t really increase your taxes. Well she can stand here and 

basically argue yes, we haven’t. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the auditor. While she says no,  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

we didn’t increase your taxes directly, other than we increased 

the provincial sales tax by 2 per cent, every time there was a 

power rate increase, every time there was an increase in 

SaskTel, every time SaskEnergy had an increase, Mr. Speaker, 

or the reductions in funding to education and the increases at 

the property tax level or the decreases in funding to municipal 

governments and an increase in the property tax level . . . Mr. 

Speaker, what is that when people have to dig into their pockets 

more. In my terms, in my understanding of fiscal policy, that is 

a tax grab; that is a tax increase. And the people of 

Saskatchewan have been paying more taxes. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I’m not mistaken, the Premier suggested 

in 1991 that his government . . . if he was elected government, 

and if they eliminated all the waste and mismanagement that 

they talked about, that they could operate and run this province 

on $4.5 billion — $4.5 billion. 

 

I just looked at . . . I was just looking the other day at the 

audited statements, and I find that this government has been 

taking more than almost $5.7 billion out of the pockets of the 

people of this province. And he could operate on 4.5. 

 

And the minister . . . and the member from Rosetown talks 

about the interest bill. Well the member from Rosetown maybe 

should go back a little bit and look at what the interest bill was 

in 1982. And he can say, well there was $139 million surplus on 

the general revenue side. True. That is true — 139 million 

surplus on the general revenue side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  But what about the Crown entities. What about 

the unfunded pension liability? And I think there’s about five 

members still in this Assembly that are going to live off that 

unfunded pension liability that the rest of us are going to have 

to pay for. 

 

An unfunded pension liability which since 1991 has grown by 

$600 million — $600 million. And I find it interesting that the 

Premier continually neglects to mention that unfunded pension 

liability. The Premier doesn’t want to talk about it because he 

doesn’t want to admit that the pension plan that he hopes to 

survive on is underfunded and that somebody might have to pay 

for it at the end of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at some of the problems . . . and 

while I will admit that there were some difficult decisions and 

maybe some costly decisions made during the ’80s, I don’t 

know of a government that hasn’t made mistakes. I don’t know 

of a government that hasn’t made decisions that have been 

costly. 

 

And the member from Regina is hollering from his seat. He’d 

probably like to bring up GigaText. But what about Nabu? Who 

started the Nabu process? Who lost the $5 million prior to 1982 

when that even had a greater value than GigaText? And yes 

GigaText was a mistake; we’ll admit that. 

 

(1445) 

 

But I would ask any member today if the expenditure in 

Rafferty-Alameda was a mistake. I’d like to ask the members 

today if the expenditure in Saskferco was a mistake. I’m sure 

that the Minister of Finance is just thrilled to see the revenue 

that is being generated as a result of the Saskferco plant that is 

operating to capacity and just turning out fertilizer. Rather than 

us having to go outside of the province and importing it, we are 

an exporter of fertilizer products to the provinces and drawing 

revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find as well it’s interesting that the members 

opposite would like to blame the Devine government when, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1982, who went to the New York money markets, 

borrowed the money, invested it in holes in the ground, and 

turned the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which was a 

revenue generator to the province, into a sinkhole for 

government funds? By 1986, $1.2 billion in debt — the Potash 

Corporation was — that had to be written off. That certainly 

wasn’t, that certainly wasn’t the former government’s fault. It 

was an investment made in the 1970s when times were good, 

Mr. Speaker, that came back to haunt the Conservatives, that 

this government even has to deal with today. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that’s very interesting, and maybe 

the members opposite should go back into the blue book and 

read about it. I believe the member from Regina South — I’m 

not sure if that’s the exact location but — made a comment 

about the Heritage Fund. Well maybe he should take a look at 

what the blue book has to say about the Heritage Fund. 

 

Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that the investment that this 

government got themselves involved into in the ’70s where they 

went and borrowed money in the foreign money markets and 

bought Saskatchewan land, forcing . . . driving the price of land 

up to the point that many farmers were in difficulty in the ’80s. 

 

Do you realize, Mr. Speaker, that while they bought that land, 

while they borrowed the money outside of the province, while 

they borrowed at high interest rates, Mr. Speaker, the 

interesting thing that I found out is they entered into rental 

agreements, rental agreements which through the 1980s did not 

draw enough revenue to pay even half of the interest on that 

money. 

 

So where did it come from? And it’s all out on the Public 

Accounts. It’s in the public documents. The government, 

through the ’80s, had to go to the Heritage Fund to the tune of 

anywhere from 9 to $12 million to top up this land bank scheme 

that this government had entered into. 

 

And that’s, Mr. Speaker . . . when you look at it and when you 

take a look at what the auditor’s comments about the budget 

that was presented the other day, it’s very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. As you start to look at the total picture of the 

government of the province of Saskatchewan, it’s really 

interesting to note how this Premier and this Finance minister, 

how they choose the numbers and the way they want to present 

the finances of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

While we appreciate what’s been done on the provincial sales  



460  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

tax side, one I guess politically would sit back and say, well 

boy, that’s great, but how come now? You know, we’re about 

two years away, at least two years from a provincial budget. 

You’d think the government’s going to hold off and present a 

little more closer to a provincial budget. Is it because there’s a 

federal budget on the horizon and they’re trying to prop up their 

colleagues in this province to unseat some of the Liberals that 

are currently here, that are probably going to lose anyway? I 

don’t know. I don’t know if they have to do that to get rid of 

any federal Liberals. I think there are, I think there are a lot of 

opportunities out there. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. All hon. members on both sides 

of the House will recognize that it’s inappropriate to be 

attempting to enter your remarks into debate by shouting across 

the floor. And I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the hon. 

member for Moosomin to be able to continue his debate in an 

unimpeded manner. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when . . . 

It doesn’t matter how you look at it, it’s time the Premier, it’s 

time the Minister of Finance, became honest with the public of 

Saskatchewan. It’s time they became honest with the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting, these 

government . . . the government members talking about open 

and accountable. 

 

In the last session of the Public Accounts Committee 

government members voted against a motion that would have 

indeed opened up and made the government more accountable. 

A motion brought forward by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

In fact a suggestion that I heard coming from the federal 

auditor, as I attended the IPAC (Institute of Public 

Administration of Canada) breakfast meeting this morning. A 

suggestion that governments got to become . . . need to become 

more open, more accountable. And to do that they need to 

present all the books, wide open, from your general revenue to 

your Crown sector to any other resource or revenue generation 

that the province — the province or the federal government — 

has. And when the auditor tells us that it’s playing and it’s 

monkeying around with numbers, I think for far too long, this 

government’s been doing that. 

 

And now we find this government trying to tell us that they 

needed a bail-out. Well it’s kind of interesting that those awful 

federal Tories would come to the defence of a province that was 

in such dire financial straits — $45 million is going to put them 

under — when there is a $130 million that they had in a slush 

fund, Mr. Speaker, that had been accumulated from liquor and 

gaming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there was certainly potash revenues available as a result of 

the privatization of the Potash Corporation — which I thank the 

members opposite for finally completing the transaction that 

has allowed that company to become one of the largest potash 

or fertilizer companies in the world, Mr. Speaker — deriving 

revenue and revenue generation to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that I could go on at length. I probably  

have gone longer than I had intended to, but I want to just bring 

out a couple points. A couple points, and just point out some of 

the areas that . . . the inconsistencies in this budget. The 

minister talked about . . . or the Finance minister talked about 

increases in funding to education. The Minister of Education 

just talked about those financial increases. 

 

I read from the SSTA — the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association — is telling us the fact is that any money provided 

in the budget has already been spent. Basically, what are they 

saying, Mr. Speaker? They’re telling us that it’s no new money. 

They’re really answering . . . What the Minister of Finance and 

the Minister of Education are doing was answering a request 

put by our caucus, in asking the government to now, once 

you’ve negotiated a contract with teachers, put the money up to 

guarantee that, rather than asking boards to take from funding 

that was already theirs. And the opposition raised that. The 

opposition side of the House raised that, Mr. Speaker, back in 

the spring budget. 

 

So while we would be led to believe that it’s new money that’s 

going to provide more education, the reality is it’s just filling a 

hole that the government had already created. 

 

So we’re pleased to see that there’s more money put into it. At 

least it gives the boards the opportunity to use the dollars they 

have there right now to currently look at and continue with the 

ongoing programs that they already have in place. 

 

What about health care, Mr. Speaker? That 59 million — 59 

million. I believe the Minster of Health told us today that it will 

. . . the current health districts will now have an increase or a 

surplus at the end of the year. Well I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, 

health districts are going to be pleased to see an injection of $59 

million. The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is, will everyone be 

onboard once the money is divided up? 

 

And I think that’s an area that opposition members and our 

caucus are going to have to be cognizant of, making sure that 

the money is distributed evenly; that it’s made available to areas 

outside of Saskatoon and Regina; that every health board has 

equal access to the funds that should be coming to them. And I 

think that’s very important. That’s a key component. 

 

And on the other side, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

deficits that health boards are facing, there won’t be a lot of real 

money left for real programs. And that is going to be . . . that is 

an issue that’s going to have . . . continue to be a problem that 

we’re going to have to continue to address. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this tax credit to agriculture. What I find 

really interesting about that is the fact that the government 

talked about a tax rebate on livestock equipment or buildings 

and facilities. And I thought to myself, well that’s nice, because 

we’re talking about diversification and there’s a lot of people 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan look at diversifying 

their operations. Some are getting into small feed lot operations; 

some are getting into cow-calf operations. There are a number 

of large hog operations coming into the province. 

 

The part that really disturbed me was when I got to about the  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

end of the newsletter that came from the Department of 

Agriculture and it said there’s a $500 deductible on this 

program — $500 deductible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what it boils down to is, unless you’re prepared to 

invest more than $7,000 — get into a large operation — you 

basically don’t qualify. Which means the greatest percentage of 

the producers in this province will not qualify for a tax rebate. I 

think that is totally ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think everyone in this province puts into and is part of the 

economic engine of this province, not just the few large hog 

operations such as Sask Wheat Pool is producing around the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, the 

only reason it’s in there is because of Sask Wheat Pool, not 

really looking at the farmers and the other individuals who have 

made a real investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One more point, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll sit down. Highways 

budget. I believe there were a number of questions in the 

Assembly today about highways and the problems in our 

highway system. The minister stood in this Assembly today and 

said, $2.5 billion into highways over the next 10 years. Well 

guess what, Mr. Speaker? That basically brings the highways 

budget back to what it was before this government took office 

in 1991. So is that a real improvement in highway 

expenditures? I don’t think so. I don’t think so. 

 

And the members talk about no deficit. Well maybe it’s time 

they set priorities. Maybe it’s time they . . . maybe, maybe it’s 

time, Mr. Speaker, they forgot about appointing all their NDP 

cronies to positions like we just saw yesterday — Gordon 

Nystuen, another NDP long-time cohort, president of STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company). And I’m looking 

forward to seeing whether or not there’s an improvement in 

how that company operates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and how many others? I would suggest, as we 

suggested here, that the province of Saskatchewan would get a 

greater benefit if Mr. Archer was given the president of 

SaskPower rather than the current SaskPower president. We’d 

have possibly a good quarterback, a good football team in this 

province of Saskatchewan, and everyone would be really 

feeling great. 

 

You know there are so many other avenues and I just think it’s 

uncanny that the government hasn’t been able to come up and 

think of some of these methods and which way they can . . . 

where they can spread the lucrative dollars around rather than it 

just looking within all the time and finding individuals. But I 

guess time will tell whether they have the ability to really 

become good business people. 

 

But on the $2.5 billion, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly time that a 

real commitment was made to highways. The unfortunate part 

in that commitment — I’m not sure I really saw any major 

commitment to twinning of No. 1. The comment was made 

about twinning of highways. I think it’s time that there was a 

long-term plan looked at, placed before the Assembly and 

before the people of Saskatchewan, so that we would know that 

there will be some definite dollars going into redirect . . .  

redirected and reconstruction and upgrading of the highway 

system in this province. 

 

As you well know, Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that we do that 

as a result of — and the government’s aware of it; the Minister 

of Agriculture is aware of it — the changes in the freight 

structure, the changes in the way grain is moved and grain and 

livestock are moved in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that I think you can 

see from what I’ve said today, that while we applaud the 

government in certain areas of the budget, there are other areas 

that take more scrutiny, take more time to debate. And I look 

forward to entering into the debate in this . . . on this floor as we 

enter into the total picture and address line by line, budget 

speech debates with the different departments and with the 

different ministers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly been a pleasure to enter into the 

debate this afternoon. I’m thankful for our guests that have 

come up from Minnesota. I trust they find this educational and I 

wish them well through their Easter break. 

 

And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just take a moment as well to 

wish all the members a pleasant Easter break as we’re entering 

that season fairly closely and I probably won’t have time to 

speak again. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it really is an honour for me today to 

enter this debate on the 1997 provincial budget. And I want to 

begin by thanking my constituents for their continued support, 

for their patience as we struggled with the difficult situation that 

we found ourselves in in Saskatchewan over the last years. I 

really do appreciate their support, their comments, and their 

input. And I want, certainly, that dialogue with my constituents 

to continue because for me it is a very positive part of me doing 

my job. 

 

I want to begin today by telling the Assembly a little bit about 

what my view and my perspective of this caucus, this 

government, in fact is. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

recognize my colleagues as a group of committed social 

democrats who have been successfully dealing with the realities 

of the 1990s. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as I work on a day-to-day basis with 

members on this side of the House, it becomes clear why we 

have been so successful. The reason that we’ve been successful 

as a government is because we have been able to establish for 

ourselves a very clear vision of where we’re going to and where 

we want to be. 

 

(1500) 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, my observation would be as 

well, that we’re the only group in this legislature that believes 

in using government as a tool, as a vehicle to benefit the lives of 

all of the people of Saskatchewan, and that government plays  



462  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

a very positive role in the quest to bring about a more just and a 

more equitable society. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well, that my observation is that 

members on this side of the House are committed to delivering 

government where all citizens have a voice in the 

decision-making process, to make people feel good about the 

future of this province, and to give them a sense of belonging 

and a sense of opportunity, and to make this government theirs 

once again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this caucus, members on this side, truly believe in 

a sustainable, publicly funded, single-tier health care system, 

unlike Liberal members on that side of the House. Those are 

some of the differences, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this caucus believe our children and 

our youth should have access to the best education system that 

can be afforded by this province. And I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to ensure, and this budget is very much 

reflective that this government is committed to make sure, that 

that happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I believe that the most 

vulnerable in our society should be given a helping hand and 

that also is addressed in our action plan for children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I believe that we cannot and 

we should not ever again allow the people of this province to 

have to rely on bond holders and bankers to finance our 

day-to-day operations of government. We all know, Mr. 

Speaker, that that kind of action is not sustainable and will 

result in the eventual destruction of programs that I mentioned 

earlier that we all hold near and dear and that we’re all so proud 

of, like medicare and high quality of public education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget that our government and 

the people of Saskatchewan truly can be proud of. We have 

shown the people of Saskatchewan that government can exhibit 

fiscal integrity. This is the fourth consecutive balanced budget 

this government has produced. We have been able to 

significantly reduce the province’s debt as a percentage of gross 

domestic product. That has been reduced from what was 70 per 

cent to now in the neighbourhood of 49 per cent, and that debt 

load will continue to be cut as we progress through our budgets 

in the future. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this is good news for 

Saskatchewan. It’s good news that we’re able to reduce this 

debt. It’s good news for investors. It’s good news for the people 

who borrow us money because it ensures that our risk is a lot 

lower and hopefully we can see a credit upgrade as a result of 

that, Mr. Speaker. And it’s good news because it allows us to 

deliver some much-needed tax relief and to enhance spending, 

as we have done in this budget with respect to the most needy in 

our province, with respect to health care, and with respect to 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget emphasizes the value of public input 

in the decision-making process as I indicated earlier, and we 

recognize the need to have community involved as we put  

together a response with respect to our budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we listened to the needs that people had addressed 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, the budget clearly outlines that this is 

a government that understands the people of Saskatchewan and 

we have listened to their concerns. 

 

Well earlier, Mr. Speaker, I indicated that I believe that this is 

the only political party in this legislature with a vision. And I 

said that I believe that we are the only party that has a good 

understanding of where this province has come from, where our 

political movement has come from, and where we want to be in 

the future. 

 

I want to just briefly turn to where we have come from, and I’m 

not going to dwell on . . . and I’m going to spare you a 

recounting of the mess that the Tories left us in. Instead, I want 

to be able to talk about what we intend to do in the future with 

the financial resources that the people of Saskatchewan have 

allowed for us. 

 

I want to start by talking about tax relief. From the beginning of 

this mandate in 1991 we have introduced, albeit modest, we 

have introduced tax . . . very significant tax reductions. They 

have been targeted, Mr. Speaker, and we recognize that. 

 

We have introduced the child tax reduction for low income 

families. That’s been increased by 10 per cent. Small business 

corporate income tax has been reduced. We have introduced tax 

credits for manufacturing and processing that have created jobs 

in this province. We’ve reduced the fuel tax on aviation fuel. 

We’ve reduced the personal income tax of up to $300 a family 

for 6,000 of the lowest income earning families in this province. 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, finally we have been able to deal with 

our provincial sales tax and introduce a 2 per cent decrease in 

this budget. 

 

And I would like to remind members opposite that a 

Saskatchewan family in this province pays less in provincial 

sales tax in 1997 than families in Alberta pay in health care 

premiums. And I think it’s important to remind in particular the 

Tory parties who hold Ralph Klein’s administration up as a 

flagship and a model for government. This is a government that 

has done things differently, Mr. Speaker. We have initiated 

government the Saskatchewan way — with compassion, 

working with people. And I think that it speaks a lot for the 

people of Saskatchewan in terms of the kinds of government 

they elect, frankly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, our government is and has 

always been committed to a universal health care system even 

in our deepest and darkest financial times. We embarked on an 

ambitious and a very badly needed reform of health care in 

Saskatchewan, but we have been able to maintain the principles 

of medicare that were established in this province so many 

years ago by people who think as we do on this side — that that 

is one of the flagships and the hallmarks that Saskatchewan has 

been able to offer the people of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I 

find it unfortunate that members of the opposition have to 

continue to be resorting to scare tactics with respect to health 

care. I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that they would have 

learned from Ross Thatcher’s history — the defender of 

medicare that he was — that the people of Saskatchewan trust 

the New Democrat government with health care in their hands. 

And I think the future will show, as we lead the people of 

Canada into a reformed health care system, that we will again 

be the flagship in Canada with respect to medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I 

really wish the Liberals would stop wasting their energies on 

half-truths and join with us in demanding that their federal 

counterparts in Ottawa develop the same kind of an approach to 

health care as the Government of Saskatchewan has done under 

the member from Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it was a proud day and it was a 

very happy day, after more than a decade, this government was 

finally able to deliver a balanced budget. Shortly thereafter 

though we faced the challenge — cut-backs from the federal 

Liberals with respect to health care and education and social 

programs. But we saw it through, Mr. Speaker. We were forced 

to make some tough decisions, and in the end one of the 

decisions we made was to back-fill every single dollar that the 

Chrétien Liberal government ripped out of the pockets of the 

people of this province in health care and education and social 

services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say the 

difference between members on this side of the House and this 

government and other jurisdictions is that we are the only 

administration in Canada who saw fit to do that. Mr. Speaker, 

why did we do that? I’ll tell you why. Because we believe very 

strongly in the value of the programs that these cuts targeted. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it irritates me no end when I 

see the Liberal opposition, having said absolutely nothing and 

defending the cuts of their counterparts in Ottawa, stand up and 

criticize this government for not putting enough money into 

health care and not putting enough money into social services 

and not putting enough money into education. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to each and every one of them, 

shame on you, shame on you. Because this is the most positive 

and forward-looking budget that’s been introduced in this 

legislature since 1982 and you know it; and if you don’t, you 

should. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, the phrase that was 

used throughout the throne speech and the theme of the throne 

speech was investing in people. And how did we do that, Mr. 

Speaker? We’ve cut the provincial sales tax, as I’ve indicated. 

We’ve increased spending on health and education. And we’ve 

introduced programs to address child poverty. We’ve put a 

massive amount of money committed over a long-term period 

to our infrastructure on highways. I want to say all of this, Mr. 

Speaker, represents a very major and a very positive investment 

in the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a little bit of difference here in terms of 

what this administration does and others have been known to do 

— in particular, Liberals. And watch in the upcoming weeks as 

the federal Liberals gear up for their election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very positive budget. Many people said, 

oh my goodness, it almost looks like an election budget. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a Liberal government; this is a New 

Democrat government and we were striving and working for the 

day when we could offer some tax relief and some enhanced 

spending to the people of this province after them having 

suffered for so many years because of right-wing 

mismanagement perpetrated by members on the other side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  And I want to say that these 

investments in Saskatchewan people are stable and they are 

sustainable and they’re here for the long haul. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned the importance of sustainability in 

my statement, and why do I place an emphasis on this concept? 

I want to tell you. I do so because I want these investments and 

the fiscal freedom that we fought so hard for to be here for my 

children and your children and future generations of this 

province. When you get down to it, this budget isn’t really so 

much about today; this budget is about tomorrow and it’s about 

the future of the citizens of this province — our young people 

and generations yet to come. That’s who we govern for. That’s 

why we were charged to put the fiscal house in order, of this 

province. 

 

And we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say, not so 

much for us, for our generation. We’ve had it very good 

frankly, here in Saskatchewan, people of my age. I’m interested 

and I’m concerned in the direction that I want to see this 

government take is for the young people of Saskatchewan and 

for their children, because, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this 

government is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’ve spoken at length about who I 

believe we are — members on this side of the House — what 

we stand for and where we come from. And I’d like to if I 

could, Mr. Speaker, comment on the members opposite — who 

they are and what, if anything, they stand for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Monday I was in this House and I was listening 

with interest to the member from Melville and his response to 

the budget. And what I found really, really telling and really, 

really interesting was what he chose to use in his speech. 

 



464  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, what the member from Melville chose to use in 

his speech was not speak to the budget, what the budget 

delivered, and the hope that it delivered to the people of 

Saskatchewan. He chose to attack the youngest member in this 

legislature, a man who has not yet reached the age of 30 years 

old but who had the courage to stand up for his convictions and 

seek election in one of the most difficult New Democrat seats in 

this province. That’s the character of the member from 

Melville, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in 

his comments he indicated that it was almost a shameful thing 

that this young man should join us in the legislature, a young 

fellow with a lack of experience. Well I want to tell you 

something, I have worked very closely with that member for the 

past years and I have a very, very good understanding, unlike 

the member from Melville, of who he is and where he intends to 

take this province in the time that he spends in his political life, 

Mr. Speaker. And I want to say that he knows who he is, unlike 

that member, who was defeated for a Reform Party nomination 

and who now sits in this House purporting to be a Liberal. Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Regina South knows who he is and 

he knows what he stands for, unlike that member, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, the attitude, the 

attitude of the member from Melville is a real good illustration 

of why the Liberal Party is not now fit to govern this province 

and will never be fit to govern this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Now, Mr. Speaker, this Reformer 

turned Liberal — part of an organization, a political bunch of 

wannabes, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature plotting with the 

member from Wood River for the day of the knives when they 

could cut the heart out of the member from Greystone, the then 

leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. That’s what Liberals 

are about. 

 

That’s what this opposition is about, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

ragtag group of individuals who have banded together to form 

what they believe is a political movement, with no ideology, 

Mr. Speaker, no integrity, Mr. Speaker, and no direction. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why they will sit on the opposition side of 

this House for a long, long time to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I was listening as well 

to the member from Melfort-Tisdale, a known supporter of the 

Conservative administration of the 1980s in his area. And then 

he left the Tories when they fell out of favour, so deservedly, 

and he emerges on the hustings as a Liberal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget his political heritage — Liberal, 

Tory, same old story. It never changes, Mr. Speaker. They 

move from that corner of the opposition to that corner of the 

opposition. And what do you call them? Liberals or Tories or 

Reformers, Mr. Speaker? They’re all the same; they’re no 

different. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I listened as well with interest 

to the speech of the member from Wood River. Now this is a 

man of integrity. This is a textbook example, Mr. Speaker, of 

political opportunism. I tell you, you pull out Webster’s 

dictionary and you look up that phrase in the dictionary and 

you’ll see a picture of his face right beside the words, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what that’s all about. 

 

He couldn’t handle the tough decisions that had to be made 

when we were trying to put our feet back on the ground on this 

side, Mr. Speaker. He couldn’t handle making the tough 

choices. And he knew because of that he’d be a perpetual 

back-bencher on this side of this House and that’s why he left, 

Mr. Speaker. He thought the pastures were greener on the other 

side of the House, and he sits in the corner isolated from his 

colleagues, Mr. Speaker. That’s what that opposition is all 

about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why do I say this about members on the 

opposition side? Well let me ask some questions, and I could 

actually give some answers. What’s their position on gaming? I 

don’t know. Mr. Speaker, what’s their position on health care? 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. But you know what the saddest part 

of this, Mr. Speaker, is? That they don’t know. That’s the sad 

part of this; they don’t know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governing is not an easy chore, and it’s about 

making decisions and it’s about making difficult decisions and 

it’s about making the right decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close my remarks; many of my 

colleagues have more to say on this. But I want to remind the 

people of Saskatchewan what the Leader of this Liberal Party is 

about. 

 

The good doctor is in favour of two-tier health care and he’s in 

favour of harmonization. I tell you what he’s in favour of, 

destroying medicare, Mr. Speaker, and increasing taxes in this 

province. And I can see why that has to be, because every day 

in here they’re talking about increasing expenditures on this and 

increasing expenditures on that. Mr. Speaker, we worked long 

and hard to put a balanced, reasoned approach to this budget. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in my travels throughout this 

province in the last short while, I can say to members in the 

opposition that this has been a very, very positively received 

budget. And I know why, Mr. Speaker, because there is trust in 

this government. There is trust that this government will 

continue to manage, that we will continue to govern with 

compassion and that we will continue to listen to the people of 

this province in doing so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by capsulating what this  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

government has done. We’ve delivered four consecutive 

balanced budgets and there’s more to follow. We’ve increased 

expenditures to enhance the quality of life for our friends and 

our neighbours, for the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve been 

able to include a measure of tax relief for Saskatchewan people 

and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been able to do all of this maintaining 

the fiscal integrity of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by thanking each and every one of 

my caucus colleagues. And I want to say to you all that this has 

been the finest group of men and women that I’ve had the 

opportunity to work with and you should all be proud of 

yourselves. You should all be proud of having the courage to do 

what in this province needs to be done. And I think you can go 

home to your constituents with a high head and you can do that 

because you’ve done the right things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just close and say thank you to the 

Premier of this province for his leadership. And I want to say to 

all members of the House that I would like to just do a short 

quote from something that the Premier of this province is often 

heard to say: “Let’s continue to work to make Saskatchewan the 

greatest province in the greatest country in the world in which 

to live.” 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 1997 budget has 

been presented to the people of this province and I’m really 

delighted to enter into the debate on behalf of the people of 

Kelvington-Wadena constituency. 

 

During the throne speech debate I neglected to welcome the 

new viewers in our community that are watching the legislative 

channel. I trust they will feel more involved in the workings of 

the provincial government and they’ll continue to keep me 

informed with their comments and concerns as the weeks go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, life has carried on much the same as it did prior to 

the presentation of the 1997 budget, even though the hype and 

the fanfare of that much-touted day would have led us to 

believe we were entering into a new type of euphoria. People 

always wait with much anticipation to find out how the 

government is going to spend their money. This of course isn’t 

a big change in the way the universe usually unfolds in 

Saskatchewan, at least for the last 90 years. Government 

decides how to spend our money and then asks our permission 

in four or five years when another election is called. This year is 

no different. It’s no better, but perhaps it was a little worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at first glance this appeared to be a very positive 

budget. Of course, any politically astute person would have 

realized this would be a good news year. The government and 

the Crowns handled more money than this province has ever 

seen. 

 

We all realize that this government, by the very fact that politics 

is the backbone of the institution, would have preferred  

to wait until at least next year to present a good news budget. It 

is normally expected closer to an election year. But the 

magnitude of the fortunes that fell this year decreed that there 

must be some positive breaks for the people in Saskatchewan. 

And once people have had one good news budget, it will have 

to happen again next year and the next year and the next year. 

And my advice to the Finance minister is, deal with it. 

 

Of course the excitement in the budget centred around the 

decrease in one of the taxes that were plaguing the people of 

this province – the much-hated provincial sales tax. Sales tax 

rebate on building materials for livestock and horticultural 

activities and the extension of the manufacturing and processing 

tax credit to include used equipment is definitely a plus. 

 

The increase in funding to the Women’s Secretariat, if it is 

described as it was in the public information, is exciting and 

innovative. And I would like to congratulate the minister 

involved and support her efforts in bringing the very real 

problems of women to the forefront. I also welcome the news 

that the government will spend $120,000 on education for fetal 

alcohol syndrome. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I go further into the budget address I 

would like to thank the member from Regina Victoria for his 

reply to the throne speech . . . or the budget speech. That 

member obviously spent an enormous amount of time going 

through Hansard reviewing speeches made by the Liberals to 

write his own reply. His unsuccessful attempt at humour, as 

opposed to his speech . . . substance or originality is of course 

one way of representing people. Mr. Speaker, the people in my 

constituency expect that their ideas and their concerns and their 

problems be brought to the attention of government. I assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, they don’t consider their problems humorous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much of my time as well as the time of my 

colleagues is spent working for people who live in the 

constituencies of the members opposite. The people who do not 

get the help they need from this government are forced to call 

on the opposition. My colleagues and I don’t have time to go 

through Hansard to find substance for a speech and we don’t 

have time to talk about the birds or the gospel according to 

Mandryk. This jargon is too trivial compared to the problems of 

the real people of this province. 

 

But the caustic remarks of the members opposite only 

emphasizes their arrogance and the fact that this government is 

totally out of touch with the people. It also underlines the fact 

that the people’s voices are only being heard by the members on 

this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, including the Finance 

minister, have heard the reaction to the budget not only from 

the Liberals but also the media and the citizens of this province. 

By nature and by necessity the people from my constituency, 

the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, consider repetition 

redundant. And we, unlike the members opposite, abhor hearing 

the same thing repeated over and over and over again. Things 

like it’s the federal government’s fault; it’s because of  



466  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

offloading from the federal government. It may work, Mr. 

Speaker, but it doesn’t give any validity to the statement and we 

don’t like to pay the game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make one point abundantly clear. No 

one, absolutely no one, was fooled by the blatantly obvious fact 

that the manner in which the budget address as presented by the 

Finance minister was an attempt to bolster the chances of the 

NDP candidates in the upcoming federal election. 

 

In fact every speech, every answer to every question the people 

of this province have heard by this NDP government since 

session began, was used as an opportunity to slam the federal 

Liberals. The fact that the Leader of the federal NDP Party sat 

in our Assembly the first day of session was the first clue. The 

rhetoric we heard every day was the second clue. And the 

address around the budget was really the icing on the cake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really don’t mind if the members want to spend 

their whole time slamming the federal Liberals, our federal 

caucus members, if that’s what you want to refer to them as. 

 

You’ve probably heard the saying, you can pick your friends 

but you can’t pick your relatives. Well our federal cousins are 

just relatives. But the people of this province who have to listen 

to your rhetoric every day must get tired of your canned 

responses. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are too 

wise to fall for this garbage two years in a row. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  If, and I underline if, one could believe in a 

socialist philosophy, and realizing that all is fair in love, war, 

and politics, I can understand them trying to use this tactic. 

Especially considering the status of the present NDP federal 

party, the reality of their chances in the next election, and 

realistically, their ability to govern a nation as diverse as that of 

Canada. 

 

Just so you know why you’re constantly repeating the phrase, 

Liberals are the bad guys, I keep remembering the phrase from 

Hamlet that says: me thinks the members protesteth too much. 

Your rhetoric is wearing thin and it’s getting on everyone’s 

nerves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget proved to me that this government’s 

understanding of the business environment and the need for 

change in that environment is still non-existent. The reduction 

of the PST by 2 per cent resulted in another reduction — that of 

government revenue in the amount of nearly $200 million. 

Propaganda sent out at the time of the budget talked about its 

moves as an attempt to create jobs. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, reducing the PST is just one-sided. It’s a 

totally disjointed measure that is totally unconnected to 

anything else in this budget. The member from Regina Victoria 

summed up the government’s real understanding of the 

reduction when he said: 

 

. . . we hope that the tax cuts will . . . create jobs. We hope 

that the tax cut will . . . be good for (the) economic  

activity. But our major priority is to reduce the tax burden 

. . . 

 

What’s that got to do with the job creation that you’re talking 

about? You don’t understand it. The two of them go hand in 

hand. 

 

The rationalization underlines the fact that this government has 

no understanding of what business means when they talk about 

an environment. Mr. Speaker, I have no confidence that this 

government knows why the reduction is important at all or why 

this is only one step that, without an overall plan and without 

faith in the people in this province, will never result . . . never 

produce the results you need. In fact one only has to ask if the 

reduction is sustainable, if the government is only willing to 

float one trial balloon to see if business can succeed without 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was one other tangible outcome from this 

budget. The slush fund that this government uses to kite money 

back and forth between general revenues and the Liquor and 

Gaming fund now has its own official name. It’s now called the 

stabilization fund. We’re not sure if its purpose is to stabilize 

the economy or to stabilize the government, but by 

acknowledging that the government has this kiting fund is a 

first step. 

 

I think we can relate this government’s gambling problem to 

other addictions. Recognizing the problem and openly 

admitting it is cleansing for your soul. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, maintaining the stabilization fund is actually this 

government’s insurance policy on the risk created by giving 

people control of their dollars. This government could choose to 

put the $150 million they now have in the stabilization fund into 

the province to ensure that schools would remain open or that 

the health services are restored or even that our highway would 

be rescued from its state of disrepair. 

 

But that would take some understanding of the link between 

creating a positive business environment and an environment 

for growth. And this government can’t seem to make a 

connection. 

 

I believe that the stabilization fund proves the PST reduction is 

a disjointed measure business people have come to expect from 

this socialist government. The NDP government has given a 

small reward to the citizens after the beatings of the past five 

years. 

 

The stabilization fund is sort of like leaving your estate to your 

children but not allowing them to use it until you’ve retired 

yourself. No opportunity to use it, no belief they have any 

ability to use it correctly, so they’ll just let it lay there. 

 

This is really an age-old socialist trick. Use the Crowns to bleed 

the people, and then use their existence to prove that socialism 

works. 

 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

Mr. Speaker, I challenge the government to find me one person 

who’s so patriotic that they prefer that Saskatchewan owns a 

hundred per cent of the Crowns instead of keeping their 

hospitals open or their schools open. Mr. Speaker, the fact the 

Crowns are growing is proof that more money is being sucked 

out of the taxpayers than is necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we compare our province to either Alberta 

or Manitoba, we always end up with the short end of the stick. 

One only has to compare the political history of our provinces 

to understand why Saskatchewan has stagnated for the last 50 

years while our neighbouring provinces have continued to 

achieve their potential. 

 

I ask you how many years has a socialist government ruled in 

Saskatchewan in the last 50 years, and how many years have 

they ruled in Alberta and Manitoba? This is not a coincidence. 

Saskatchewan has as many if not more natural resources than 

our neighbouring provinces. 

 

Our talented and entrepreneurial people have been making their 

marks all over the world. But our trouble is that a socialist 

government has an inability to attract or even keep these people 

at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, targeted tax relief means that growth is restricted 

— restricted to the areas that this government wants to see it 

grow in. A small amount of relief means that people have a half 

a chance to make their mortgage payments. It doesn’t mean 

long-term wealth creation. It doesn’t mean business start-ups. It 

just means less people will go bankrupt. 

 

We have targeted relief in this budget. We have the government 

realizing that they want to help pigs and potatoes. And that’s 

good. I think that we should have a hog industry and I think 

there’s lots of opportunity within the potato industry for growth. 

 

But why should the government decide who is going to be the 

winner and who’s going to be the loser in this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the events following this budget provide us some 

understanding of why the third party nearly decimated the 

province in the ‘80s and proved to me that the current PC Party 

is totally incapable of ever being an alternative government in 

this province again. The endorsement of the budget by the 

Leader of the Third Party, to the point of supporting this 

left-wing, self-serving document had to be done to save face. 

 

But how could a conservative, right-wing party like the PCs 

stoop to socialist ideology? The PST reduction was the only 

solid proposal of the PCs this session. Hopefully they don’t 

believe that this one simple proposal will make life wonderful 

in Saskatchewan. Perhaps the political belief that to have one 

uncomplicated message to the electorate — the PST reduction 

— just backfired on the third party. 

 

Whatever the answer, the NDP government should be happy. 

There are only 11 of us left now to hold their feet to the fire. It’s 

a great day for the government and a black day for the people of 

this province. 

Mr. Speaker, the saddest thing about this budget was the final 

insult given to rural Saskatchewan. The cut, or shall I call it the 

downloading and the offloading, from the province onto the 

municipalities makes the federal government look like an 

amateur at the game. The cuts will force local governments to 

cut services and to cut programs. The savings realized by 

individuals as the result of the PST reduction will pale in 

comparison with the increase in property taxes because of your 

choice in budgetary spending. 

 

Boards that were waiting to hear if the budget would breathe 

back life into the schools now realize they don’t have a future. 

Small hospitals watch as the larger centres receive the biggest 

increases to their budget. This in turn means that services will 

only be available in designated locations picked by this 

government. 

 

And with the migration fundings, these hospitals are in a 

catch-22. You need the services to bring the people. The fewer 

the services, the less money. The less money, the fewer 

services, and so on and so on until there will be nothing left of 

our district health boards in the rural areas. 

 

The funding through the infrastructure program can only be 

garnered if municipalities have the matching funding available. 

With the cut-backs, many will have difficulty finding their 

share, and as a result, they may be unable to access government 

funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think of the localities out in rural Saskatchewan 

that are suffering because of this government. The Big River 

nursery that’s been in business for over 30 years is losing a 

hundred jobs. We have schools in Weekes. If that school closes, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a 70-minute bus ride, one way, 

for those students to go to school. 

 

What about . . . between Porcupine and Kindersley and Hudson 

Bay there are 75 miles. Mr. Speaker, in Annaheim and 

Englefeld, the towns that are actually thriving with . . . because 

of industry, they’re having problems because they can’t keep 

their schools open. We can’t attract young people to come to a 

town to work in a job if there’s no schools there. They believe 

in their family. They want to keep their families together, and if 

we don’t have a school system they can’t come. They’ll be 

forced to live in a bigger centre and drive out to rural 

Saskatchewan if it’s still there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the education dollars that were flaunted in this 

budget did little more than just cover the increase that was 

given to our teachers. We all know that teachers deserve every 

penny they get, but they weren’t given any extra money. 

 

The highways’ dollars is $2.5 million a year. It doesn’t sound 

near as great as saying 2.5 billion in 10 years. The reality is it’s 

still only two hundred point five a year. Do you know how 

much it costs to build 1 mile of highway? The Minister of 

Highways knows — $1 million. So that means we could have 

200 miles built in a year. That’s not a lot. In the meantime we 

have to maintain the roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that in the budget, SOCO  



468  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) was given an extra 

million dollars for administration. Now that is really frustrating 

considering they’ve only dealt with 15 applications in the last 

three years, and is continuing to give them over $5 million a 

year to administer it. Maybe that’s the job creation they’re 

talking about — keeping people going in places like SOCO. 

 

I was amazed to hear the government talk about JobStart and 

Future Skills when that’s a program that is funded 50 per cent 

by the federal government. There’s a 50/50 agreement with 

each government running up $1.3 million over three years. The 

Canada-Saskatchewan Agreement on Strategic Initiatives, both 

governments will contribute up to $13 million over three years. 

But there’s nothing saying about what the federal government 

has done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, PAWBED (Partnership Agreement on Water 

Based Economic Development) has been given $20 million by 

the provincial government, but at the same time there was $20 

million put in by the federal government. 

 

PARD (Partnership Agreement on Rural Development) was 

getting $7.5 million by the federal government and by the 

provincial government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the cooperatives initiative that we heard 

about in the budget is interesting, but I’m not sure if the new 

generation co-ops that will be created or are looked at in this 

government by this budget is what people are expecting. It’s not 

the type of co-ops we see on Main Street, Watson or Spalding. 

It’s a type of cooperative like Sask Wheat Pool and I think 

maybe it’s a little misleading to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously no desire by this government to 

save rural Saskatchewan. And colleagues from across the floor, 

I’m willing to predict, just as I did the elimination of the PST 

from livestock equipment, that your government will go down 

in history being the one who turned out the lights when the last 

person left rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Any government who tries to pass a budget 

that will in effect ruin my constituency and ruin the people — 

the lives in it — will never garner my support or the support of 

the people in my area. And for that reason I will not support this 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am indeed proud 

and honoured to address and support the 1997 budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at my own experiences — being born 

and raised in northern Saskatchewan, and having done the 

lifestyle living on the trap-line, doing fishing and also moving 

forward, doing work in the tourism industry, and then later on 

going to school, and later on getting into teaching, and having 

that experience from northern Saskatchewan — Mr. Speaker, 

when I look at that experience, I feel a lot of great privilege and  

honour to be in this House. 

 

When I look at it, I see that in many cases when we were born 

and raised in Cumberland, we were trying to, you know, fight 

for jobs at the mines and trying to fight for jobs in the forestry, 

and trying to look and try and get an education and be important 

contributors to our community in Cumberland. And my speech 

today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to look at the North and the 

impact of the budget, you know, as it relates to the North. 

 

I’m indeed very proud to be part of the government as a 

member from our Premier, the member from Riversdale. I know 

that in many cases his tremendous leadership is part and parcel 

of the team approach that we take as members on this side of 

the House in regards to governing this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also say a bit of thanks to a team 

that I was watching yesterday in curling. I know that, you 

know, the member from Athabasca will be attending the 

aboriginal curling championships this weekend, and that 

yesterday we were very privileged to have the send-off to the 

team from Saskatchewan who are the Canadian champions. 

And I would like to, you know, thank and congratulate Sandra 

Schmirler and Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, and Marcia 

Gudereit. 

 

I know that as I watched them through the years, not only have 

they displayed the tremendous and awesome skill in curling, I 

know that in many cases they had the dynamic, you know, the 

exuberance on ice. And in many cases when we were talking 

about public relations, they are indeed leaders in public 

relations, not only in representing our province but representing 

our country. I know that they will be great ambassadors, you 

know, as they play the game at the international level. And 

being former world champions, I know that they will do us 

great honour. 

 

And I would like to thank them as well for . . . in their busy 

schedule they have taken their time out to visit northern 

Saskatchewan. They have come to Cumberland House, you 

know, for an event there. And I knew that through their busy 

schedule it was a tremendous honour for us to have them at our 

community in Cumberland House. Because in many cases you 

see international celebrities, and in many cases them coming 

down to the community level stands in good stead, you know, 

for themselves as individuals and as a team. And I think I would 

like to thank them for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to the budget, I think this budget is not 

only one of an investment in people and the investment on the 

communities, it is also one of bridging the gap in northern 

Saskatchewan. When I look at the history of northern 

Saskatchewan I first of all wanted to make a little bit of 

comment in regards to the member from North Battleford. 

Because the last time I did the throne speech he hadn’t said a 

word about northern Saskatchewan, and I must say that he did 

say one or two sentences the other day. 

 

(1545) 

 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

When I listened very carefully to whether or not he would speak 

about the North, he told me . . . he said in this House that indeed 

he was in the North. And as he blurted out to try and get a grasp 

back to exactly what he was doing in the North, he blurted out 

that he flew through the North. So while we do know one thing, 

he did speak one word about the North and that we know that 

he did fly through the North, maybe one of these days he’ll take 

a little bit of time to visit the North and, you know, drive around 

and meet with the people and see exactly our tremendous 

lifestyle, see our self-determination from the North, see the 

strong stands we get, and see the partnerships that this 

government is building in regards to the people of the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When I look at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

was looking at the history of northern Saskatchewan, and I was 

looking at the overall vision of the people of northern 

Saskatchewan as it related to northern development, as it related 

to them taking care of their children and looking into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of the people have been stating very clearly 

that they wanted to have control over their own lives. They 

wanted to have a sense of self-determination in regards to the 

major aspects of development, whether it was in the economy 

or whether it was in the field of education or in the field of 

municipal government. 

 

When we look at the history of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is very clear that it was not the Liberals or 

the Conservatives that made this essence, this pride, this 

northern spirit come true. That’s always been the NDP 

government. 

 

When you look at the history during the Thatcher years, when 

you look at the Thatcher years, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 

northern Saskatchewan, the only thing that they did was try and 

establish the small-level type of Indian Affairs control. They 

had this Indian Affairs colonial mentality and the Thatcher 

government tried to have a mini Indian Affairs in this province. 

 

But it never worked and people disregarded it over the years 

and many of the chiefs spoke against it because they said, we 

had enough problems with the Indian Affairs in Ottawa that to 

have a provincial Indians Affairs in this province, so when the 

NDP government came in in 1971, we threw that out. 

 

On the case of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we also 

looked at the aspect of control. From a governmental sense, 

during the Liberal years, it was managed through DNR, the 

Department of Natural Resources. I remember that most of the 

programing in northern Saskatchewan was not economic 

development during the Liberal years; it was basically social 

services. So when we were looking at governmental control and 

people’s control, they were done through one department 

controlled from Regina and that indeed it was mainly social 

services programs that they did move on in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When the NDP government came in in 1971 we moved in on 

the different levels of control. The first level was, what the 

people wanted was education for their children. They wanted 

educational control. So when you looked at the legislation, what 

the DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) did was 

moved in on educational control in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And we had the control from Ile-a-la-Crosse, the member from 

Athabasca’s own community. They had the first elected board 

from that area in regards during NDP times. The Northern 

Lakes School Division, the same thing — the first elected 

large-scale board in northern Saskatchewan. Northern School 

Board as it was called at that time was the first elected 

controlled board of that magnitude in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that in many cases, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan during the ‘70s also recognized the control. 

Three community colleges were established in northern 

Saskatchewan, one on the east side, one in the central side, and 

one in the west side. And these were controlled by the people of 

northern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I might add that in 

regard to municipalities and elected people having a say in 

control, the first phase of development on municipalities were 

done with the northern municipal council. And in that sense it 

was very important to recognize that the vision of northern 

control was taking effect during NDP years. 

 

I might say that when you look across Canada, when these 

Liberals from across the floor are talking against health boards, 

and they call the elected health boards puppet boards, what in 

the northern Saskatchewan people are saying is this — they 

want control, they want to have control. They don’t want 

somebody that is hand-picked from Melenchuk’s department 

and his research money from down South. They don’t want him 

to hand-pick who it is that should sit on the board. They want to 

elect those people themselves over the long run, as we move 

into the transition to an elected board in the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, in many cases again 

we’re moving control from education, municipalities, and now 

the field of health. When you look at it, Mr. Speaker, the 

majority of the monies that goes into northern Saskatchewan 

will be under the control of people from northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might add that the Tories were mentioning 

something about the North. And I’ve always remembered this. 

When I was a member of the opposition, when the Tories were 

around, as far as northern Saskatchewan, they took back 

control; they centralized everything like the Liberals did. Like I 

said, Liberals and Tories always work the same way. They 

moved . . . they took away DNS, destroyed the controls in the 

North, moved them all back to Regina. 

 

It’s interesting when I read, their highways at that time they 

said that the North was full of beautiful lakes and rivers, but no 

people. That was the attitude of the Tories. And I might say that 

might be the attitude of the member from North Battleford. I’m 

not too sure yet. We’ll see what he says, because all that he’s 

done so far is say that he flew through northern Saskatchewan 

like the Tories used to do during the ‘80s. So when we were  



470  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

looking at it, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have to look at the 

specifics and the details as well. 

 

On the health side, you’re looking at the fact that although the 

Liberals cut our budget in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

transfer payments of $200 million and 90 million in the health 

area, we have been in the past two years able to replace $40 

million last year, of which 600,000 went into northern 

Saskatchewan. When I looked at it, Mr. Speaker, this year not 

only did we put $57 million in the health budget after the $200 

million cuts from the feds, but we had increased also 

expenditures in the North. 

 

In the North in the health side we will get a 7.3 per cent 

increase on the operations of the new boards. Also when you 

look at it, Mr. Speaker, we will have help for physician 

services, a million dollars. 

 

The member from Athabasca is over there and I know on the 

west side they will be getting three more people who will be 

working as public health nurses and also on the mental health 

services as well. And these are important developments in those 

areas because, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is committed 

to the people of the North and also is very, very, very 

considerate in regards to the health levels and the development 

of that sphere in the North. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, we also look at the capital 

side. You look at Liberal or Tory governments anywhere, you 

don’t see development in that capacity. When you look at it, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had approximately $12 million in 

regards to the health centre in La Ronge. And in many cases a 

lot of the La Ronge people had put in a million dollars’ worth, 

over a million dollars’ worth of money that they were able to 

save up at the community level to put in there as well. We had 

people contributing from the local level. 

 

And also this year, Mr. Speaker, you’ll be very pleased to know 

that we’ve got a $10.8 million facility going into the Athabasca 

region. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  A lot of those Athabasca members say 

nothing about the fact that . . . In regards to Lake Athabasca 

region, maybe that member from North Battleford will finally 

go and land in Stony Rapids where we improved the airport in 

Stony Rapids last year, so that maybe he could land over there 

and go and visit the new health centre in Stony Rapids. They 

never say one word about the new $10.8 million health centre 

that will go into Stony Rapids. 

 

All they keep saying is, oh what about those ATCO trailers in 

La Loche. I’ll tell you one thing about La Loche, Mr. Speaker. 

As any government when you look at it, it will not be a Liberal 

government. The majority of the people in La Loche are treaty 

Indian people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is the federal government doing in regards to the health of 

the treaty Indian people where they have the treaty right to 

health? Not very much, Mr. Speaker. If they were going to be  

smart, Mr. Speaker, they would stand up in the House and get 

the federal Liberal government to cost-share a facility to 

improve the level of the facility development in La Loche. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will tell you this one thing. I think that in the 

long run it’ll be an NDP government that’ll improve the 

facilities in La Loche and never a Liberal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I think I always hit a little 

bit of a nerve with the people when I speak the truth over here. 

When we look at the educational level and we see that $22 

million expenditures provincially, a lot of the people ask me, 

what about the North? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we did a lot of community college 

development. They elected boards in northern Saskatchewan in 

education. We have also seen the tremendous improvement of 

the Northlands board and the development thereof. I was 

involved in teacher education over 20 years ago in 

NORTEP(northern teacher education program). A lot of people 

are proud of the teacher education NORTEP program that we 

do have in the North. About 200 people have graduated with 

teaching certificates from over there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the educational 

development we also had a multi-party training program — $10 

million committed. And when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve had over 300 people in mining from that particular 

program alone. In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had 

1,000 . . . last year alone, 1,750 people in post-secondary 

education. 

 

It’s a far cry from the Liberal years, Mr. Speaker. When the 

Liberals were in power when I went to university, I was the 

only one from northern Saskatchewan going to university. That 

was Liberal times. 

 

When I look at the number of people, there were just a handful 

of people going to the technical institutes. Now these are not 

only counting that . . . these are people . . . there’s 1,750 people 

are in northern Saskatchewan getting trained in the North. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not counting the people that are taking training 

in many parts of the province of Saskatchewan and elsewhere in 

the country. 

 

So when you’re looking at it, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals over 

there and the member from North Battleford should be saying, 

I’m proud of those young people, I’m proud of them standing 

up, getting babysitters, and sitting down and getting a good 

education so that in the long run they put food on the table for 

their children. That is what I’m proud of. That is the northern 

pride that I speak about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

question of social reform, we also look at this issue in these 

terms. In many cases the Liberals will try gimmicks here and 

there — whether it’s a $4 gimmick or something like that. Well  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

we don’t have a $4 gimmick, Mr. Speaker, what we have is 

commitment. We had $12 million last year in a budget on the 

child action program to help children and to help youth in the 

province. Now we have $25 million, Mr. Speaker. That is over 

double the amount that was there. 

 

Now the member from North Battleford is saying something 

again. I would say this much: with all the speeches he makes 

about social conscience — and the same with the member from 

Athabasca — you look at the devastating cut of the federal 

government, $7 billion all across Canada, $200 million in 

Saskatchewan alone. They said they would never touch 

medicare, but they smashed about $90 million away from the 

province just on health alone. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they may talk about social conscience and 

social justice and they may go in the press on their $4-a-day 

breakfast or whatever it was, but I’ll tell you something. The 

commitment or money has to go down to the people at the local 

level. And that is exactly what this NDP government is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, on the question of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce a very special guest that’s visiting the 

Assembly today and ask that we all welcome the mayor of my 

home community and the guy that took charge of the mess I left 

behind, Mr. Max Morin of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McLane:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to the 

members of the Assembly, I would too like to welcome Mr. 

Morin here today. Max and I served for many years together on 

the Provincial Health Board and continue to share ideas and 

thoughts about health care in this province. And I’d ask you all, 

on my behalf, to welcome him as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take 

my place as well to welcome Max Morin, the mayor of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. Max has been very instrumental in working 

with the new north group in northern Saskatchewan, bringing  

together all the other mayors and working as a team in northern 

Saskatchewan to create a new vision for northern development 

in the many areas of development, from economic and social 

development, education, and so on. So we’re very pleased to 

have Max Morin here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very 

important to recognize just one thing, and I would like to go 

back a bit on the health side on the member from Arm River. 

 

I know that in this case we need to be able to look at the 

importance of statements that the members from opposite have 

been saying about puppet . . . you know, puppet elected boards. 

I think they ought to take those words back. I think that the 

people from northern Saskatchewan, once they take control of 

the health in their area, should be given the chance to control 

that health. When they do their elections, they’re the ones that 

should be standing up and saying yes, we are the ones 

controlling this health — not hand-picked selections from 

Melenchuk or whoever will be the next Liberal leader. 

 

When I look at economics, I look at it this way, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 1,000 jobs for the very first time in the history of 

northern Saskatchewan. We have 1,000 jobs in the area of 

mining for Northerners. That is now just over 50 per cent of the 

people who are employed. 

 

When I look at the level of contracts, we had about $20 million 

worth of contracts. The northern contractors now have over 

$120 million worth of contracts. It is a day of tremendous 

development, not only for the entrepreneurial skills of northern 

Saskatchewan and northern businesses, but it is also a very 

important development on the people taking jobs and taking 

their place in the many areas of northern development jobs 

taking place in the apprenticeable trades, whether they want to 

be electricians or mechanics, and there’s about 80 of them 

already in those positions — 121 people in the technical trades, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well as approximately 40 of them in 

supervisory positions and doing a lot of the important works. 

 

I just visited in McLean Lake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I saw 

over there the Dene people from the Athabasca region. I saw 

Jim Laban; I saw Sandra MacDonald; I saw Lena May Siegertz 

— these people were running programs of trading people within 

the mines and moving them forward in the various jobs right in 

that mine. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are exciting developments being part of 

NORTEP program. I see now the Athabasca people, the Dene 

people, taking their place in regards to running training  



472  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

programs within the mining sector. It was a proud moment for 

me when I visited them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in about the past 

week and a half. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do the 

development on Northern Development Board and also the 

environmental quality committees. We spend about a quarter of 

a million on environmental quality committees, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We involve all the communities in northern 

Saskatchewan. Our only hope is that the Liberal government 

would put even a penny to help us out on those environmental 

quality committees. 

 

If we had another quarter of a million from the federal 

government, we could do research to help out the communities 

in regards to what they want to do in regards to some of the 

issues that they’re dealing with as they are doing monitoring of 

mining development in the North. 

 

So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are important ideas that I 

picked up from a lot of the people as I travelled through the 

North this past week. They also said this: we have about a four 

and a half million dollar program in a northern development 

fund. They said that it’s helping a lot of our entrepreneurs in the 

North. But they also said, maybe the federal government, it’s 

their election time, maybe they should match our funds. 

 

Maybe if they put up four and a half million, we would have $9 

million in regards to northern development, and putting money 

with the northern entrepreneurs so that they can take their place, 

not only in the field of mining, but forestry, tourism, wild rice, 

services at the community level. Those are the types of things 

that are going to be important in regards to building a new 

North, a new sense of pride, of self-determination, as we 

challenge and deal with the issues of the 1990s, but as we move 

on into the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, in the final few comments, I 

would like to say this much. Some of them, some, when we met 

with the new North, they said, let’s get some sewer and water. 

The federal government we heard is getting out of sewer and 

water; they’re getting out of housing. Will the province make a 

commitment, a lot of people were asking me? Well in this 

budget I was proud to say yes, we made that commitment. 

 

We’re putting $2 million in sewer and water in northern 

Saskatchewan, $3 million in housing. Also on the infrastructure 

program, there’ll be approximately 2 to $3 million there as well. 

So we’re looking at 7 to $8 million in regards, not only to 

needed services in the province, in northern Saskatchewan, but 

also as part of the job creation activities at the local level. 

Because I know a lot of those people have the feeling of 

self-determination, putting part of the sweat equity and being 

part of the building of their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well I would like to say this last thing. On roads 

— we’ll be also doing important developments on Turnor  

Lake, the west side, improvements on roads. We’ll also be 

doing $5 million new expenditures over on top of what we 

normally have. A lot of the people . . . Subject to the fact that 

we make an agreement with Athabasca, there will be an 

Athabasca improvement as well. So I think in many cases, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we will be not only looking at this issue of 

roads and improving our roads in the North, it is a building in 

regards to bridging the gap that we did last year past 

Cumberland House, and also putting that new bridge there and 

also going into Grandmother’s Bay, etc. So we’re continually 

building all the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think in finality and conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

proud, I am proud to be part of this government, this NDP 

government of 1997. I am proud to see that we are indeed 

investing in people. We’re investing in our communities, we’re 

investing them in southern Saskatchewan, and we’re investing 

them in northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

proud to say that for a person born and raised in northern 

Saskatchewan, that we are supporting and I am strongly 

supporting the budget of 1997. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make 

several comments in reference to the provincial budget 

introduced in the Assembly; and obviously from day one we 

could not support the budget and I could not support the budget 

for, not what the budget was not going to do for northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but for Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And as I look through the various comments 

of members opposite, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of federal 

government bashing. And the obvious strategy here, Mr. 

Speaker, is there is a federal election coming up this summer. 

And we all know the federal election’s going to happen this 

summer, so obviously the strategy is to discredit the federal 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I feel it’s very important that we recognize 

one thing, is that what the federal government done to balance 

the books is exactly what the provincial government done. So if 

somebody else does it, then obviously it’s not good enough. We 

balanced our books, we brought our economy back on stream, 

we are now living within our means, but nobody else can do 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had the responsibility Canada-wide, as the 

Saskatchewan government has it Saskatchewan-wide, to 

balance the books, and they are indeed going to achieve that 

objective. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I look into the 1996 

Saskatchewan economic highlights — retail sales are up 8 per 

cent, triple the Canadian average; new vehicle sales increased 

by 16 per cent; housing starts rose by more than 40 per cent . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Mr. Belanger:  Business investment rose by 18 per cent; 

crop production was up 23 per cent over 1995 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Manufacturing shipments increased by 10 

per cent, the highest in Canada . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The number of oil wells drilled rose by 35 

per cent . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Real gross domestic product was up 3.3, 

twice the national average. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a very, very 

rosy picture. And the question that every Saskatchewan resident 

has out there: in spite of all of the great news, Mr. Speaker, why 

the road system, why the poor health care system, and why the 

continuing social and economic decline of Saskatchewan? Why 

is all that occurring in spite of the great news and the good news 

that are presented in this budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker, you cannot fool the people. Governance of 

Saskatchewan is certainly a serious business. There is no 

question about. It is a very serious challenge. You must meld 

special-interest groups in terms of what they need and what 

they want. You have to look at debating the merits of 

privatization versus public ownership in a number of our 

Crowns. We have to even talk about user fees, which the NDP 

have spoken about in past years. 

 

And the phrase, Mr. Speaker, that’s used at that time in the 

financial crisis of Saskatchewan was, there are no sacred cows. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have sacred cows, and those 

sacred cows include health care. There is not one single party in 

the province of Saskatchewan and in the Dominion of Canada 

that can say, we are the health care defenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberals will defend health care till the day 

that we die. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And the second point, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to talk about in reference to the biggest problem that 

Saskatchewan has is of course the debt. Saskatchewan’s debt is 

significant — 15 billion when this government took office. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, of that 15 billion the estimate was $850 

million per year, every single year, in interest payments alone. 

And the people of Saskatchewan will not forget the third party. 

The third party was the one that put us in this debt. And for 

every percentage of the PST that is now in place in 

Saskatchewan, we can attribute that to the third party, the 

Tories, Mr. Speaker. They brought this province into ruins. It  

was not the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, it was the Tories. And from 

this day forward every person paying taxes out there, be it 

municipal taxes, school taxes, or PST, they can thank the Tories 

for those taxes. Saskatchewan’s got the highest taxes of any 

province in Saskatchewan, save one or two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that debt is enormous. There is no question that 

we have to address that debt. And I talk about the seriousness of 

managing the province of Saskatchewan, and debt reduction is 

part of the Liberal strategy as well. Tax breaks are part of the 

Liberal strategy as well, and servicing the people are part of the 

Liberal strategy as well. 

 

Nowadays, Mr. Speaker, it does not really matter whether 

you’re a Liberal, Tory, or NDP. Nowadays it’s common sense 

government. You’ve got to govern in a common sense way. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why there is no significant 

difference between what the federal Liberals are doing and what 

the provincial New Democrats are doing. 

 

And what’s really tough, Mr. Speaker, is sitting here day after 

day and hearing them bash the feds and say, oh those bad guys. 

They’ve done what we done, and they’re going to accomplish 

what we done but we are the only ones that could do that. 

We’re the only ones that should balance our books. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, common sense does not only lie with the NDP. It lies 

now with the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to continue on to a few other points in 

reference to some of the comments made by the hon. member 

from Cumberland. And we certainly respect a lot of the 

accomplishments that he has done as an aboriginal person. He 

has inspired many people and certainly inspired me to get into 

politics. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, living, working, and breathing in 

northern Saskatchewan is not as he portrays. Everything the 

Minister of Northern Affairs has indicated is untrue. There are 

some significant breakthroughs but, Mr. Speaker, there are 

more significant breakthroughs needed to bring the 

Saskatchewan’s North . . . make it part of the Saskatchewan 

economy and part of the whole province of Saskatchewan as a 

whole. 

 

Let us speak, Mr. Speaker, about a few things, a few things. The 

remote housing program for example, and this is the whole 

point I’m trying to make — the fed-bashing going on. Let’s talk 

about the remote housing program for a minute, Mr. Speaker. It 

was the federal government that has said clearly we will 

contribute to the remote housing program that the Minister of 

Northern Affairs spoke about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what they’re going to do — and this took a 

lot of innovation, a lot of imagination and excitement — what 

they said is we will contribute $5,000 per year over a 10-year 

period in which we will diminish your mortgage by that amount 

if you are able to a . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 



474  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, seated in your 

gallery is a former member of the Legislative Assembly, the 

former member for Regina Rosemont I believe at that time. His 

name is Bill Allen. I think most members of the Assembly will 

recognize that name, not only as a former member but also as 

the current president of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Party, and a person who is active in education in the city of 

Regina. I would ask all members to join with me to extend a 

warm welcome to Bill here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Continuing 

on with the remote housing program, the federal government 

had the imagination, Mr. Speaker, to look at one thing. People 

in northern Saskatchewan when they’re working, they get 

penalized by the housing disincentive associated with social 

housing. So let us have a remote housing program in which we 

will ask the working people to actually contribute to building a 

house, their share, and our fair share. So eventually the 

governments will get out of the housing business and the people 

that should be in the housing, which are the families, will 

eventually own these units. 

 

So for an example, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government 

come along and they’re tailgating on this federal program. Who 

got up and announced a lot of these programs was the Minister 

of Municipal Government. Now who’s administrating the 

program is the provincial government. Who put in the money, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? The federal government put in the money 

for the remote housing program. 

 

So taking for example, Mr. Speaker, at 5,000 a year a decrease 

in a mortgage — what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, is you’re 

saving in the long run. You’re saving over social housing. Just 

doing some really rough guestimates here, taxes in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse average lot — and the mayor is here today so he 

can correct me if I’m wrong — is roughly $800 a year. And the 

maintenance of a home in northern Saskatchewan, and to make 

sure you’re able to fix up the home in case of repairs, roughly 

about 7,500 per year. 

 

Homeowners are contributing a $25,000 loan to build these new 

homes. The lot that the municipality are giving up free, Mr. 

Speaker, as their contribution to this really unique and  

exciting program is $10,000. That’s a municipal contribution. 

The town of Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, Buffalo Narrows — 

they all contributed to this project because they saw how good it 

was. And, Mr. Speaker, over one case and over a period of one 

applicant you’re looking at $118,000 worth of savings, Mr. 

Speaker, that the provincial and the federal government will 

save over 10 years. At what cost? At 5,000 outlay the first year. 

And, Mr. Speaker, all they come up with is $5,000. Of course 

you guarantee . . . (inaudible) . . . thousand over, but it’s over a 

10-year period. So you can see how they defer the payments. So 

you look at your interest savings, your tax savings, your 

maintenance savings, the contribution from the town, the loan 

from the homeowners, all of a sudden a $300,000 contribution 

to housing in Ile-a-la-Crosse turns out to be 600,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is innovation. That is exciting. And that 

is what people want when you talk about housing in northern 

Saskatchewan — remote housing. To eliminate the disincentive 

with housing must happen. And social housing is not our total 

answer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, continuing on with a few of the problems we 

speak about in reference to the budget. When you talk about 

housing, it must get away from this whole atmosphere that we 

have to control housing. Housing is a way in which you can 

control people. The budget has to reflect the dynamics of each 

region. I talk about the diverse nature of Saskatchewan politics. 

And I talk about the special-interest groups that are out there. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is part of this 

province and if you want it to continue to remain part of 

Saskatchewan then you should treat it as part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Continuing on with the housing story, look at the RRAP, 

(residential rehabilitation assistance program), the rural 

rehabilitation assistance program, and the ERP, emergency 

repair program. Several stats, and these are provincial stats, Mr. 

Speaker, indicate that up to $3,000 per month can be spent 

looking after an elderly in a private home — private nursing 

home. And suppose, Mr. Speaker, you really, really want that 

elderly to become independent, and there are a lot of people in 

northern Saskatchewan, elderly people, that live in very poor 

homes. Now we’ll have the actual applicants for you, we’ll 

have the actual interviews for you, and we’ll have the actual 

numbers for you within the next two or three weeks. That’s 

what we’re currently working on. 

 

And what you’re going to find, Mr. Speaker, is you’re going to 

find that the elderly people saying, well I’ll need to get my 

home fixed. I can’t continue living in this house and can 

somebody help me out there. This are the voices that are not 

being heard. When we hear of the 15 million, and the 20 

million, and the 18 million the Minister of Northern Affairs 

talks about, people say, well where is it? Where is it, Mr. 

Speaker? The housing dollars, where are they? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s time that we start giving the benefits 

right directly at the local level. And it’s time we started 

recognizing some of the elderly and their families out there are 

living in homes that you and I would never, ever live in. So 

target the elderly, Mr. Speaker. If you want an exciting, 

innovative budget, target the elderly when it comes to home  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

support programs and fixing up their homes. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, he’s got to stop making so many 

restrictions. You must simplify the process. In northern 

Saskatchewan many of the elderly people have a tough time to 

read and write simply because of the language barrier, and they 

have to go through all these processes. And when the demand is 

very high, Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of extra work by some of 

the field workers and some of the housing workers to go 

through all of these applications. 

 

And many times seniors look at a 10-page application process 

and they say, well to heck with it; I can’t fill that out myself. So 

what happens after this, Mr. Speaker? They forget about it year 

after year after year after year. 

 

And I think that Saskatchewan should be ashamed when we 

can’t house our senior citizens in northern Saskatchewan, never 

mind the rest of southern Saskatchewan. If you want to have 

support for budgets, then you must support the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of the other problem too, in terms of dealing 

with the issue of housing, is many times we forget to involve 

the municipal governments. We forget to involve the local 

housing authorities or the Metis locals. All these organizations 

are located right in all these communities and they know which 

people to help. They know in which area that they’re able to 

offer expertise, and they know how best to spend that dollar. 

 

Yet do we continue to ignore them? Mr. Speaker, we do. Local 

control, local benefits, and local decision making is what 

housing should be about, and certainly taking a lead from the 

feds in terms of having, you know, vision and excitement. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the far northern communities, I’ll have 

you know that not one house under the remote housing program 

was given to any of the far northern communities of Uranium 

City, Camsell Portage, Fond du Lac, Stony Rapids or Black 

Lake. 

 

Now the question we have to ask is, in this case is it because 

they are first nations and there is a jurisdictional problem? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, Stony Rapids is not a first nation, neither is 

Camsell and neither is U City. So in essence, they didn’t get 

nothing. So the far northern communities are part of 

Saskatchewan. We must never, ever forget that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of people throughout time — 

we complain about this a thousand times in this Assembly — 

we spoke about the working people out there, the people that 

work at some of the mines that the Minister of Northern Affairs 

speaks about. A thousand jobs is what he said. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, some of those guys that are working in the mines, they 

got to pay 7 or $800 for a house that isn’t worth 15, 20,000. 

 

So the point is, you’re talking about problems in housing, 

housing is a disincentive. Some people I’ve known have quit 

working because they had to pay too much for a house. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that fair to Saskatchewan taxpayers? Is 

that fair to that northern person that wants to go to work? The  

answer is no. And that’s the whole thing about promoting 

independence and talking about exciting, invigorating and 

innovative governments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to get away from that mind-set, is 

that we can do all and be all to people and that’s how we can 

control them. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to empower the people, 

the communities and the ideas out there, to help us invigorate 

Saskatchewan. That is the key to governance of this province as 

a whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I wish to share with you a number of letters, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, from different people. You may not take my word for 

it and several members from across the room may not believe 

me, but I’ll talk about Michael Moberly in Buffalo Narrows. 

He’s talking about him and his wife and four kids. And I quote: 

 

. . . and it’s been pretty rough. We’ve been applying for 

housing for at least five months. We’ll be homeless pretty 

soon. 

 

And continuing on, Mr. Speaker, to Lorette Moberly, and again 

we talk about: 

 

We live at my dad’s and there’s about 21 or 22 people 

staying there. 

 

And I go on again: 

 

There’s only two bedrooms and we have 12 kids living 

amongst those adults. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, 21 or 22 people per house, isn’t that a bit 

ridiculous? And if you’ve seen some of the housing conditions 

and some of the housing stock in northern Saskatchewan, you’ll 

know that there’s a severe problem. There’s a severe problem. 

 

And we can continue on. We can go to Helen Tinker of Buffalo 

Narrows and we can talk about things like: 

 

The mortgage was paid off, but we still owe a small 

amount in arrears. We’ve been in this house for the last 20 

years and CMHC, Sask Housing, or whatever they’re 

calling themselves nowadays, has never come to inspect 

the house or help with any type of repairs needed for the 

house. 

 

And we can continue on, Mr. Speaker. We also have letters here 

from Lorette . . . or Margaret Laliberté, talking about, quote the 

opening statement: 

 

I am writing this letter out of desperation for approval for one 

of the above programs. 

 

And the programs these are talking about, Mr. Speaker, really is 

the RRAP and ERP program and the remote housing program. 

 

And I can continue on here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Margaret Chartier of Buffalo Narrows, again: 



476  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

I’m hoping that you’re able to help me get a grant to fix 

my house. Major repairs are needed both inside and 

outside. 

 

And we have a letter here from the . . . (inaudible) . . . council 

of Ile-a-la-Crosse, priorizing issues and housing was right up 

there, Mr. Speaker. And then we have another letter here from 

Lucy Laliberté, again from Beauval, speaking about houses. 

And we got a couple of letters of people whom I can’t name at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, because they’re involved with several 

court cases talking about arrears and how the government is 

going to go after them to address these arrears. 

 

We have Hermaleen Gardiner of Canoe Narrows and: 

 

I’d like to get some assistance in purchasing building 

material to extend my existing house so as to have easier 

access to the building. 

 

And what she had done, Mr. Speaker, I have to congratulate 

her, she went so far as to go to a lumber store and get quotes. 

And she’s talked to her nephews about doing the work but there 

is no dollars for that. And we can go on to a number of people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a file here fairly thick and these are 

petitions calling for a comprehensive housing strategy in 

northern Saskatchewan, a housing strategy that eliminates the 

disincentives, a housing strategy that rewards the working 

people, and a housing strategy that helps protect the 

environment in which our elderly people live and our single 

parents, and of course you can never forget the families that are 

on welfare. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is what we need in this type of budget. We 

need to begin to hear the people. The people of Saskatchewan 

have spoken on a number of occasions, a number of occasions, 

on everything from health cares, to highway, to municipal 

funding, and the list goes on and on and on. And, Mr. Speaker, 

have we heard? The answer is no. We have listened but this 

government has not heard. 

 

So continuing on, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to address 

some of the highlights of the federal government in terms of 

what they’ve been doing and I do this to challenge the 

government. Not necessarily to say they are awful guys, you’ve 

not doing your work. I’m saying these guys are doing their part, 

when are you going to do yours? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of examples in terms of 

roads. I look with interest at some of the estimates; $2.5 billion 

over the next 10 years for highway construction. And the 

Minister of Highways gets up and makes a statement and very 

proud. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at that, the questions you got to 

begin to ask is, number one, is who is paying for some of these 

costs? Is the federal government involved with paying some of 

these costs? The answer is yes. Are the Indian bands in northern 

Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan as a whole, helping pay for 

some of these costs? The answer is yes. Are some of the 

forestry companies helping to pay for some of these costs? The  

answer is yes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, $2.5 billion on roads over a period of 10 years 

sounds like a significant amount, but if you look at what’s being 

currently spent now and plus the contribution of other parties, I 

can almost guess that the amount would be the same. It’s much 

like you and I sitting here, Mr. Speaker, and saying the next 10 

years this government will have $50 billion; $5 billion a year in 

terms of their budget, we will have 50 billion. 50 billion sounds 

like lots, but over 10 years it isn’t; so 2.5 billion over 10 years 

is not significant enough to repair the road structure of 

Saskatchewan. We know it, they know it, and everybody in 

Saskatchewan knows it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the whole situation — again my 

math may be wrong, I was terrible in math in school — you’re 

looking at less than 2 per cent of the provincial government 

budget over the next 10 years will be spent on highways — 2.5 

billion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to start talking about real 

commitment — real commitment — in terms of reducing the 

problems with our roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan, talking about 

highways, much . . . In southern Saskatchewan, if you have one 

road out, you can go 20 or 30 miles down the road and you have 

another road that you can access to get to your destination. 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not so in northern Saskatchewan. The 

North’s only links to the outside world is through its highways 

and its telephone system. And right now there are a number of 

communities being forgotten. 

 

And seeing now that it’s spring, Mr. Speaker, Patuanak, which 

is 80 kilometres away from the main road, they had six 

wash-outs last year, Mr. Speaker. And I can almost guarantee 

you this year that community will be isolated for six weeks at 

the most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Turnor Lake, we spoke about Turnor Lake, 30 

kilometres — not 300 kilometres, Mr. Speaker, but 30 

kilometres — they’ll be stranded for one to two months because 

all the roads are so bad that they cannot travel on these roads 

without a 4X4. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you look at St. George’s Hill, Dillon, and Michel 

— again another 60 kilometres that has to be repaired. And, Mr. 

Speaker, those roads are awful. I noticed a picture that one of 

. . . the member from Cannington showed me a picture of 

maybe 100 feet, there was a bad rut there, and he was showing 

everybody in the Assembly. And I told myself, well that’s . . . 

every kilometre we have that type of a problem in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So you’d assume, Mr. Speaker, whose got the problem here? 

Northern Saskatchewan has had road problems for years and 

years and years. 

 



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

So we talk about some of the innovative ideas northern 

Saskatchewan had, and I spoke about it last week. I’m not going 

to elaborate on that any further. I think it’s important that we 

understand, with the Garson Lake road, there were promises 

made by the Premier that the Garson Lake road will be built as 

soon it became government and today, Mr. Speaker, they can’t 

even get 250,000 a year for the next three years to build a road 

on training programs to link Garson Lake up to the rest of this 

province. And then from Garson Lake of course you have Fort 

Mac and that of course will have a lot of tourism come through. 

 

And so the very important thing, Mr. Speaker, is these are the 

people, these are the people that have been telling year after 

year after year, this government and the Minister of Highways, 

that these problems persist. And yet year after year after year 

after year after year after year — it’s been what? 18, 19 years 

— the problems persist. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to really summarize how many people we’re 

leaving out, excluding the far North in terms of the Black Lake 

road — I’m talking just within my village of Ile-a-la-Crosse’s 

area — you’re stranding 3,200 Saskatchewan people because of 

poor roads. And I don’t mean stranding for one day or an hour, 

Mr. Speaker; I mean stranding for two, four, six, eight weeks. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that the minister recognize 

these roads not as roads but as trails, as tow-roads. And if you 

want to talk highway maintenance, Mr. Speaker, then let’s talk 

highway maintenance. Let’s put serious dollars and serious 

efforts into higher maintenance. And that’s the only way that 

you’re able to do things, is you put your money where your 

mouth is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I will not again elaborate too 

much longer on the highway situation. I think everybody in the 

Assembly knows our highways are atrocious. They know that 

the highways in northern Saskatchewan are worse than 

anywhere else in the province. 

 

So I will not elaborate, only to point out that we will be 

presenting petitions as we go along. And we’re inviting people 

from the North to send letters into myself or the Minister of 

Northern Affairs to talk about these problems in reference to 

roads. 

 

So in closing, in reference to the highways, in closing off the 

discussion on the highways, again we will be presenting 

petitions and letters as the Assembly progresses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the budget missed was some of the good, 

solid work being done at the northern local level by some of the 

mayors in lobbying the federal government. Some of the 

examples we have are the friendship centre movement, of which 

La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows and now Ile-a-la-Crosse has some 

affiliation with. 

 

The Head Start program, they’ve got a number of . . . I believe 

seven projects in northern Saskatchewan that are funded by the 

federal government to work with the aboriginal children. You  

talk about giving them a head start in life and we’re talking the 

age of three, four, five, prior to them entering school. 

 

We’re talking about some of the job strategy dollars that many 

of these northern communities access from federal dollars. So 

these are all some of the positive things being done by the 

federal Liberal government. 

 

So you throw in the remote housing, you throw in the Head 

Start program, the friendship centre movement, some of the 

training dollars, and some of the road dollars, all of a sudden, 

Mr. Speaker, you start talking, well who is governing who here? 

Who is really helping out northern Saskatchewan people? And 

this is intended as a challenge to the NDP to start producing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan we have a lack of 

facilities, a serious lack of facilities. And Ile-a-la-Crosse, again 

having the mayor here today is an extreme pleasure, but they’re 

trying to find over a million dollars to build a new arena. Their 

arena is 30 years old and it needs replacement bad. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they have tried every means to get dollars, but the 

answer has always been no. 

 

Buffalo Narrows, they’re building up for their brand-new 

curling rink. No one helped — they had to do most of that work 

by themselves. Pinehouse, living next to Key Lake — beautiful 

big mine. And Pinehouse hasn’t even got an arena, Mr. 

Speaker. And you talk about Turnor Lake needing all kinds of 

work on their rink. And is there any programs out there to help 

these communities? No, none whatsoever. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we must begin to understand that in northern 

Saskatchewan the economy is very low, the tax base is 

non-existent, so how do you expect a bunch of people in 

collective communities that aren’t involved in the economy to 

pull themselves up by their bootstraps and start building these 

million-dollar facilities? They simply can’t, Mr. Speaker. So all 

this old saying of help yourselves and prove you’re good, 

doesn’t apply, Mr. Speaker, because we haven’t even got 

bootstraps to pull ourselves up by. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the North we have an incredible amount of 

young people. I made earlier statements that up to 60 per cent 

are under the age of 24. And this in five to ten years, Mr. 

Speaker, is going to create enormous problems. The social 

problems that will result in a lot of these younger kids getting 

up into the teenage years will become incredible — too 

incredible for the communities to handle. 

 

So we need to get some very aggressive and specific northern 

youth strategies in place right now, Mr. Speaker, talking about 

social development, economic development, cultural awareness, 

and of course dealing with a number of other issues that 

challenge northern youth. We need to get specific now, Mr. 

Speaker, because the problems associated in the future to our 

justice system, to our social cost, and to our social programs, 

and to people in general, will be astronomical. So this budget 

has to begin to deal with those issues. 

 

And we also have to talk about training in mining, in natural  



478  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

gas, in forestry, in tourism, in agriculture, aquaculture. The list 

can go on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess in closing I just want to point out a number of 

closing remarks in terms of some of the issues that we’ve talked 

about, in terms of the roads, in terms of the housing, in terms of 

the economic programs needed, in terms of the federal 

contributions, in terms of the housing, in terms of some of the 

health problems. And, Mr. Speaker, you start looking at that 

and you begin to say to yourself, where is it that the member 

from Cumberland can say for every $90 you pull out of the 

North, you put $140 million back in? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Northern people have not seen evidence 

of that. And this is why I ask for those questions in the House, 

is prove your figures, Mr. Member. Show me that you do 

indeed spend that amount of money. And I can almost 

guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that that proof is not there. Show 

me the money, and then we will actually begin to believe. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to look at some of the things that 

the North is contributing, and I challenge every member of this 

House to prove otherwise. The fact of the matter is in northern 

Saskatchewan, Cameco’s operations persist and exist in 

northern Saskatchewan. And several years ago . . . I shouldn’t 

say several years ago, but awhile back, Cameco’s shares were 

sold by this government for a tune of $750 million, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s almost three-quarters of a billion dollars on 

shares of operations in northern Saskatchewan; $1.5 billion 

dollars on the McArthur River uranium mine over the next 10 to 

15 years. One mine alone will generate that many royalties. 

 

Natural gas exploration. We know natural gas is being dug up 

and they’re hitting natural gas all around Dillon area in 

north-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Forestry expansion. Weyerhaeuser and Millar Western, they’re 

all expanding northward. You talk about the tourism 

opportunity. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that the North is indeed 

contributing a significant amount of dollars to the provincial 

economy, so why in the heck aren’t we dealing with some of 

these problems? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very impressed with some of the training 

programs being undertaken in northern Saskatchewan. You talk 

about jobs. Jobs are important, there’s no question about it. But 

how about the other benefits associated with the economy? The 

economies of ownership, the economies of decision making, 

and the economies of profits are not afforded to northern 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the time has come to stop that attitude. 

We’ve got to begin to empower people, communities, and 

ideas. This is what the gist of the whole budget missed and this 

is why I cannot support the budget in its form, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank the member from 

Cumberland for making some of the points that he did. There’s 

no question that there’s a federal election coming around the  

corner, and people are aware of that. They’re not silly. And of 

course I’m very, very, very proud and very, very happy for the 

people of La Ronge and area in getting their new facility. I say 

great. That’s good for them. And I say it’s also great for a 

number of other communities in Saskatchewan to get a new 

hospital. I support the new hospital in La Ronge and I support 

the hospital services all throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the question of northern Saskatchewan is 

really, what’s happening with St. Martin’s Hospital in La 

Loche. La Loche people are tired of hearing these trailers being 

referred to as their hospital. And I’ve said it once before and I’ll 

say it again, as long as those trailers stand in La Loche as St. 

Martin’s Hospital, it will be a tribute to that government’s 

commitment to health care. As long as it stands. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the people of the North must have a greater 

sense of ownership over the system that they live under. In 

order to survive, northern people must rid themselves of the 

systems of disincentives. There are linguistic differences, there 

are cultural differences, and perhaps even racial differences. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we, the people of northern Saskatchewan, 

want and cry and ask and beg and demand and need and want 

and the whole bloody thing, is equal treatment. 

 

We’re not demanding special treatment. We’re not trying to be 

put on the pedestal here, Mr. Speaker. We’re asking for fair 

treatment. We’re asking for decent roads. We’re asking for 

decent housing and we’re asking for decent highways and 

hospitals. And we’re asking for a future for our children; that’s 

the most important thing. 

 

And we’re not asking that at a cost to the government. Like I 

said, we’ll contribute. We said what we’re going to contribute. 

Now it’s high time that this government puts up the talk that 

they’ve been giving to people of the North for many, many 

years. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, after that speech, although I disagree with the slant 

and the angle that the member come from . . . came from, I 

think if the member for North Battleford were a gentleman, 

he’d stand up and just hand over that northern critic portfolio to 

the member for the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Instead of just flying over the North, I 

think this member does actually know what’s going on in the 

North; he’s been there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, after a 

number of years in this House and a few years in government 

and many tough years since 1991, I want to tell you and tell the 

people who are watching and listening today what it feels like  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

— what it feels like this time as compared to the last few times, 

of budget. 

 

I can remember 1991, ’92, ’93, ’94, ’95 is getting a little better, 

but the early years especially, where you had to make all the 

tough decisions and you thought . . . and everybody in the 

province, in fact everybody in maybe Canada, thought you were 

wrong. And you’d walk out in the street and you’d suck it in 

and you’d go out there and just let people hit on you. And that 

was tough, Mr. Speaker, really tough. 

 

But year after year we did that. And I credit that to the Premier 

of this province who led this caucus through the woods to 

victory many times and led the people. And it feels so, so good 

as an individual, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think . . . people outside 

can’t relate. But it feels so good inside to be able to start giving 

back to the people, investing in them again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  And because of that, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to thank a number of people. I want to thank the Premier for his 

leadership. Because I can remember sitting around the cabinet 

table in those tough years — not the cabinet table; I just dreamt 

about it then — but the caucus table those years. And one by 

one we’d all take a turn saying, gee we just can’t do that; we 

just can’t do that. 

 

And with the leadership of a few people, everybody came 

onside. And through the democratic process of talking things 

out, we achieved some goals that most thought we could never 

achieve. So I thank the Premier and my colleagues in this 

caucus. 

 

I also want to thank the staff that worked for us, because they 

took much of the brunt of the static through the tough years as 

well. I also want to thank the public service, who had to go out 

and explain why we were doing things and took just as much 

static as we did in many cases. 

 

But finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of 

Saskatchewan. I can remember in 1993, in 1993 where I could 

barely walk down the street of my own home town for fear of 

being verbally attacked. People who knew you well, and you 

knew they didn’t dislike you; they just thought you were doing 

something wrong. 

 

But I thank the people of Saskatchewan for their foresight in 

sticking with us for a second term so that we could prove that 

once again, like in 1944, like in 1961-62 — no, what was it? — 

’71, and like in 1991, we again . . . people put the confidence in 

a government with a track record that brought us out of the 

woods of debt, the depths of debt into a time when not only we 

balanced the budget but in this budget we look to the out years, 

to the year 2000 with a surplus of $200 million, Mr. Speaker. I 

thank them very much for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  But before I get into . . . and I’m going 

to have to cut a little short today because of other people want 

to speak. But before I get into that, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t you 

make a great game show today? I was just sitting here looking 

at the Liberal opposition. Today’s game show is, how long you 

been a Liberal this time? And you could take the member for 

the north-east of Melfort. How long does the member from . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I can see I got their attention. 

But the member for Melfort could be the first candidate. How 

long has the member from Melfort been a Liberal? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Three years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thirty years? Oh maybe. Fifteen years, 

three years? There’s a winner — maybe three years. 

 

How long has the member for Wood River . . . no, Arm River? 

How long is it? He could be the next candidate. How long has 

the member for Arm River been a Liberal? He must be in his 

mid-40s. Has it been 30 years? Has it been 15 years? Has it 

been 2 or 3 years? Well maybe. I can well remember him 

walking around with the Conservative candidate in Arm River. 

 

And you can go through . . . What about the member from 

Melville? He could be the next contestant. How long has the 

member from Melville been a Liberal this time? And he carries 

his age well, so I’m not sure how old he is, the member from 

Melville. But I don’t think he’ been a Liberal for much more 

than two or three years, just like the rest of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point is this, and you can go on and on 

through everyone. In fact there’s one, one member of the 

Liberal caucus who claims that he’s had a Liberal membership 

the longest. And that poor, lost soul wanted to cross the floor 

from this side of the House. And I guess if we were good 

stewards we’d go over and try to save him, but that’ll be a lot of 

work. The longest . . . he claims to be the longest card-carrying 

Liberal in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point is this. If you look over the history of 

this province’s elections you’ll see that the New Democratic 

Party has held 40 to 45 per cent of the vote fairly consistently. 

Fairly consistently. But every generation there’s a new 

generation of Liberals and Tories. Last time they were all 

Tories. Remember there wasn’t a Liberal in the House. 

 

Well it’s the Liberals’ generation this time, turn to take the 10 

years. Mr. Speaker, it is true and they know it. They flip-flop 

between Liberals and Tories. Our vote — and check the record 

— our vote stays about the same. They flip-flop between 

Liberals and Tories. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to prove my point, to prove my point, I listen 

and I repeat some of the comments of those members on the 

Liberal side of the House now. Some of those brand-new shiny 

Liberals over there. 

 

They talk about . . . Mr. Speaker, they talk about they want the 

schools to stay open; you guys are bad guys because you’re 

closing the schools. You want the hospitals to stay open; you 

guys are bad guys because you’re closing the hospitals. We  



480  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

should build all the roads, because you guys are bad because 

there’s potholes in the roads. And it goes on and on and on. 

 

Well just think back. Just think back. Just think back previous 

to the Conservative Party coming into power and when they 

came into power. They were going to do her all. Remember? 

They were going to balance the budget and give more services 

and build more roads and build hospitals and schools and give 

grants out and manage this country. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they took their eye off the ball and 

spent a billion dollars a year for 10 years every year, than they 

took in in revenues, putting the gross debt of this province up to 

$15 billion. And now the Liberals come into this House and 

they say the same thing. Check the record. I mean don’t believe 

me, Mr. Speaker, check the records. They’re going to do it all. 

More services — more services, fewer taxes, more roads, more 

schools, more hospitals . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What about the debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  And reduce the debt, exactly. I forgot 

about . . . I was searching for that one . . . and reduce debt. 

More services, reduce the debt, and reduce taxes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how that works, but I can 

remember a government with a similar . . . I can remember a 

government with a similar calculator about 1982, and that 

calculator didn’t work then and it isn’t going to work now for 

these brand-new, shiny Liberals. It isn’t going to work. 

 

My point, Mr. Speaker, then is you can’t have it all. And it’s 

credibility that counts in this game. And I ask the member . . . I 

was almost excited when the member from Athabasca got up 

and he had the budget in his hand, and I thought finally one of 

the Liberal members is going to talk about the budget in the 

budget speech debate. Because I’ve been listening and it’s been 

very, very thin about the budget — very, very thin speeches on 

the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s thin because they’ve got nothing to criticize. 

They’ve got very little to criticize. So all they can say is, 

because they think its popular, they’re going to build all the 

schools, and rebuild the hospitals, and build all the roads, 

provide all the services everybody wants. You can’t do it. 

You’ve got to have a balanced approach. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what are the Liberals saying? You know, 

you’ve got to call a spade a spade sometimes, and I’ll give you 

a few examples. 

 

In the Kelvington Chronicle of Tuesday, March 5, the member 

for Kelvington was saying: 

 

I will be expressing your dissatisfaction (talking to the 

people) with the decisions made for the delivery of health 

care and will be opposing any further cut-backs to health 

care. 

 

She’s going to oppose any further cut-backs to health care. 

Okay, that’s her position, on that day. I’m not sure what it’d be  

the next day. 

 

But then in a TV interview with Mr. Melenchuk, the Leader of 

the Liberal Party, he’s asked about . . . he says, I was thinking 

the Saskatchewan people have done a tremendous job because 

their taxes, utilities, and tariffs have been increased by $1.3 

billion since 1992, and that balancing occurs as a direct transfer 

from their bank accounts to the bank accounts of the 

Saskatchewan government. 

 

Now here’s . . . just let me parenthetically say this — from their 

bank accounts to the bank accounts of the Saskatchewan 

government. This is the Leader of the Liberal Party who can’t 

differentiate between the people’s bank account and the 

government’s bank account. It’s the same bank account, Mr. 

Speaker, because the people are the government when it comes 

to bank accounts. But Mr. Melenchuk has that yet to learn. 

 

Anyway, when he says how are you going to get rid of the $1.3 

billion that they’ve taken from the folks, that we have taken 

from the folks, he says, well health care. So we have the 

member from Kelvington saying no more cut-backs in health 

care. We have the Leader of the Liberal Party saying he’s going 

to cut back health care. In fact the other day he was quoted as 

saying $100 million cut in health care. 

 

And then there’s another one: “Melenchuk sees private clinics 

as a safety valve.” Cutting back health care, cutting back health 

care by $100 million and then he sees private clinics as a safety 

valve. Well I guess you’d need a safety valve if you’re going to 

keep cutting back as we on this side of the House have not cut 

back health care by one red cent. In fact, we’ve increased it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on, but my point is this . . . oh 

yes, I will go on. One more. Mr. Melenchuk says a Melenchuk 

government would pass legislation that disbands the province’s 

30 health boards and replaces them with local and elected 

boards, sort of like back to the future. But then Mr. Osika, the 

member from Melville . . . Oh I’m sorry, I . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I think the hon. member 

already recognizes the error in the rule of debate. All hon. 

members will know that in debate in the Assembly that 

references to other members seated in the . . . with seats in the 

Assembly, they are to be referred to only by their formal 

positions held in the Assembly. And I’ll ask the hon. member to 

acknowledge that and continue in his debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I apologize for the matter, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville, after Mr. 

Melenchuk says that he’s going to disband the health boards, 

the member from Melville says . . . the member from Melville 

promoted an all-elected board to the best would be . . . an 

all-elected board would be the best compromise. 

 

So the leader wants no boards elected. The member from 

Melville, who used to be the leader, wants the boards to be 

elected. Mr. Speaker, the inconsistency of the Liberal Party is 

going to be their demise. You can’t be a chameleon in politics 

and get away with it, and that’s what they’re trying to do. And 

they will try and they will try and they will try and they will get  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

away with it for a little while until the people understand what a 

chameleon looks like, because a chameleon is anything you 

want it to be. 

 

But do you know what? A chameleon will never be your 

government, ever, because you’ve got to stand for something. 

You’ve got to put your policies forward and stand by them, as 

we did from 1991 to 1997, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about this brochure, just a few 

points. The 1997 budget is balanced and we’re going to have 

three more balanced budgets. 

 

This is a little “Saskatchewan Budget Highlights” book I wish 

everyone in the province would pick up and look at. It 

capsulates what we’re doing. And by the year 2000 the interests 

on the “. . . government debt will be $200 million less than in 

1995.” Mr. Speaker, in five years, in five years the interest 

payments will be $200 million less. That means bringing the 

interest rate down by several . . . or bringing the debt down by 

several billion dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, by the year 2000 — and 

here’s one that is very, very important number and this is what 

the bond dealers look at — “By 2001, the Province’s debt as a 

percentage of the GDP will be cut almost in half.” 

 

The percentage of the debt in 1993 was nearly 70 per cent. In 

1997, the province . . . as a percentage of the debt of the GDP 

(gross domestic product) will be cut to 48 per cent, and by the 

year 2001 it’s 36 per cent. That tells you there is good fiscal 

management, reduction of debt, and growth in the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people pay less in sales tax than 

any other province with a sales tax. And you might say, well 

what about Manitoba? Manitoba is 7 per cent; Saskatchewan is 

7 per cent. But Manitoba has a broader base; therefore their 

people pay significantly more sales tax than our folks pay. 

 

And guess who the two lowest provinces in Canada . . . Now 

granted Alberta doesn’t have a sales tax, so we’re only talking 

about provinces with sales tax. Alberta doesn’t have a sales tax 

but they’ve got just about a $900 health care premium and their 

licence are two or three times what ours is, but we’ll leave that 

alone. 

 

The two provinces with the lowest sales tax in Canada is NDP 

B.C. (British Columbia) and NDP Saskatchewan. Can you 

imagine that, Mr. Speaker? What about Newfoundland? What’s 

that? Liberal. Is that Liberal? Oh, they’re about the highest. And 

what about New Brunswick? Well they’re almost as high. 

Every Liberal and Tory province is higher than the two New 

Democratic provinces in Canada – in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

And they talk about services and lowering debt and lowering 

taxes. I don’t think they have it. 

 

(1700) 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families pay the lowest overall  

taxes and household charges in Canada. The lowest taxes and 

household charges, when you lump everything together. Well, 

well I think, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made my point there. 

 

And I’m going to take my place now because I know other 

members want to speak. But there’s so much more I want to 

say. I will get a chance to cover agriculture more in the 

Agriculture estimates, which I will do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say one thing. I don’t want people to 

forget. This is about leadership; this is about a government and 

governments that are going to be taking this country and our 

provinces into the future. 

 

I hear the members opposite over there tell me every time 

there’s an increase in SaskPower rate or SaskTel rate or any 

Crown rate, they’re up in arms about the increase, and the 

increase would amount to $10 a month or varying charges, 

about that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know I haven’t heard one peep – not one 

complaint – about the $260 million cut from the crop sector, 

from our safety net package. I haven’t heard a peep from the 

$320 million cut from the Crow benefit. I haven’t heard a peep 

from the $65 million cut from the demurrage and everything. I 

would ask those members in the days to come, Mr. Speaker, to 

table their correspondence – table their correspondence – with 

their federal government complaining about these severe cuts to 

rural Saskatchewan, devastating cuts to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Don’t stand up in this House and try to tell . . . talk about the 

revenge, rural revenge of this government. There has been no 

government in the history of this country who in such a few 

short years cut more to rural Saskatchewan than the Liberal 

government in Ottawa, even with an Agriculture minister from 

this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s deplorable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say finally that it is a pleasure for me, it 

feels good for me to be able to support a budget. I want to 

challenge the members opposite, the member from Humboldt 

with the gimmick of the day, using special needs people, using 

street people, hungry children, for their gimmickry as . . . 

bringing it in this House. Using them politically. If she wants, 

Mr. Speaker . . . and I was going to say a lot more about this but 

. . . (inaudible) . . . time, I won’t. 

 

If she and her colleagues really care about those people . . . the 

fact that we doubled, doubled the number to $25 million for our 

child action benefit plan, more for education, to help those 

people off the street. If they really care . . . we’ll see if they’re 

hypocrites or not, especially that member from Humboldt. If 

she’s not a hypocrite . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I think the hon. member will 

recognize that in the use of his language in his last sentence that 

it was not befitting the level of language that would be 

considered to be appropriate for debate in the Assembly. And 

I’ll simply ask him to withdraw his remark and continue his 

debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Okay, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. I’ll  



482  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

withdraw those remarks. 

 

If that member wants to prove to the people that she’s serious 

and that she’s not using special needs and poor people, then she 

will vote for this budget, as I am very proud to do, sir. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I am most privileged to be able to stand in my place today and 

make comments on the 1997 budget put forward by the current 

government. 

 

And I do want to begin by saying that I agree with one 

comment made by the member from Watrous, the Hon. 

Minister of Agriculture. And that is his focus on saying that this 

is about leadership. Because it most certainly is, Mr. Speaker. It 

is about leadership. Leadership is not about placing 

responsibility on the shoulders of others when it is one’s own 

personal responsibility. 

 

It’s not about requiring the Liberal opposition to be responsible 

for the actions of any other government. It’s not about the 

member from Kindersley being responsible for any of the 

actions of a government that has preceded him, any more than 

they would like to be held accountable for the actions of 

Premier Glen Clark in not telling the truth to the people of the 

province of British Columbia. Nor would they wish to be 

responsible for the $10 billion deficit brought in by the NDP 

government under Bob Rae. 

 

This is about leadership indeed. It’s about leadership of this 

province under the administration of these people opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what this is about. And although I’ve been most 

interested in listening to the comments of all members on the 

budget, and I have listened to most of them and I’ve been very 

impressed by people’s comments, the repetitive comments on 

the part of the government can only be seen as part of political 

strategy. 

 

And unfortunately I must say, Mr. Speaker, that this budget is 

simply a form of politics of packaging. And rather than my 

speaking in terms about what this is going to do to the people of 

Saskatchewan, which has eloquently been described by many 

people here with very differing points of view, what I’m going 

to do with the time allotted me today is to simply talk about the 

real numbers. 

 

So I hope that you will find this somewhat illuminating, 

because I most certainly did. And I would never begin to say 

that I have the financial expertise to understand this. So just like 

my questions of the Premier earlier today where I did indeed go 

to investment bankers first, I wish for you to know that I indeed 

went to financial experts on the numbers on not only in the 

budget, but using the 1996 fall report of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

My comments therefore are purely based on the numbers in the 

budget. And it is legitimate indeed to talk about the increasing 

of the government services organizations’ debt as increases in 

the debt of the province. 

The so-called surplus in these budget accounts and reductions in 

the accumulated deficit — these are not real, Mr. Speaker, 

because it does not come from bringing the spending of the 

government under control. And that’s the responsibility of 

government departments and it’s the responsibility of the 

ministers in charge. Rather, where this really comes from, Mr. 

Speaker, is the result of transferring excess earnings of the 

Crowns and Liquor and Gaming over to the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

We’ve heard over and over again from the Provincial Auditor of 

this province, how significant it is that we do not have full 

reporting when only the General Revenue Fund is openly 

discussed. The assumption that one has to make to do all of this 

is that the Crowns and Liquor and Gaming are government 

departments. But when I do this in this discussion, then their 

operating budgets have to be included as well. And what the 

table for the accumulated deficit would ultimately show is that 

the debt of our province, Mr. Speaker, has increased since the 

beginning of the decade, it has not decreased. 

 

In addition, the table for the debt reduction account — and 

that’s on page 64 of the government’s own budget — it only 

says that during the 1996-97 fiscal year and the 1997-98 fiscal 

year, this government plans to set aside money to reduce the 

debt of the province. 

 

In fact they have paid down the government services 

organization debt in only one fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, and that 

was 1994-95. In every other year that debt has increased. They 

have paid down the debt of government enterprises, and of 

course you know that that means the Crowns and Sask Liquor 

and Gaming, in only one out of three of the past five fiscal 

years. Overall the debt of our province has grown by $357 

million since 1991-92, and decreased by only $373 million 

since 1992-93 — all the result of paying down $640 million of 

the government enterprises debt while government services debt 

grew by $267 million since then. 

 

This is truly a shell game, Mr. Speaker, and there is only one 

taxpayer that has to deal with all of this. And that’s one of the 

great frustrations that I’ve heard about. Of course we have to be 

concerned about what happens from the federal government and 

the implications of any offloading on provincial governments. 

But of course we have to be concerned about provincial 

governments and the way that they offload or download onto 

municipalities. But ultimately there’s only one person who pays 

the piper, Mr. Speaker, and they most certainly feel the actual 

affects of what the real budget means to them. 

 

So if we add the GSO (government services organization) debt, 

for example running a deficit in government services, or adding 

the accumulated deficit in the General Revenue Fund, does 

indeed mean that the debt of our province is going up, and 

putting money in the debt reduction account is nothing more 

than that. It’s phoney. 

 

So I’m going to comment on three areas of what come to mind 

to me because of . . . in this budget. The first is . . . I must be 

touching some little nerve here. There must be one left and I’m  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

getting on it, Mr. Speaker, because the member from Regina 

South, I always know that I can get his firm approval whenever 

the noise level goes up on the other side of the House. 

 

The three areas in this budget that come to mind, there are 

certain words that best describe this, Mr. Speaker. The first is 

embarrassing; the second is irresponsible; and the third is 

shameful. 

 

So let me describe what it is that ultimately operationally 

defines those words for me from this budget. 

 

Embarrassing: it is the worst case of distorted budgeting that 

this province has ever seen, certainly in my lifetime, and likely 

since 1905. This government has taken the art of distortion and 

distorting budgeting to new heights of misrepresentation. 

 

Secondly, why is it embarrassing? Because it is phoney. 

Entirely an exercise in shuffling numbers to make it appear that 

the government is meeting its targets, when all it is doing is 

increasing the provincial debt and taxing every single living 

person in this province to the limit of their capacity to pay. 

 

Thirdly, why is it embarrassing? Because it is based on bad 

forecasting, unrealistic assumptions about the growth in 

revenues, including what can be expected from Liquor and 

Gaming, what becomes the main source of funding for the 

so-called surplus in the 1997-98 fiscal year. 

 

The second thing that had come to mind which I will now 

operationally define is the word irresponsible. It shows that this 

government has only one financial strategy and that’s to spend 

every single penny that it can squeeze out of the people of this 

province. And they do not even intend to use it for front-line 

services like hospitals or schools where services have been cut 

badly. 

 

Not one minister of this government has brought the spending 

of his or her department under control. Not one has a strategy 

for even doing that because we most certainly have not seen 

evidence of it anywhere. 

 

This government is selling the assets of the province of 

Saskatchewan — like Cameco shares — the assets of the people 

of this province. It is like selling your own house to make it 

look as if our financial house, under this government, is in order 

when it is not. 

 

It continues to use the power of the Crowns to raise rates and 

the power of liquor and gaming to make people spend money. 

To collect revenues rather than bring the spending of the 

government under control. And that is irresponsible. 

 

It continues to put the futures of the children of this province 

and our grandchildren in jeopardy by taxing — through 

excessive income in sales taxes, utility rates, liquor and gaming, 

and downloading onto local governments — everyone in this 

province far beyond their ability to pay, while leaving more and 

more debt for our children and grandchildren. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is irresponsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  And what is shameful? Let me tell you 

what is shameful. It is a shameful display of the abuse of 

taxpayers of this province. A shameful display of number 

crunching; the worst in innumeracy. Disgusting in its complete 

disregard for the well-being of this province, especially those 

on low incomes and fixed incomes — those who need the help 

most, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Arrogance for believing that the people have to stay here is 

another thing, Mr. Speaker. Shameful for disregarding those 

who prefer to stay close to their family and friends. And those 

who have to stay because they have nowhere else to go. 

 

For some . . . Now let’s just look at some of the numbers here, 

and I will move on, Mr. Speaker, because I know there are 

others who wish to speak. I’m going to just summarize some of 

them as I see as the most important if one were to get an 

overview of what has actually been done in this budget. 

 

And you know, I’m just going to make one little side comment 

here, Mr. Speaker, and please indulge me. 

 

(1715) 

 

Yes, my profession is a clinical psychologist. And one of the 

things that is truly tragic is how the people in this government 

continue to employ what is called cognitive dissonance. Rather 

than wanting to participate fully in understanding all the 

different component parts that make up a full plan, which would 

allow us to debate completely on this issue, they expunge from 

their minds anything that makes them feel uncomfortable and 

doesn’t fit with their little template. And that’s unfortunate. 

Because if we truly listened well and participated fully, the 

people of this province would be the beneficiaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the numbers. Let’s just look at the 

revenues. This is the forecast for 1996-97, the revenues. Taxes 

increase by 7.56 per cent, which equals $215.42 million over 

1995-96. It’s from their own books, Mr. Speaker. Didn’t make 

this up anywhere; it’s from here, in black and white. 

 

Individual income tax revenues are up 14.58 per cent. That’s 

$162.06 million. And, Mr. Speaker, we have not seen that in 

this province for years, increase in income tax to that amount. 

Sales tax revenues by 5.27 per cent of an increase — $41.06 

million. 

 

And remember something, Mr. Speaker. This is the forecast for 

1996-97, and of course I know this is really confusing for 

people who haven’t read their own budget. But remember, the 

reduced PST on March 21 won’t make any difference here at all 

because this account closes March 31. 

 

Non-renewable natural resources. These revenues increase by 

33 per cent. That’s $222.06 million, almost all of it from oil. 

Transfers from government utilities increased by 52 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, $181 million. The sale of Cameco shares, 365 

million. Revenues from Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming go  



484  Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1997 

down by 63 per cent to 182 million. Go figure. My gracious. 

This is very interesting. 

 

The other revenues decrease too. Transfers from the federal 

government do indeed decrease, Mr. Speaker, by 25 per cent. 

But you know what’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker — from the 

day the Chrétien government was elected in Ottawa, they have 

not spent five minutes blaming the Mulroney government for 

Somalia or any other kind of thing that transpired before them. 

You know what that’s called? It’s called leadership, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The total revenue increases by almost 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 7 

per cent, which is $350 million and this is very high. The total 

revenue without the transfers from government entities 

increased by 3.5 per cent — $169 million. 

 

Now let’s look at the expense side. Total expenses go down by 

what? Get prepared because this sure ain’t whopping, Mr. 

Speaker — 0.01 per cent. In other words, a whole $62,000 out 

of a $5 billion budget, Mr. Speaker. Now you have got to be 

kidding. 

 

Total expenses excluding the debt service charges increased by 

1.23 per cent — $53 million. This government, Mr. Speaker, 

has assumed exceptionally high rates of growth on individual 

income tax revenues, sales tax revenues, and oil tax revenues; 

and this is possible and the only one that they’ll probably know 

by now for this fiscal year. They have total revenue, excluding 

the transfers from government entities like Crowns, growing at 

3.5 per cent, which I suspect is on the high side for incomes and 

revenues, although real GDP is expected to grow at that rate. 

 

I’ll spend just one brief moment now talking about the 1997-98 

estimates. The revenues, Mr. Speaker, total revenues will be 

decreasing by 7.45 per cent, which is $408 million, in every 

major category — every major category. Total revenue, 

excluding transfers from the government entities, will be 

decreasing by 6.7 per cent, which is 338 million. Total spending 

decreasing will be a whole 1.24 per cent, which is $64.5 

million. 

 

Now I don’t know what else to call this, Mr. Speaker, except 

number shuffling. And how realistic can it really be? How 

realistic can it really be? 

 

The accumulated deficit is a very serious situation — on page 

64 — adding $162 million to the debt of this province in 

1996-97. And we don’t even know what is planned for the 

Crowns, but the government expects that the revenue from 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming is going to fall by $162 

million. Then adding 432.5 million to the debt of this 

government in 1997-98, and Liquor and Gaming is expected to 

generate $287 million in excess earnings. Confusing? I think so. 

 

I would like to pose this question during my comments now, in 

hope that at some future date the Finance minister will answer 

it. My question is this. We have had reference after reference to 

a rainy-day fund, Mr. Speaker, and I’m asking one simple 

question. How much cash is in it? How much cash is in the  

rainy-day fund? 

 

Because I’ll tell you what this reminds me of. It reminds me of 

the fact that somebody may be wanting to save for a car, so they 

have a glass jar in which they put their money. And they find 

that they’ve saved a whole $900, only to come along and see 

two things — their local property taxes go up and they have to 

go in and take money out of there; or an unexpected insurance 

thing that they have to pay for. 

 

And every time they go to the glass jar, Mr. Speaker, they stick 

in what? An IOU. Well let me tell you, it doesn’t leave me 

feeling very secure to think that the Finance minister talks about 

a rainy-day fund when all that’s happening is the General 

Revenue Fund is basically sticking IOUs in a glass jar. 

 

We’re talking about the need in this province, Mr. Speaker, for 

a full plan, a complete plan, not this stuff, not the politics of 

packaging. I will support a budget that has a full plan. And how 

can we really have full debate without full knowledge? Where’s 

the plan for all the government’s responsibilities? Where’s the 

plan to reduce the accumulated deficit in 1998? The truth is that 

every target is for the General Revenue Fund, missing out 40 

per cent of what’s going on. What about all of it? And the most 

important question is, does anybody even know it? That’s what 

I need to know. 

 

Now in 1991, Mr. Speaker, I did something unprecedented in 

this legislature. I voted in favour of the government’s Speech 

from the Throne, and I did that for a particular reason, Mr. 

Speaker. In 1991 this government came to power in the fall and 

it chose to have a Speech from the Throne immediately. That 

was taking a great risk. Did we believe that they would be fully 

prepared to govern? Absolutely not. How could they be when 

they’ve been out of government for so long. But they chose to 

show that kind of leadership. And I showed them my support by 

voting in favour of their Speech from the Throne, albeit 

relatively short, because I wanted to give them their support — 

I wanted to give my support to governance. 

 

So I’ve proven a point, that when I believe in something I will 

vote for it, Mr. Speaker. When I believe in something, I will. 

Now granted members of government did not appreciate what I 

did. They acted like I had done something foolish. But I would 

vote in favour of a budget that I believed would ultimately be in 

the best, best interests of the people of this province. I would 

vote for a budget that would show that it had a full and 

complete plan with all of the information necessary for me to 

make a good decision. But I will not, Mr. Speaker, vote in 

favour of a budget that is based purely on the politics of 

packaging and purely on number shuffling. And with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I say I will not be voting in favour of the 1997 budget. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am going to keep my remarks short and concise. As I see this 

particular budget in view of my constituency and the people of 

Saskatchewan, four areas are of prime importance. As the critic 

for Agriculture and as an agriculturalist myself and representing 

an agricultural constituency, that is very important. 

 

In this particular budget, Mr. Speaker, agriculture takes another  



March 26, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

whack from this government. That has been the history of this 

government. Cuts to agriculture, cuts to agriculture, cuts to 

agriculture. Mr. Speaker, agriculture is taking a $55 million cut 

to the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program, a 

very excellent long-term program, Mr. Speaker, which is 

greatly needed in this province, particularly in light of the 

decreasing values of our agricultural commodities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipalities are another area of great 

importance in my constituency and in this province, both rural 

and urban municipalities. They also are taking dramatic cuts, 

Mr. Speaker, in this particular budget. Again that hurts the 

people of this province because those monies will be taxed back 

on the property, on those that can’t afford to pay it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The other area of great concern in my constituency, and indeed 

across this province, is the highway system. The minister brags 

about how much extra she added to the highways budget. Mr. 

Speaker, that additional $30 million won’t even maintain the 

roads in the state they are today. They will continue to 

deteriorate. The only new money is the monies that have been 

added in the infrastructure program. And that only kicks in if 

the federal government puts up their money and the 

municipalities. And the municipalities, Mr. Speaker, can’t 

afford to put in extra money; they just took a $28 million cut 

from this government. 

 

In my constituency and indeed across a good portion of 

south-east Saskatchewan, the western border of this province, 

Mr. Speaker, the government raises very, very significant 

numbers from oil revenues — 600-plus million dollars last year, 

close to $600 million estimated for the next year. That money is 

taken out of our area, the roads suffer because of all that 

activity, and yet the government and the Minister of Highways 

does not put the money back into those areas to support those 

roads. 

 

There is a small project happening in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker — approximately two kilometres, approximately two 

kilometres of road work is going to be done. Nowheres near 

what needs to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Watrous and the member from Greystone, 

Mr. Speaker, talked about leadership. And indeed this entire 

budget is about leadership. We have all been elected to lead, 

Mr. Speaker, and the government’s primary role is to lead the 

people of Saskatchewan. But this government leads only in 

blaming. 

 

In their first term they blamed the Devine government; in this 

term they blame the federal Liberal government. They are 

leaders, Mr. Speaker, they’re leaders in blaming and in political 

patronage. 

 

If I had the time, Mr. Speaker, I would go through a list of all of 

the past candidates, MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), and those who sought nominations for the NDP, 

and point out exactly where they are now placed in government. 

Don’t have time to do that tonight, but I certainly will at some 

point in time, Mr. Speaker. 

What this government lacks, Mr. Speaker, is leadership, with a 

vision for job creation and for prosperity for this province. For 

those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget. 

 

The Speaker:  I hear the clock being called and it being past 

the normal time of adjournment, the House will now stand 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:29 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 447 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Deputy Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................. 447 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 447 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 447 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 447 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 447 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 447 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 

  Toth .................................................................................................................................................................................... 448, 458 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 

  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 474 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tisdale Trojans Champions 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 

 Opening of Bioriginal Processing Plant 

  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 448 

 Wooden Demonstrators Exported 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 449 

 Congratulations to Junior Citizen of the Year 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 449 

 Opening of Tri-Sum in Canwood 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 449 

 New Business Openings 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 449 

 Regina Jumps Into Spring Horse Show 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 

 Dual Marketing 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 

 Todd McLellan Wins Award 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 450 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Midwifery Services 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 

 Highway Maintenance 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 451 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 451 

 Jaw Implants 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 453 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 453 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 453 

 Reductions in Business Regulations 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 453 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 454 

 Saskatchewan’s 1993 Budget Crisis 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 454 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 454 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 206  The Saskatchewan Health Ombudsman Act 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 455 

 

 Bill No. 213 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997 (FREE VOTES) 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 458 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 461 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 465 

  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 468 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 472 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 482 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 484 

 


