



















































Hansard: May 20, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1849 

 May 20, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Premier to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good 

evening to you, sir, and all the members of the House. I am 

pleased to introduce to you, seated at my immediate left, the 

deputy minister to myself, Dr. Greg Marchildon. Greg’s a 

Saskatchewan boy from Zenon Park who’s made various stops 

along the way and we’re very happy to have him come back to 

Saskatchewan from Johns Hopkins University. Seated to my 

right is my chief of staff, Miss Judy Samuelson; directly behind 

me is the director of operations and executive services, Don 

Wincherauk. Seated to Don’s left is the executive assistant to 

the deputy minister, Mr. Jim Nichol. And the person behind Mr. 

Wincherauk is the manager of administration, Bonita Heidt. 

 

And of course the cast of hundreds if not thousands waiting in 

support, aid, and comfort should I need the same. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

I welcome the Premier and his officials here this evening in 

what I’m sure will be a very valuable exchange of ideas and 

views about his government’s policies and his government’s 

record. 

 

I know in terms of looking at the Premier’s record as the 

Premier of this province, and, I’m sure, as the Leader of the 

Opposition, I’m sure that he has responded to the Executive 

Council estimates many, many a time. This being my first 

opportunity to question the Premier in this role. I’m to say the 

least slightly nervous here. 

 

I’ll be bringing up a number of issues tonight, issues that our 

caucus has been raising throughout this entire session and 

issues to which, unfortunately, we’ve not been given 

satisfactory answers or explanation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, there are two very different views of this 

government’s performance and values. One view, coming from 

the 40 members on that side of the House, is that they can do no 

wrong and that they are not responsible for anything that’s 

wrong in Saskatchewan today. Anything the least bit negative in 

Saskatchewan can be and must be attributed to someone else. 

Anything good that occurs here, of course, is completely their 

doing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, that’s a view which finds its roots in the 

arrogance we see in the government — an arrogance that rivals 

the NDP government in 1982 and an arrogance that reminds me 

of the Devine government’s last sorry days in office. 

What those two governments had in common by the end was 

the attitude that they knew better than anyone else in the 

province what was good for the people who live here. The 

people weren’t to be listened to because the politicians and the 

government knew best. So those governments simply stopped 

listening to the people they governed, the people they worked 

for, the people who elected them to govern. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s that type of attitude that allows for 

opposition parties to win by-elections in seats they have not 

held in 50 years and it’s that kind of arrogance that always 

defeats governments. Allan Blakeney learned this; Grant 

Devine learned this. And this government has already had a 

taste of it when the member from North Battleford joined us on 

this side of the House in time for this session, I’m sure much to 

the chagrin of the Minister of Justice. 

 

So while the members opposite wallow in their own 

self-importance and perceived infallibility, the people of the 

province have come to a point of view quite different than the 

40 hon. members who sit on the other side of the legislature 

from ourselves. This is the point of view of the people we’re 

here for: the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m not going to stand here and argue 

that people aren’t glad that the budget is balanced or at least 

appears to be balanced, thanks to a record high resource 

revenues and the nearly $130 million that pours into 

government coffers each and every year from communities 

throughout Saskatchewan through video lottery terminals. And, 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m not going to stand here and say the 

people of Saskatchewan weren’t happy to see the PST drop 

back to 7 per cent, the very point it was when this government 

took power. That wouldn’t be fair, and it wouldn’t be honest. 

 

But — this is a big “but” that the members opposite seem to 

have blocked out — there are many people in this province 

today who are suffering as much, if not more, than before this 

government came to power in 1991. These people, while 

they’re happy that the provincial budget is under control, these 

are the people who are becoming more and more convinced 

with each passing day that this government — this NDP Party 

— has forgotten about how its policies affect the people in the 

province. 

 

The people in Saskatchewan see that this is a government that is 

absolutely riddled with hypocrisy. The government’s words say 

one thing, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Their actions show something 

quite different. 

 

The government opposite is a government that takes offence 

when anyone dares to question its policies or the motivations 

behind its policies. And I think we can hear that already tonight 

from the comments from those members. Whenever anyone on 

this side of the House raises a question about the wisdom of a 

certain policy or an initiative, we don’t get a clear explanation 

from the government. What we get from those members 

opposite, and the Premier, is another defensive political show, 

the type of show that I’m sure we’ll see tonight. 

 



1850  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

We ask a question about what the government is doing about 

the problem of child prostitution; they say we’re grandstanding. 

We ask a question about what the government is planning to do 

to deal with the problem of youth crime in Saskatchewan; they 

say we’re grandstanding. We ask a question about the many 

Saskatchewan residents who are falling through the cracks in 

this government’s health care system, and they say we’re 

grandstanding. 

 

Over and over they tell us this isn’t the forum to raise such 

concerns on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. They tell us 

that by raising these issues in this House on a daily basis we’re 

playing cheap politics — something they’d never think of doing 

of course. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I ask you, if you don’t have the 

right to use this House to ask these questions, questions that the 

citizens of this province are concerned about, then what are we 

doing here? Is this government so consumed with their own 

self-importance that they are actually offended that the 

opposition party has the audacity to call them to account for 

something on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan? Because if 

it’s the attitude of the members opposite, I have only one thing 

to say — we don’t have to take any lessons about political 

grandstanding from the members opposite. They were masters 

of it during the 1980s and they continue to be masters at it. 

 

Whenever an important issue is raised in this province, this 

government’s first reaction is not to seek a solution to the 

problem. No, that would be too difficult and may actually force 

them to take some responsibility. No, their first reaction is 

always political. At the first sign of a problem in the province 

they go into overdrive to contain their political damage; actually 

solving the problem that caused the concern is an afterthought 

if it’s actually a thought at all. 

 

They first have to figure out who to slough the blame on so they 

don’t have to deal with the problem themselves. We see 

absolutely no leadership from the government on the many 

important issues facing our province and the people who live 

here. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, it is a government’s responsibility to 

show leadership. We have not seen that from this government. 

In order to show leadership a government must first be willing 

to take some responsibility for what’s occurring in the province, 

and continually we see the government and the Premier refuse 

to take such responsibility to show the type of leadership we 

need in Saskatchewan. It’s not enough to find the nearest 

political scapegoat. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to hear 

some answers, to hear some solutions from the members 

opposite. The blame game may make for good politics but it 

makes for ineffective, unaccountable, irresponsible government. 

 

Is it too much to ask that this government actually deals with 

some of the issues the people of Saskatchewan are concerned 

about? Is it too much to ask to listen to the people and at least 

hear their concerns? Is it too much to ask that these concerns 

are dealt with in a serious way? Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

from what I’ve seen during the last two sessions from this  

government, it seems that it is too much to ask. They simply 

can’t put politics aside for one second; they’re totally incapable 

of it. And in my opinion the people of Saskatchewan deserve 

better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s not good enough to balance the 

budget without acknowledging how you did it. That you are 

taking in nearly $800 million more in taxes than you did in 

1991. That you’ve closed hospital beds, laid off nurses, and 

closed hospitals. That you’ve chopped resources from our 

schools and our students. That you’ve drained hundreds of 

millions of dollars out of communities throughout 

Saskatchewan through VLTs, without even keeping your 

promise to return even a small portion of that cash to those 

same communities. That you’ve taken a hatchet to local 

governments, each and every year you’ve been in power, 

inflicting vicious cuts year after year after year. 

 

It’s simply not good enough to take all the credit for balancing 

your budget when you’re not willing to take the responsibility 

for the pain you’ve inflicted on the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, every member of this 

House knows that something had to be done after the 

Conservative government of Grant Devine was finally booted 

out by the people, who were sick and tired of the waste and 

corruption. Yes, tough decisions had to be made. Yes, the 

finances of the province had to be brought under control. And 

yes, some pain had to be inflicted to get us out of the 

Conservative-created mess. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s totally unacceptable for this 

government to stand before us in this legislature, stand before 

the people of Saskatchewan, and disavow any responsibility for 

the cuts that were made, for the pain that was inflicted. And 

today, Mr. Deputy Chairman, now that the finances of the 

province are apparently under control — as I said, thanks 

largely to record resource revenue and new-found wealth in the 

gambling industry — it’s time for this government to stand up 

and explain its actions of today. 

 

Explain why schools continue to be hard hit. Explain why 

municipalities have been almost completely cut off from any 

revenue sharing from this government. Explain why it refuses to 

share its gambling fortune with the communities where the 

money comes from. Explain why the hospitals that were 

downgraded to health centres in 1993 are now being shut down 

completely. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan want an explanation and deserve 

an explanation. They deserve a government that is open and 

accountable, like the NDP promised it would be when it was 

still in opposition. 

 

I just want to take a few minutes to look back at a few things 

the current Premier promised in the lead-up to 1991, and some 

of the things his party promised. Just a bit of a report card — 

where the NDP told us they were going and where they’ve 

gone. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

(1915) 

 

In a document entitled Democratic Reforms for the 1990’s, 

which I believe was prepared by the New Democratic caucus, 

several interesting points were made. I’ll be the first to admit 

that on issues such as accountability, perhaps the current 

government does a better job than the previous Tory 

government. But I mean really, Mr. Deputy Chairman, who 

wouldn’t do a better job on virtually anything that that 

government did? 

 

The NDP promised, while in opposition, to table the annual 

reports of government departments within six months of the 

close of the fiscal year. Has that happened? No, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. During this session we’ve received the reports for 

the 1995-96 fiscal year for government departments. We won’t 

see the reports for 1996-97 until next year — 1998. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, the same document also calls on the 

government to implement a fair and open tendering policy 

based on getting the best deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 

What did we get instead, Mr. Deputy Chairman? We got the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, which does nothing 

but cost the people of Saskatchewan more money. And it was 

nothing more than a pay-off from this government to its union 

supporters. 

 

And then there’s the Provincial Auditor. During the 1980s, the 

NDP constantly rushed to the defence of the Provincial Auditor 

against a government that often treated the office with outright 

contempt. But again, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the NDP’s actions 

of late speak much louder than their words in the 1980s. Lately 

we’ve seen one minister in particular treat the Provincial 

Auditor with outright disrespect and contempt, with the aid of 

several back-benchers who took part in a scripted, well planned, 

well orchestrated attack on the auditor, whose only sin was to 

raise legitimate concerns on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan about this government’s accounting practices. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the government’s members’ 

shocking behaviour in this instance shows how arrogant the 

government has become. And I have to assume this attack was 

conducted with the Premier’s blessing since I have not heard 

him disavow himself from the actions of that minister or force 

that minister to apologize. 

 

The auditor gives an opinion they don’t like, so they just go and 

get another opinion that they like better. That’s not the end of it 

though. A few days later they pass a motion stating in effect 

that the Workers’ Compensation Board shouldn’t be 

accountable to the Provincial Auditor either. These actions 

show a patent disregard for the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, simply because he dares question some of the 

actions and policies of the government, which is his job. 

 

It’s unacceptable and it’s unworthy of that party which climbed 

upon its high horse so often when it was in opposition. But it’s 

the type of hypocrisy and arrogance we’ve been talking about 

this session and last. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t always agree with  

everything the press has to say, but I think a recent column in 

the Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix aptly sums up what many 

people in Saskatchewan are starting to feel about this 

government. That column, in summing up this session and this 

government, stated in part: 

 

Instead of coasting through the session, the government 

has found itself embroiled in a series of controversies that 

can be attributed, in large measure, to its own arrogance 

and self-righteous behaviour. 

 

The same column goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

Just as there is no superior race, there is no superior 

political philosophy. And until some members of the NDP 

caucus get that through their inflated heads, the Premier’s 

headaches will continue. 

 

Well I’m sure the Premier knows that Tylenol or Advil will take 

care of his headache. But I think there’s a very important lesson 

to be learned here. 

 

When a government thinks it knows everything, when a 

government thinks it has all the answers and stops listening to 

other opinions, it is a government that will soon lose the 

support of the public. We’ve already seen this in the North 

Battleford by-election. And I suspect we’ll have ample 

opportunity to see it more in the next two years. 

 

It’s this type of attitude that leads the government to try and 

cover up the $16 million loss in the NST fiasco. It’s this type of 

attitude that gets us into Guyana. And it’s this type of attitude 

that leads to outrageous, insensitive, and unacceptable attacks 

from members on that side of the House on political opponents 

who aren’t even members of this House, whose only sin is that 

they have different philosophies than those members. Perhaps 

more humility from those members would lead to fewer 

apologies. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, if the only side-effect of the arrogance 

shown by those members were hurt feelings or a few negative 

headlines, it wouldn’t be hard to swallow. However that same 

arrogance is causing a lot of unnecessary pain for people in this 

province because the government will not listen to them, will 

not acknowledge the harm their policies have done to the 

people and the communities throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

And those are the issues we’ve raised in this House during this 

session and last. And it’s these type of issues we’ll continue to 

raise because they are the issues the people of Saskatchewan are 

asking us to raise. 

 

They want to know why their health care system continues to 

deteriorate even though we’re still spending every bit as much 

as we ever did. They want to know why schools are closed — 

not because there aren’t enough students, but because there 

isn’t enough resources provided by the government. They want 

to know why their roads aren’t safe to drive on and why this 

government fails to realize that the longer it leaves the problem, 

the harder it will be to fix. 

 



1852  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

They want to know why this government refuses to even 

acknowledge its responsibility in the area of youth crime. They 

want to know why they’re faced with higher and higher utility 

rates; at the same time the government has apparently decided 

to purchase a worthless power company in a country most of 

the members opposite probably couldn’t even locate on a map. 

 

These are the questions the people of Saskatchewan want some 

answers to. I’ll be touching on each and every one of them with 

the Premier tonight. And after I sit down and if he decides to 

give adequate answers to each and every one of these questions, 

we may have a short evening. However, if he stands in his place 

and begins once again to point fingers in all directions other 

than at himself and his government, we may have a long 

evening. 

 

So I’ll begin my questioning tonight by asking the Premier to 

explain to the people of Saskatchewan why his government 

continues to add pain to the lives of the people of this province, 

particularly the people outside of our larger centres — the 

people who are now losing their health centres, the people who 

are seeing their children bussed out of their communities 

because their school has closed, bussed over highways which 

continue to crumble and will continue to crumble. 

 

And I’ll throw out this challenge to the Premier — explain his 

government’s actions in these areas to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and at the same time, at least acknowledge that 

his government has a role to play in these areas. 

 

Will you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 

is correct. I have heard many estimates from many departments 

and many times as minister in charge of the Executive Council. 

But I have to tell you this is the first time that I’ve heard the 

beginning of estimates with a 24-minute speech, presumably 

lecturing this government for being too political, and not once 

even acknowledging that in that 24 minutes, it was probably the 

most political harangue that this legislature in any estimates of 

any department has heard, certainly in the 30 years that I’ve 

been around. 

 

So I don’t think I’ll take, with the greatest of respect, too many 

lessons from the current Leader of the Official Opposition 

about what is political or what is not political. 

 

I want to make a second point and I think this all members of 

the House will welcome. The hon. member talked about, very 

glancingly I might observe, about how it was that we balanced 

the budget and how we’re attacking the debt. And oh yes, sure, 

we lowered the PST but it wasn’t good enough — never is good 

enough. Didn’t even ignore . . . mention — ignored totally — 

the substantial new funds that we’ve pumped into the various 

social programs — I’ll say a word about that in a moment. And 

then he proceeded to try to analyze, proceeded to try to analyze 

why this is the case. 

 

Well I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, and all members of the  

House, don’t buy his analysis. Buy this analysis, buy this 

analysis: today, Mr. Chairman, the Dominion Bond Rating 

Service (DBRS) upgraded the province’s credit rating from 

BBB to A. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And with this, Mr. Chairman, 

Saskatchewan’s credit rating now is bracketed by all four major 

North American agencies in recognition of the province’s 

financial and economic turnaround. And what do they attribute 

this to? Not to the stated reasons of the Leader of the 

Opposition. Of course that wouldn’t be plausible or possible. In 

the words of DBRS, they cite both the province’s continuing 

strong economic performance, “its sustainable fiscal program.” 

DBRS noted “the province’s demonstrated its commitment to 

meeting fiscal objectives despite substantial challenges in 

recent years and fully intends to generate continuing budget 

surpluses.” 

 

Which leads me, of course, to the specific question the hon. 

member asks: do we acknowledge that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has responsibility with respect to roads and 

highways and social services and the various programs he’s 

identified? Well of course the Government of Saskatchewan 

acknowledges they have responsibility for it. That’s why in this 

budget we’ve been able to reduce taxes on sales from 9 to 7 per 

cent; why we’ve been able to pump $57 million more to the 

base on health care each and every year hereafter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Plus back-filling every penny taken 

away from us by the federal Liberal government. That is why 

we’ve been able to announce the $2.5 billion, 10-year program 

for highways without a penny being matched by Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  That’s why we’ve been able to 

announce an $8 million more on K to 12 system, $13 million 

more to the post-secondary system on education, and 

back-filling virtually all of what the federal Liberal government 

has taken away from us; we’ve been able to announce that. 

That’s why we’ve been able to announce in this budget $25 

million or double the amount in the children’s action plan — 

double the amount in the children’s action plan, an action plan 

recognized internationally as the outstanding plan of Canada 

and North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And that’s why we have a program 

which basically says we invest in people — job creation, 

education, kids, health system, highway improvement, and the 

balanced budget. That is our program, our investment in the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to close before I sit down, Mr. Chairman, to say the hon. 

member talks about — in his mind in any event, imagined as it 

is, as imagined as his figures were in his opening statement —  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

that somehow the government here is arrogant. I want to tell 

you this government, Mr. Chairman, has made mistakes. This 

government has made mistakes, and I’ve acknowledged it 

publicly before; I acknowledge it again. And it is inevitable that 

we will make mistakes again in the future. We try hard not to. 

 

Where we make mistakes, we seek to learn from them. Where 

we make mistakes, and when we formulate government policy 

we seek to consult and to listen to people from all over 

Saskatchewan, and we do. 

 

And sometimes we may lose by-elections, as we did in the 

constituency called Regina North West. And somehow it 

happens that when the general election comes, we always win 

back those by-elections, as the people of Saskatchewan know 

that this is exactly where we’re headed because of the 

investment by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  So, Mr. Speaker, that we have issues 

to deal with which are complex and important, I acknowledge. 

Have we solved every problem? No, we have not. Have we 

reached heaven on earth? No, we have not. 

 

Have we made tremendous progress in six years? Yes we have. 

Don’t take my word for it. Just take today’s record-breaking 

announcement — for the recent time being, in any event, 

because we were higher at one point — and that is, take the 

announcement of the Dominion Bond Rating Service, which 

has taken a look at our books objectively and non-politically, 

from top to bottom, and says, Saskatchewan is back. We are 

back to being a social and economic and fiscal leader of all of 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. Over the last 

number of years, Mr. Premier, we’ve heard you report and the 

Minister of Finance report that indeed the government budget 

was entering a period of becoming balanced. And we have had 

three surpluses. I would like to also indicate to you that in 

1991-92, the fiscal year for government, the government 

revenues were $4.6 billion. Today the government is taking in 

nearly $1 billion more than it did when it came into power. 

 

Compare that to what the province has lost in transfers from the 

federal government. And I’ll be very generous here, Mr. 

Premier, because I think I’ve heard you use these numbers in 

the House where you’ve indicated that $200 million in transfers 

has been lost over the last number of years. 

 

Even if you accept that figure, that still puts us ahead by several 

million dollars each and every year — several hundred million 

dollars. So excuse me if I say that this government’s continual 

cry of poverty rings very, very hollow. Not that the facts matter 

to the members opposite — they continue to blame the federal 

government for the NDP’s mismanagement of health care and 

continual reductions to education and other government 

services that are a provincial responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  And I expect them to continue to use the 

federal government as a whipping-boy. They seemed content to 

fight the last federal election on the floor of this legislature 

since the day it was called. 

 

And their campaigning has paid off. Alexa McDonough has 

moved from fifth place to fourth, right past the Bloc, and only 

30 or 40 points behind the current government. But I’m sorry, 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I digress. I digress. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, fed bashing has been a tool used by 

successive provincial governments for many, many years, 

especially by the NDP who never have to worry about their own 

federal cousins achieving power. Fed bashing is a convenient 

way to shirk off explaining their own actions. 

 

But what I find truly maddening, truly frustrating, that all the 

while the members opposite cry and moan about reductions 

from the federal government, reductions that hardly make a dent 

in Saskatchewan record revenues, this provincial government 

carries on with its own downloading. 

 

And the offloading this government has passed on to local 

governments makes the federal cut-backs pale in comparison. If 

Paul Martin had done to the provinces what this government 

has done to municipalities then you might have reason to cry 

the blues. But your own cut-backs to our local governments far 

exceed anything you’ve had to put up with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  It’s become very clear that this government 

intends to end any form of revenue sharing with the 

municipalities in the next few years. It just hasn’t had the 

courage to admit it. Instead it continues to whittle away its 

responsibilities to local ratepayers. Every year local 

governments have received cuts from this provincial 

government — this government that decries any offloading it 

must put up with. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is related to municipal revenue 

sharing, both urban and rural, to school boards in terms of the 

foundation grants that your government provides. How can you 

consider offloading to that level of government as simply 

necessary for you to balance the budget and instead hammer on 

the fact that the feds are downloading a very small portion to 

your budgets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I sure hope that the 

member’s confident predictions of the 30-percentage-point lead 

that his federal kissing cousins have — for his sake, not perhaps 

for the sake of Canadians — proves to be accurate on the 

evening of June 2. 

 

Nor would I dare presume to say that he said it with a touch of  



1854  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

arrogance and a touch of super-confidence that even, dare say I, 

members on this side would not try. But leave that aside; that’s 

just a parenthetical comment. 

 

What I’d like to know from the Liberal opposition is just a 

square answer to one proposition. Just a moment ago in a 

preface to this question you say that our economy has grown to 

the extent that revenues to the coffers to the province of 

Saskatchewan have grown by about a billion dollars. And yet 

day after day, day after day — I bet you even during these 

estimates yet tonight — you’ll come up and say the economy’s 

not growing. You’re not doing your jobs. The job numbers 

aren’t up there. You should be doing this and you should be 

doing that. 

 

What is it? What is it? Are we growing or are we shrinking? 

Are we up a billion dollars or are we down a billion dollars? 

Get your math right, also correct, if I may. We pay 8 . . . Well I 

hear your seat mate saying it’s the highest-taxed province of 

Canada and that is an absolute inaccuracy. The $75,000, the 

$75,000 of a family of four on taxes and household charges, 

there is no province in Canada that has a lower tax rate bar none 

— bar none — bar none, and you don’t even accept that. You 

won’t accept it at all. And not only will you not accept it, not 

only will you not accept it, not only will you not accept it, 

member from Saltcoats, you won’t accept this, but here’s what 

you’re doing. 

 

Here’s what you’re doing since March 6, 1997 to May 6, 1997, 

in the period of this session, I have here, documented by you 

and your colleagues, a total extra cost, annual cost added to the 

budget of $1.9 billion. Going from department to department, 

you people would spend $1.9 billion each and every year. I 

have every MLA’s name. I have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, no, not every bureaucrat . . . (inaudible) . . . right from 

Hansard. I have the page number; I have the MLA; I have what 

you promised and I’ve got the cost on it — $1.9 billion. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we’re seeing here is a political party in 

total disarray — a political party that on the one hand says 

we’re not growing the economy; on the other hand says we’re 

growing the economy. A political party that says on the one 

hand we should not go back into deficit or debt and on the other 

hand advocates expenditures of $2 billion. 

 

It’s okay, Mr. Chairman, I know you want to intervene, but they 

get a dose of truth and they react in a very negative and loud 

way. I totally understand that. They’re going to hear some more 

truth. And what they see is an expenditure . . . (inaudible) . . . of 

$2 billion each and every year and then he gets up and he asks 

us to add another $20 million more with respect to 

municipalities, given the situation. Mr. Chairman, what the 

members opposite in the Liberal Party need is a first-year 

course in basic math before they come to these estimates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Premier, last year both urban and rural 

municipalities were told to expect 25 percent cuts in their 

revenue-sharing grants for this year. And of course there were 

protests against such a brutal cut, when the province was raking  

in the revenue that I’ve just indicated to you. 

 

However, when the true figures were revealed this year, we got 

to see first hand how brutal the government can be. And it’s 

truly incredible just what the province is doing to our local 

governments, because for many local governments, the cuts 

were much, much higher than 25 per cent, as unbelievable as 

that is. Total urban government grants have been slashed by 17 

million, while rural grants have been reduced by another $12 

million — $29 million, Mr. Premier. Now that’s brutal. 

 

But the story becomes even more brutal when you look at 

what’s happened to some of the individual municipalities. The 

RM of Shellbrook, a cut of 61 per cent in conditional grants. 

The RM of Rosthern, a cut of 65 per cent. RM of Langenburg, a 

cut of 74 per cent. RM of Meota reduced 66 per cent in 

unconditional grants. The RM of Meadow Lake, a cut of 91 per 

cent, and the RM of Golden West, a cut of 95 per cent. And that 

list goes on, Mr. Premier. It is so entirely hypocritical for those 

members to decry downloading when they oversee these kinds 

of savage cuts to local municipalities. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you explain to local taxpayers why cuts 

handed down by the federal government are the wrong course, 

while your downloading is the right course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that I 

think is quite obvious. But before I do, again I get a little bit 

confused about the Liberals opposite. Here I have the Melville 

Advance, Wednesday, March 26, 1997. And guess what the 

headline says? “NDP stole budget ideas from Liberals.” That’s 

what the headline says. The best ideas in Thursday’s budget 

“were the ones stolen from the Liberal Party, says Melville 

MLA, Ron Osika” and then goes on to say how good the budget 

is. 

 

All of a sudden it was the best budget ever introduced and all 

the ideas came from the Liberal Party — not tonight though. 

Tonight they’re on a different course. 

 

Of course we’ve seen this before. Doesn’t much matter whether 

they’re for privatizing Crown corporations or against 

privatizing Crown corporations, their story seems to change 

with every columnist’s opinion on how they’re doing or how 

they’re not doing in the Legislative Assembly. They got a 

lesson to learn, but that’s not the way they’re going to assume 

office, nor is it the way they’re going to maintain the position of 

the official opposition. 

 

The offloading of the federal government, however, is a very, 

very different issue. What the federal government is doing 

nationally is cutting back $7 billion in three key areas: health, 

post-secondary education primarily, and in social services — $7 

billion. That means for the province of Saskatchewan a shortfall 

of about $110 million each and every year. 

 

This on top of, Mr. Chairman, reductions in, for example, the 

responsibility out of the constitution to look after status treaty 

Indians off reserve and the offload there, and the various 

offloads in various other abandonment of programs, whether 

it’s the Crow rate, to the aspects related to deregulation,  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

totalling in the approximate amount of about 600 to $700 

million each and every year for this provincial government. 

 

We are not alone in objecting to the Prime Minister. Every 

premier — Liberal, Conservative, NDP — every premier across 

this country has been saying to the Prime Minister of the 

country: you can’t cut back on fundamental programs like 

health and education and social services. 

 

Now what we did was this. Prior to the 1995 election we tabled 

a budget in April . . . March, April 1995. And we said to the 

local governments, in this budget year, two years from now, you 

will receive a reduction. We’re giving you two years warning 

— What? The figure is $20 million I think it is, if my memory 

serves . . . Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Fifteen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Fifteen million dollars, which if 

memory serves me correctly, over the next two years you can 

accommodate for that and take that into account. 

 

That was the budget, that was the promise, and that’s what we 

implemented. That on a budget of 4.4 billion, using your 

figures, is an amount by which the vast majority of local 

governments can manage and can maintain very easily and is of 

a magnitude of an entirely different order — entirely different 

order — than the $7 billion savaging of Canada’s national 

programs which the Liberal Party have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I guess, Mr. Premier, the reactions by the 

premiers to the federal downloading are no different than the 

reactions that we and, I’m sure, you are hearing from the reeves 

of municipalities, the mayors of municipalities, the chairpersons 

of school boards, who are saying that your downloading is no 

different. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  As this government lets provincial highways 

fall into further disrepair, more stress is put on municipal roads 

for which there is less money to maintain them, especially after 

the government went further in its hit against municipalities and 

cancelled the futures program. 

 

Of course before it was done away with, the futures program 

allowed RMs to use more than their annual allocation of funds 

so they could finance the reconstruction of significant portions 

of roads over time. With the cancellation of the program, many 

RMs tell us they’ll be lucky to build a kilometre of road per 

year. 

 

So why is the government doing everything in its power to 

make the situation of municipal governments, and in particular 

RMs, untenable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well we’re not, Mr. Chairman. We’re  

working with the RMs as close as we can. We have working 

partnerships which are very important. The southwest 

transportation advisory council — the hon. member from Wood 

River will know about this as an example of where RMs are 

working with the provincial government to identify the 

priorities of the highway system in that particular area. 

 

We’re dedicating a 10-year program of $2.5 billion to build up 

the roads which need to be built up with the infrastructure 

program which has been signed, again involving the federal 

government — to its credit, I give it credit — with the 

provincial government, is now going to be devoted almost 

entirely to local governments and almost entirely in the case of 

RMs to the highways and transportation network. 

 

There’s no doubt about it that we should be spending more 

money on highways if we could afford to be spending more 

money on highways. But I have said — maybe not to this 

House, but it’s a fact — we have enough taxpayer highways in 

the province of Saskatchewan to go around the centre of the 

equator about four and a half times. And 6 per cent of that 

network is used by 70 per cent of the traffickers — 6 per cent; 

94 per cent is used by the remainder. 

 

We’ve got to use our dollars very, very efficiently. We’ve got to 

make sure they’re targeted and they’ve got to be put in case of 

an economic and social plan. That is what we’re doing by 

working with the RMs and we’re turning it around and we’re 

achieving it in a better way each and every day. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Sadly, Mr. Premier, it’s not only municipal 

governments that have borne the brunt of your government’s 

obsessive cut-backs. Even perhaps more harmful is what the 

government has done to our public schools. More harmful 

because we’re not just dealing with potholes and/or garbage 

collection here. We’re dealing with the education of our 

children. 

 

Again we’ll hear about the government’s commitment to 

education from the minister and from the Premier, but their 

words won’t be backed up by their actions. Since the 1991-92 

fiscal year this government has taken $328 million out of the K 

to 12 system in Saskatchewan, $328 million from our children’s 

education — some commitment for the future. 

 

Grants are now lower than they were in 1991-92 even though 

operating costs have risen dramatically. The educational 

development grant has been cut altogether and capital grants are 

just over a third of what they used to be, Mr. Premier. This is at 

a time, and I want to keep emphasizing this for the members 

opposite who might believe their own press releases . . . this 

from a government who is taking in more revenues than ever 

before in the history of Saskatchewan — federal cut-backs or 

no federal cut-backs. 

 

The cuts to the education system has forced some school boards 

to close schools. And yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, before the 

members opposite say it, I’ll say it for them — schools have 

been closing in the province for many, many years, but the  



1856  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

closures that are going on now are quite different because many 

of these closures aren’t being driven by a lack of students, as 

has been the case in other years and during other 

administrations. These closures are taking place solely because 

of a lack of funding by the province. In towns that are lucky 

enough to have businesses move into the area, schools are being 

shut down simply because the dollars aren’t there to run them 

properly. It makes no difference if there is a greater need for 

schools in these areas than ever before. There’s simply no cash 

to run them. 

 

In Regina which, the last time I heard, has a growing 

population, the division board was forced to close schools 

because of a lack of funding by the province. And in 

communities that aren’t losing schools outright, they are losing 

some much needed programs. 

 

Mr. Premier, in Prince Albert for instance, we see that 

education cuts have resulted in the elimination of the Carlton 

connection, an intervention program for special needs students. 

This isn’t an example of a frivolous program, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. It’s much needed — so much that parents in Prince 

Albert launched legal action to try and save it. Desperate times 

call for desperate measures. 

 

The true commitment that the government has in education of 

our children can been seen in its share of education funding. A 

few short years ago, the provincial government picked up 60 

per cent of the cost of educating our kids. Today that figure has 

fallen to 40 per cent, leaving the other 60 per cent to be funded 

by the property tax base. This is a hit not only on the school 

system, but once again on local taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government’s commitment to education 

seems to be lacking. Can you explain to the people of this 

province, those people in towns where schools are closing, 

where there’s programs that are being eliminated or all the 

kinds of things that we’ve talked about in this session in the 

field of education, where those things are happening, how can 

you describe that kind of a situation and then still look at the 

fact that we have slipped from 60 per cent funding by 

government to now only 40 per cent? Is there a plan in place to 

bring us back to that kind of level of funding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, we have indicated to 

SARM, SUMA, SSTA, STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation), to Legislative Assembly, through the Minister of 

Education, that our objective is to increase from the General 

Revenue Fund more of the percentage of funds used to finance 

K to 12. That is our commitment. 

 

We have been in a situation since 1991 where we have been 

fighting a deficit, resulting in the good news of today’s 

announcement that we’re now, as I describe it, a universal A 

province which, by the way, will mean material benefits for us 

right across the piece, including more money for education. 

There’s no doubt about it. We need to increase it and go toward 

a target that is better than it is at this particular time. 

 

But I want to make two points before I close on this particular 

question. When the Leader of the Opposition himself was in 

charge of a school board, school division, there were school 

closures. He will say of course they weren’t occasioned by the 

lack of funds. They were occasioned by the lack of population 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I said population. He will of 

course maybe even blame us, maybe he’ll say it’s our fault 

entirely. But the reality is there’s a change in demographics. 

And it is a decision which local school boards, a decision 

making which they’re exercising, very responsibly based on 

their needs. And I dare say the member discharging his duties 

locally did the same at that particular time. 

 

But here’s the fundamental question. He says, when are you 

going to get back to 60/40? I noted by the way in my Liberal 

spending proposals document, which I identified a few 

moments ago, that you first raised this on March 24, 1997, a 

60/40 split on K to 12 funding. Do you know how much that 

would cost a year annually? Well I’ll tell you how much it will 

cost a year annually . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  It cost 180 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Pardon me — 191 million. 

 

An Hon. Member:  I said 180. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Okay, fine. Let’s take your 180 — 

let’s take your 180 — and you tell me, if you were in 

government and you were going to increase it, where are you 

going to get that 180 million from? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Premier, I’ve asked you for a plan, a plan 

of action for the term of your government. Your minister has 

indicated that there should be a plan, that we should move to 

60/40. The local governments of SARM, SUMA, and SSTA 

have lobbied your government. And if I recall your words this 

past spring, you said we must move in that direction. I’m not 

telling you to do it tomorrow. I’m saying put in place a plan. 

And I’d like to see your plan. I’d like to see your plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I think the area of municipal government and 

education are very good examples of this government’s 

hypocrisy when it comes to pointing fingers at other levels of 

government for downloading. No one has to take lessons from 

this government for the evils of downloading because no other 

government does it better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I haven’t even touched on health care yet or 

the other issues the New Democrats used to guard jealously as 

their own private domain — the types of issues this government 

has seemed to forget about. Nor have I spoken in great detail 

about the state of the highways in Saskatchewan. But before 

getting into those areas, I want to hear the Premier on this issue, 

sir. 

 

How can you stand in this House and tell us over and over 

again how harmful and counterproductive it is for one level of 

government to download and not your own government, sir? I  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

ask you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I’ve answered this question. I’ve 

answered this question. As a result of the . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well you’ll never accept the answer. Because 

being a part of a political party that downloads $7 billion on the 

backs of Canadians on health care and education and social 

services, you'll never accept that answer. 

 

I’m telling you that what we engaged in 1991 was a province 

that was in a very serious state of affairs. This upgrade which I 

announced today tells us how far the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have come. They’ve come, by working together, 

to the point now where we can add, on K to 12, $8 million 

more, where’s there’s 18 million more on the capital side. We 

are expanding. Take a look at your government and our 

government — deficit for your government federally; no deficit 

for us. Debt reduction for us; no debt reduction for you people 

and the Liberal government. We have more money for 

education; no more money for education from the federal 

Liberals. More money for health care right here; no more 

money for health care from the federal people. Money for 

highways; no more money from the federal people. 

 

You say, how can we justify that? We can justify that because 

the economy has grown. We’ve run a balanced government, a 

fiscal policy which has made sense. It’s a fiscal policy which 

you embrace and it is of a magnitude and of an order in terms of 

just sheer dollars which cannot even be remotely compared to, 

which the local officials have had two years to manage; and I 

want to tell you, notwithstanding your best efforts in this 

regard, are managing quite well, thank you very much, in spite 

of your partisan political comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, 

welcome to you and your officials this evening. Interesting 

discussion we have going here this evening with respect to your 

estimates and holding your government accountable, which is 

obviously the job of opposition parties to do. And we will 

endeavour to do some of that here this evening. 

 

Mr. Premier, we haven’t received I don’t believe, as of yet, your 

department’s global estimate questions. I think I’m hearing 

from your official there that you may not have received them. I 

think that is incorrect. It’s to my understanding the global 

questions have been given to your office and we received them 

from almost each and every department with the exception of 

yours. And we wonder if you could provide those or at least a 

commitment to provide them as soon as possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I make the 

commitment. They think they should be ready by late tonight. 

We’ll have them in your hands tonight or first thing tomorrow 

morning but I just don’t have them right now. We did receive 

the requests and we’ll get them to you tonight or tomorrow 

morning. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Would you provide for us this 

evening, Mr. Premier, a run-down on all of the trips that you  

have made, you and your officials have made — who 

accompanied you, the expenses, who you met with, that sort of 

thing, which is the sort of the standard fare. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  We shall do that as part of the global 

material, if that’s possible? Yes, we’ll do that. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  With respect to ministerial assistants, Mr. 

Premier, how many ministerial assistants within your 

government department will be receiving incremental raises on 

July 1 of ’97? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised by my 

officials that what the government did a couple of years ago, as 

the hon. member opposite will know, is we introduced a grid 

system for ministerial assistants, much as there is in virtually all 

categories of the regular civil service. And on July 1, I have one 

ministerial assistant working directly with me. There will be an 

increase approximating 4 per cent which also may be applicable 

to the MAs (ministerial assistant) across the piece. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Last time we visited on this subject, we were 

aware that ministerial assistants’ salaries, benefits, and other 

expenses within your government department were a total of 

$560,000. What is the figure with respect to that today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, this is how the 

situation looks. In 1990, the number of MAs in government 

totalled 159. Annual salary costs totalled $5.54 million. May 

1997, the number of MAs totalled 107 at 4.236 million. Those 

are the figures. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Premier, I’d like to turn our attention now to 

issues that are important to the people of Saskatchewan, and the 

first one we’ll start with is in the whole area of taxation, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

And I think I could offer the views I think, of a lot of people of 

Saskatchewan with respect to the provincial sales tax who 

would want to offer thanks to the government for the reducing 

of the provincial sales tax and the balancing of the budget. As 

you know, Mr. Premier, as a fiscal conservative, one who 

believes in a positive bottom line, whether it’s within your 

household, within your farm, within your business, or within 

government, it is my firm belief that we should be operating 

with every degree of fiscal integrity we possibly can. 

 

And with respect to the provincial sales tax, as you know, I’ve 

been and our party has been on record for a number of years, 

certainly since I’ve taken over the leadership of our party, with 

respect to the reducing of the provincial sales tax, and we are 

pleased to see that there was a move in that direction with 

respect to the provincial sales tax. 

 

With respect to the overall budget of Saskatchewan, we still are 

of the belief that you could have concentrated more on cutting 

government spending rather than raising taxes over the last five 

years. We still have a very high tax load in Saskatchewan 

relative to other jurisdictions. 



1858  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

In Alberta the average family is paying something in the order 

of $2,000 less per year in taxes in addition to paying no 

provincial sales tax. And that takes into account the extra costs 

of medicare that they pay in premiums and that sort of thing in 

Alberta. So if you look at it person over person, tax over tax, 

that sort of thing, we are still lagging behind with respect to the 

taxes in Saskatchewan relative to other jurisdictions. 

 

So while, Mr. Premier, there is some good news in the budget 

in terms of reducing the provincial sales tax, and the very fact 

that the budget has been balanced here in Saskatchewan, I think 

there is also some concerns that we have to look at with respect 

to future balancing of budgets in the years down the road here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look at the ways that you’ve done it, we’ve done it 

through increased taxes as I’ve said, and we’ve been blessed 

with a number of things that are far from your responsibility. 

For example, we see record low interest rates in Saskatchewan. 

We see almost or record highs in terms of oil and gas revenue. 

We see things in terms of the oil and gas sector doing extremely 

well. Agriculture’s rebounded to the point where there’s a 

considerable amounts of money now coming in from 

agriculture, rather than going out, as there was in the past. 

 

While, Mr. Premier, there is some good news, I think there’s 

also some clouds on the horizon that we want to keep our eye 

on with respect to the integrity of the fiscal position of 

Saskatchewan. And I wonder if you’d care to comment to this 

point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well I certainly want to comment 

favourably concerning the Leader of the Third Party’s main 

concern about the fact that we have to be very vigilant in the 

years ahead with respect to our budgeting. There is no doubt 

about it that the province of Saskatchewan, and for that matter 

the province of Alberta, need to make sure we continue to work 

at diversification and expand our economic situation and base 

beyond our primarily resource-driven economies as they are. 

 

I would add, without getting into the debate for the moment, I 

think we’ve made great strides — not nearly as much as we 

should — but we’ve made great strides over the last several 

years and we need to do more. 

 

But I guess the two observations that I want to make is the 

question of taxes. Clearly we need to lower our taxes some 

more, and if our fiscal picture will permit we will do so. I’ve 

indicated to the House in my little exchange with the Leader of 

the Official Opposition, it’s very little difficult to know how 

you’re going to do it. When you total up the Liberal provincial 

party demands in this session alone for extra expenditures, 

totalling nearly $2 billion a year — each and every year — and 

still be able to provide, as they would believe you that they’re 

going to provide, a tax decrease and no deficit and a debt 

reduction, I mean that is straight voodoo economics that only 

the provincial Liberal Party can mount. 

 

So I think we need to be very vigilant, and we need to make 

sure that our numbers are accurate in this regard. But having 

said that, when I said earlier, much to the chagrin of the official  

Liberal opposition, the 1997 comparison of taxes and 

household charges are well documented by all provincial 

governments. A single person at $25,000 total income pays less 

in taxes and household charges than any other in any other 

jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

A person of a family of four at 50,000 total income pays less 

than any other jurisdiction of any other province in Canada. For 

a family of four at $75,000 total income we do not pay the 

lowest, Calgary has us beaten. But we argue that if any taxation 

principle is fair, the one taxation principle is the ability to pay, 

and at $75,000 there should be an ability to pay. In this 

consequence there is a higher tax that is paid there. 

 

Now we need to take a look at this in a very careful way so that 

tax reductions, when they’re made, are made for ever. And 

when tax reductions are made, they’re made without 

jeopardizing the integrity of the budget; and when they’re 

made, they’re made in such a way that we buttress our health 

and education and highways programs, as we have. 

 

So I agree with you; we need to look at more tax reduction. I 

argue however, we’ve done it in a balanced approach — 

one-third roughly for tax reduction; one-third for continued 

debt reduction — thus tonight’s announcement about the 

Dominion Bond Rating Service A rating; we’re A across the 

board now — and one-third for increased education and health 

care spending, which is what we’ve done. 

 

Now the last point that you raise is the question about what 

kind of a civil service we have in the sense of whether or not 

it’s bloated. And I want to simply quote to you two independent 

analysts — and I have my disagreements with these people 

from time to time, but nonetheless this is what they say. In the 

Leader-Post report of May 15, 1997, the headline is: “Sask. 

fiscal policy praised.” Mr. Michael Walker was speaking to a 

function in Saskatchewan, and he says: 

 

“Saskatchewan has done a great job of controlling its 

spending,” . . . 

 

In fact, the province has decreased spending by 6.5 per 

cent — an average of $2,155 per family of four — since 

1993-1994. 

 

And then if I take a look at the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, 

their document called The Taxpayer, volume 9, no. 2, 1997, the 

headline says this, analysing the Manitoba government: 

 

The NDP Government of Saskatchewan has shown up the 

Manitoba provincial government with a budget that cut 

their provincial sales tax by 2 per cent or $180 million and 

retired the provincial debt in ’96-97 by 359.5 million. The 

lacklustre Manitoba budget paled in comparison. 

 

But it also goes on to say that we have been able to contain our 

costs. We are either the lowest provider, in terms of bodies, of 

civil service functions of any jurisdiction in Canada or, 

depending upon how you compare them, second lowest to 

Alberta. 

 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

That’s why when the Minister of Social Services, at the 

wrap-up of his estimates tonight, praised our civil service, he 

did so with justification. They have really had to tighten their 

belts. The people out there, outside the civil service in schools, 

in hospitals, in municipal governments, everywhere, we’ve had 

to tighten our belts. And we now have a turnaround budget. 

 

So to answer your question and to conclude in this regard, 

we’ve had an overall decrease of our civil service of 16 per cent 

since 1991 by independent analyses. We have turned it around 

in this budget. We’re going to be watching it very carefully, and 

we’re going to be applying from here on in what I call the 

one-third, one-third, one-third formula — one-third for tax 

reduction, one-third to keep lowering that debt, and one-third 

for making sure that we have the best possible health, 

education, and highways, and social services programs that we 

can afford. 

 

I want to stress, lest anybody use this quotation against me 

somewhere down the road, these are not going to be watertight 

compartments. They’re not going to be watertight 

compartments, but they will be rough guidelines that we follow 

in the question of how we budget in order to make sure that we 

continue to have steady, solid, balanced growth. We have had, 

as you know in 1996, the highest growth of any province in 

Canada in 1996, up over 3.3 per cent, and that’s a testament to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, with 

respect to the provincial sales tax, I think what I am looking for 

here this evening, and I think what a lot of people across 

Saskatchewan are looking for this evening, is a plan for further 

reductions. 

 

What we believe, that the government should be looking 

towards providing a plan to the people of Saskatchewan so that 

the people of Saskatchewan can plan accordingly their 

operations, their business, their farm, their household, with 

respect to how they can arrange their affairs to the maximum 

benefit that they can. 

 

If you look at . . . incidentally, to get back to a few of the 

comments you made earlier about the other opposition party 

providing spending commitments or spending, I guess you’d 

call them, promises to the people of Saskatchewan in this 

session, I have to admit I’ve sat with wide-eyed amazement 

myself to watch on an almost daily basis, as we see member 

after member saying spend more, spend more, spend more. And 

it is I think, Mr. Premier, I think I would have to agree with 

you, that it is extremely irresponsible to make those kinds of 

spending commitments and promises when you have absolutely 

no possible means to accomplish them or are not in a position 

to accomplish them, Mr. Speaker. And it amazes me to see that 

happen on a daily basis as we’ve seen during this session. 

 

And I think, as I said, I think it’s irresponsible. I think the 

electorate sees through those kinds of things more than they’ve 

ever seen through those kinds of things in the past. When you 

people used to do it back in the ’80s and leading up to the ’91  

election campaign, at least you tried to say where you were 

going to get the money to do it with. We haven’t seen any 

indication from the Liberal opposition at all of where they’re 

going to raise, using your figures, $1.9 billion. Was that correct, 

$1.9 billion of spending promises in the course of — what? — 

60 days here, 50 days, something like that? 

 

I think that, Mr. Premier, I think that it shows you the 

irresponsibility and the desperation of a political party when 

they see themselves in a position that they are. Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m hearing lots of comments from the Liberals with respect to 

that. 

 

But I think the thing that you have to hear — not we want to 

hear — from the Liberals, is if you will provide us with any 

kind of rationale, first of all, and any kind of a plan with respect 

to how you plan on raising $1.9 billion. Our budget is balanced 

by — what? — a few hundred million dollars? We’ll be in the 

glue for 1.5 to $1.7 billion again. 

 

And as a fiscal conservative . . . and as I know and when we 

speak to many of you privately, you’re fiscal conservatives as 

much as I’m a fiscal conservative. But it always amazes me 

when we see that kind of activity irresponsibly put forward by 

opposition parties. It’s always easy. As you know, Mr. Premier, 

when you did it, it was easy. Then it was easy; today, to see a 

party stand up and just say well, we’ll spend more now, solve 

all the problems, to my knowledge, we have not on one 

occasion that I can recall stood up and said we’re advocating 

more spending without first of all saying where we think the 

corresponding reduction in spending on government, on the 

other hand, would come from. 

 

Where I am not an advocate of spending more, I am not an 

advocate of government intervening in the economy and 

thinking that they can fix all that is wrong by simply throwing 

more money at it. I an not an advocate of that. I am an advocate 

of good government: one that believes in fiscal responsibility, 

one that believes in doing what the people of Saskatchewan 

need and desperately are looking for. 

 

And with respect to that, Mr. Premier, I think what they are 

desperately looking for is that further reduction in the 

provincial sales tax, a plan with respect to future tax reductions 

here in Saskatchewan, a plan with respect to jobs for the people 

of Saskatchewan and a plan with respect to economic activity. 

We’ve made some headway in those areas, and there’s no 

question about it. But I still think we need to be working a great 

deal harder and longer with respect to a plan for further 

reductions in taxes here or jobs here in Saskatchewan and for 

economic activity here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Because all you have to do is come over, Mr. Premier, to the 

west side of Saskatchewan and you’ll see a picture of young 

people leaving this province. You’ll see a picture of more 

activity in Alberta, more jobs in Alberta, less jobs in 

Saskatchewan. Although we are making some headway — and I 

have to admit that; we’re making some headway — I think it’s 

important that we recognize that all the clouds on the horizon 

are not rain clouds good for agriculture here in Saskatchewan. 

And I’d ask you to comment, Mr. Premier. 



1860  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer that I 

have to give to the last comment, I think can be best stated, at 

least I think it was best stated, by Statistics Canada, reported in 

the Toronto Globe and Mail of Saturday, May 17, 1997. And 

the headline on the financial page simply says “Prairie GDP 

Growth Top of the Heap.” Saskatchewan leads the way at 3.3 

per cent. We can’t argue with that fact. 

 

And notwithstanding . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well what 

it means to the average person is just exactly what the hon. 

member has said, but I think incorrectly. It’s meant to the 

average person that there’s been a good agriculture year. 

There’s been a tremendous year in oil and natural gas. And by 

the way, you come from the west-central area so I have to defer 

to you, but I would say that there’s great activity there and great 

potential for activity. 

 

The question however that you ask is what is the game plan. 

The game plan is clear as follows: we have to simply grow the 

economy more by making sure that we have a targeted, focused, 

diversified, value added strategy. We’ve got that in the 

partnership papers which are being revisited. 

 

Secondly, where we can provide tax relief to industry in order 

to make it grow, like in the manufacturing and processing 

rebate, the livestock, intensive livestock operations, we want to 

make it do so. We did that last year with respect to farm 

implement manufacturing machinery sales and with great 

success in terms of jobs and the revenues being increased to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to make sure we control our expenditures, that is to 

say that we don’t go on a wild binge spending spree, as has 

been talked about here. This may mean not necessarily hacking 

or slashing programs — this is where you and I may disagree — 

but it certainly requires all governments to redesign their 

programs in health care, education, in a whole variety of areas, 

to make sure that we have the dollars and we meet the dollars 

that are available . . . in other words to tailor the suit to match 

the cloth. 

 

And we’ve got to make sure on top of all of this that we have a 

firm game plan to proceed. Our firm game plan is what we call 

investing in people. It’s identified jobs, education, highways, 

the social program with respect to kids in poverty — and 

making sure that we never ever, ever surrender the dry ground 

that we’ve captured from an ocean of red ink. 

 

Now it’s been not easy going. We’ve made our fair share of 

mistakes, goodness knows. I admit to that. 

 

But on balance, with the help of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . And I totally agree with you: the days of 

making promises totalling $1.9 billion, which is what the 

Liberal Party in this province in this legislature — in this 

Saskatchewan legislature — has done already, those days are all 

gone. And to do so without telling us where they’re going to get 

the money from is, I think, just as irresponsible. 

 

So that’s our game plan in broad terms. Let’s see how it works 

out with everybody rolling up their sleeves and keeping their 

eye on the ball. I think we’re going to see the next three, four, 

five years being the best years Saskatchewan’s ever had. I’ve 

never been as optimistic. I’ve never been as hopeful. I’ve never 

felt this confident in the province of Saskatchewan in my some 

30-odd years in political life as I feel at this particular time. 

 

I don’t take credit for that. This government does not take credit 

for this. I think it is the total contribution of all of us 

collectively, together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. I think if 

you would look towards a few other things that could be done 

by this government, I think I might be able to share that 

optimism. If we could look towards changing your thoughts 

with respect to things like the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement, or successor rights, or irresponsible, in some cases, 

Crown corporations and the operations of those Crown 

corporations, I think, Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan 

might be able to share your optimism if all of those kinds of 

things were dealt with in terms of the operations of your 

government. 

 

Mr. Premier, as you know, you are embarking upon a review of 

the Crown corporations here in Saskatchewan. We understand 

that that is almost complete or will be completed very shortly, 

and we wonder, Mr. Premier, within the context of that review 

of the Crown corporations, have you and your government 

ruled out of hand, have you and your government ruled out of 

hand exclusively the potential of privatization within those 

Crown corporations? 

 

Is that something that is not on the table or is that something 

that is on the table? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, a few preliminary 

observations. First of all, with respect to the CCTA (Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement) — I don’t want to get 

derailed on it unless you want to pursue it — I think this 

amounts to something like 18 per cent this year of the total 

value of all Crown corporations contracting out. 

 

Now I know you may argue that 18 per cent is very, very 

important. I don’t mean to minimize it, but let’s not make a big 

issue out of the dollars which are involved. 

 

On successor rights, as well, I want to make it absolutely clear, 

the successor rights permits the Saskatchewan Labour Relations 

Board — if you’re talking about the short-lines — allows the 

LRB (Labour Relations Board) to say in Saskatchewan, look, 

successor rights don’t apply for these economic reasons. And 

that is a flexible situation which I think is a reasonable one. But 

leave that aside because that wasn’t the main thrust of your 

question. Your main thrust to your question was the Crown 

review and, is privatization off the table? 

 

Our situation is as follows, Mr. Leader of the Third Opposition 

Party. We have said . . . I said to the government, look, we have  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

not had a financial check-up of our Crown corporations to the 

best of my knowledge for nearly 50 years. This is going to cost 

3 to $4 million. We have engaged outside experts outside of 

government — outside of Canada in some circumstances. 

 

We have done technological analyses of our Crown 

corporations, who have tried to forecast into the future what 

happens with SaskTel, for example, or Power Corporation. 

We’ve engaged our financial advisers; we’ve taken a look at the 

financial state of the books of the Crown corporations. We’ve 

examined the way they’re governed — are they governed in a 

proper manner? Should we be reorganizing the governance 

levels? 

 

We’ve looked at the question of whether or not there should be, 

for example, some form of a LURC (legislative utilities review 

committee), a legislative review committee, which is your idea, 

or a PURC, which is a Public Utilities Review Commission. All 

of this is being amassed now; it is not yet complete. Believe me 

it’s going to be several weeks yet from completion. 

 

It’s being amassed by our Crown Investments Corporation 

people, our central body responsible — our kind of, I call it 

treasury board; that’s not quite the accurate legal description, 

but our treasury board for our Crown corporations — and 

they’re going to be putting forward to us the best economic, 

technical case for all of these Crowns on a case-by-case basis. 

 

This may mean joint venturing; this may mean partnering. It 

may mean involving itself in some outside-of-Canada matters. 

We’ve been debating in this House about Guyana. We’ve been 

debating in this House about the NST situation or LCL 

(Leicester Communications Limited) in the English cable 

experience. 

 

One thing is clear that’s coming through now, if the people of 

Saskatchewan desire — and by the way that seems to be their 

inclination — that the Crowns should be held in public 

ownership, mainly by the people of Saskatchewan, one thing is 

obvious — we can’t stand still. We’ve got to be out there 

competing. Although we may own them as taxpayers and 

individuals, we’ve got to be out there competing with the 

commercial privates as aggressively and as competently as the 

commercial privates are out there competing. And so far we’re 

doing a pretty good job. 

 

SaskTel has been engaged in a war with the large, deep-pocket 

telephone companies — AT&T, Sprint, you name them; they’ve 

been here. And the percentage loss of long distance has just 

been a fracture, so much, just a small fraction. Touch wood that 

it maintains that way. I think it will because SaskTel provides 

excellent service; it’s technologically at the top of its game and 

I think people know inherently that it’s a home-grown 

Saskatchewan company owned and operated by Saskatchewan 

people, and at the end of the day the profits don’t go anywhere 

but stay here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But it faces challenges— wireless technology. It faces a lot of 

companies like AT&T with huge, deep pockets. All of this we 

have to try to foresee and forecast as best as possible. It’s going 

to involve a very comprehensive final report to be tabled and to  

be made public and to be debated upon before any decision is 

made by this Legislative Assembly by fall time or earlier . . . or 

made by the government by fall time or earlier once all the 

documentation is in. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I hope 

we can conclude from that that we will be having a fall session 

to debate those kinds of issues with respect to that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, I can’t help but jump back a little bit to your 

arguments with respect to the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement, and you dismissed them rather light-handedly by 

suggesting that it’s . . . and cavalierly, by suggesting it’s only 18 

per cent and that sort of thing. And that successor rights, and 

they still apply . . . While they still apply, they may be exempted 

from them from the Labour Relations Board, to things like 

short-line rail lines. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Premier, those are the kinds of things 

that the business community finds and takes its, sort of, starting 

point from, in terms of making decisions. They use those kinds 

of things as a signal as to what this government’s intentions are 

today and into the future. 

 

And when you bring in things like the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement, you dismiss it by saying it’s only a few 

million dollars, or 18 per cent, or that sort of thing, it’s that kind 

of attitude, and it’s that kind of attitude with respect to 

successor rights, that says our all-knowing, all-encompassing, 

all-caring Labour Relations Board will deal with it if it becomes 

an issue to companies that wanted to look at short-line rail 

opportunities here in Saskatchewan. It’s that kind of attitude 

and that kind of way of governing that scares the living 

daylights out of people when they want to start up an operation 

here in Saskatchewan or look at the opportunities . . . set up the 

similar operation in other jurisdictions. 

 

It’s not necessarily, Mr. Premier, all of the nuts and bolts and 

the day-to-day operations of the government, or the day-to-day 

operations of running a business that people look at. They also 

look at those intangible types of things that governments say 

and do as a clear example and an indication of what they’re 

likely to do in the future. 

 

And that’s what . . . when you’re setting up a business, Mr. 

Premier, as you know, that’s an important thing. It’s an 

important thing in terms of running and deciding and making 

your decision with respect to the operations of that company 

that you’re thinking about. You have to think about, of course, 

whether you’re going to do well; whether you’re going to have 

people that you can employ; whether you can have employees 

that will know their job and be able to perform to the standard 

that’s necessary. 

 

But you’ve also got to look at those kinds of indicators of 

government as to what the future direction of that government 

is going to be. Just as your Labour Relations Board can come in 

and say that successor rights don’t apply to short rail line 

operations right now, they can also come back after they start 

up a few years down the road and say, well we’ve changed our 

mind. And that’s the problem with all of this, Mr. Premier.  



1862  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

They don’t get clear signals from your government with respect 

to things like taxes, in terms of the PST and the reduction to the 

PST. 

 

Yes, we’ve got a signal, and it was a positive one. With respect 

to balancing budgets, yes, they got a positive one. Then they 

look at some other intangibles when they’re deciding on 

business opportunities here in Saskatchewan. What has the 

government said with respect to Crown corporations? What has 

the government said with respect to Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreements? Do they, if they’re planning on setting 

up an operation that they’ll be building and bidding on 

government projects here in Saskatchewan, and they’re a 

non-unionized company and want to maintain that status, do 

they look at this and see this as a positive indicator? And I 

would argue, no they don’t. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Premier, that that is one of the things that 

is an impediment to business growth here in Saskatchewan, is 

that kind of attitude from your government that’s displayed on 

an almost constant basis; that says, we know what’s best. And if 

it isn’t right, we’ll maybe make some modest adjustments to 

accommodate you at the moment. But in the future, well we’ll 

reserve the right to make further changes that may impact on 

you positively or negatively, and we’ll make that decision in the 

future. 

 

And it’s those kinds of things that are difficult to do with 

respect to things like successor rights. If you were operating — 

hypothetically — a short rail line operation in Saskatchewan or 

giving consideration to doing that here in Saskatchewan and 

you looked at this and you said, one of the components that is 

the biggest concern that I have is with respect to my labour 

costs, respect to the labour agreements that are in place 

currently and whether or not I’m going to have to live within 

those agreements or not, when you look at that, Mr. Premier, 

you can conclude, just as many of the presenters did at the short 

rail line conference that was held not too long ago here in 

Regina, you would come to the same conclusion. You would 

come to the same conclusion. You would say no, because that 

makes a significant enough dint in the bottom line of your 

operations that it is unacceptable to you and that you can’t see a 

profit at the end of the line. 

 

And so that’s why you don’t see short rail line operations 

clamouring to come into Saskatchewan. That’s one of the 

reasons at least you don’t see it. The high diesel fuel costs and 

other taxes are associated with it as well. But one of the main 

components of operating a business of that type is the type of 

cost that you have in terms of your labour costs. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Premier, even in spite of the fact that we 

are seeing rail lines being abandoned all over Saskatchewan, in 

spite of the fact that we see tremendous opportunities, I believe, 

for short rail lines to set up operations and become very 

successful in Saskatchewan, employing people, spending 

money here in Saskatchewan and paying taxes to you and your 

government, that is why we simply don’t see that opportunity 

being exploited here in Saskatchewan. Because they do not see 

a positive signal from your government with respect to labour 

legislation and with respect to the Crown Construction  

Tendering Agreement. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, they also have some concerns with respect to 

operations of things like your Crown corporations. We see on a 

frequent basis from your government . . . and you dismiss them 

just sort of out of hand and again in a sort of cavalier way of 

doing it. Well the NST thing, we blew 16 million down on that, 

but we made money on all of these other investments that we 

were involved in through SaskTel, and so as a result of that, you 

know, we have a net positive benefit to Saskatchewan. So 

what? 

 

(2030) 

 

And with respect to things like the Guyana power deal that you 

raised . . . and I was going to raise a little bit later anyway; we 

might as well talk about it now. With respect to things like that, 

again the business community and people generally I think here 

in Saskatchewan look at that and they say to themselves, the 

first question they say is, why? What possible motive can you 

have to go into Guyana and invest in a power company when 

there’s other suitors looking at that type of thing? And I’m sure 

you’re going to say, because you have to be globally 

competitive, and you have to go head to head with these 

commercial privates, as you call them. 

 

But why? I’m not sure I understand the motive behind 

something like that. Venturing into some risky third-world 

country, hoping that you may be able to exact some 20, 25 per 

cent, 30 per cent rate of return on your investment. And the 

reality is, is the past experiences of companies that have gone 

into places like Guyana is not good. It’s not good, Mr. Premier. 

 

Back in the ‘70s the current, I believe he’s the opposition leader 

or whatever form of government they’ve got down there right 

now, God knows what, after the fact that the president passed 

away here awhile ago . . . But some of the people who are 

sitting in office down there today, when they had their last 

chance to have their hands on the levers of government, 

nationalized everything in sight. And we are prepared to go into 

a country like that, invest a whole pot of money, hoping that 

Jack Messer and his officials . . . and Lord knows the minister 

doesn’t know what he’s doing with respect to this. But Jack 

Messer and his officials go waltzing into this country and are 

just going to come away with a big fat profit at the end of the 

day. 

 

Well I hope if you’re going to proceed with this thing, Mr. 

Premier, that you’ve done the due diligence on this thing. 

You’ve looked at not just whether there’s a return on 

investment but whether or not there’s going to be any kind of 

political stability in a country like that. 

 

But getting back to my point, Mr. Premier, it’s those kinds of 

negative signals . . . we’ve got some positive signals from your 

government, the business community has I think, here in 

Saskatchewan. But it’s those kind of negative signals that go 

along with it and always make people wonder about your 

government. But I suspect privately you harbour some of those 

same thoughts. And I think you also wonder privately why 

business does not provide you with a kind of level of support  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

that you would like to see you get from business. 

 

And I can tell you the reasons why. It is exactly that. On one 

hand, they see a positive signal. On the other hand, they see 

what they consider a very negative signal from you, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

So if you want to draw some attention and draw some support 

from the business community here in Saskatchewan, those are 

some of the areas that you might want to look at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, if I may, 

speaking to the Guyana situation for a moment, let’s please, 

please again be mindful of the facts. The facts are that there is 

no agreement to enter into any commercial arrangement with 

the Guyanese electric company or Guyana. There is nothing 

except a letter of intent, which is no more, no less than what the 

lawyers call an invitation to treat, to examine the books, to 

examine due diligence of the company, to examine the political 

climate of the circumstances, and to see what opportunities — 

if any — exist. 

 

I might remind the hon. members of this House that 

Saskatchewan isn’t alone; there have been at least six other 

companies of repute on a North American basis that went in 

there to take a look at this example as well. And the simple 

matter is that no decision will be made until we are satisfied 

that due diligence and that the chance of recouping the 

investment is a real chance and a possible chance. And that’s 

exactly where we stand with respect to the Power Corporation. 

 

But the point is this — I said this in my earlier remarks — and 

it’s an interesting debate because I don’t want to put it on a 

philosophical basis only but it has an element of philosophy to 

it, if the Power Corporation of Saskatchewan should continue to 

be owned by the people of the province of Saskatchewan, as I 

believe the vast majority of Saskatchewan people want it to be 

owned, then standing still won’t work. Whether it’s in Guyana 

or somewhere else, that’s another issue. 

 

What the Power Corporation of Saskatchewan has to do is, it’s 

got to get in there and it’s got to compete with a lot of very 

tough competitors which in some areas may have lower costs of 

generation, may have higher costs of transmission or vice versa, 

a number of factors which we have to meet. And that involves 

international arrangements in an internationally expanding and 

global world. That is very much in keeping with the business 

philosophy that exists not only in Saskatchewan, but in many 

parts of North America today. 

 

So Guyana will be looked at and will be looked at diligently. 

And no decision is made. I repeat: none is made. And no 

decision to proceed will be made until and unless the 

documentation and all the facts are before us to justify 

proceeding on this basis. 

 

I want to make a comment about the CCTA and successors on 

short-lines very briefly. First, short-lines. We’re not standing 

still on shorts; far from it at all. We’re moving in active 

discussion with southern railway companies and other southern 

people who are interested in coming to Saskatchewan. And  

we’re actively working with the citizens’ groups who are 

looking at promoting the short-lines. 

 

And the successor legislation is not the barrier to this at all. It is 

not. Those who have looked at it deal on questions of 

economics, not in terms of wages but in terms of how much 

tonnage is going to be used on a particular short-line that is to 

be abandoned, whether or not the viability is there; and there 

are many other complex factors involved, such as where the 

next condominium grain elevator is going to be built or not 

going to be built, and how that fits into the short-line operation. 

We continue to work with them. 

 

On the CCTA — and this is the point that I want to make which 

brings me to my second-last point if I can — on the CCTA, I 

think that the Leader of the Third Party has put his finger on a 

major difference between his party and our party. And that is, 

we believe in balance. Everything that you talk about here on 

CCTA or successor rights is what I would call a position which 

says, from our point of view everything from this legislature 

should be a pro-business position — full stop, period. 

 

That’s basically it. There’s no balance. It should not be 

pro-union. It should be straight pro-business or, if you will, 

even anti-union. And if you’re in government and you seek to 

balance competing interests, there are as many, if not more, 

unionized construction companies who want to bid on these 

business opportunities of the Crown corporations as there are 

non-union companies. You’ve got to devise a policy which 

provides some balance. And the same thing with the successor 

rights. 

 

You say, what is the attitude of our government when it comes 

to business. Well I say the attitude of this government to 

business can be summarized as follows since taking office: 

reducing the small-business tax rate from 10 to 8 per cent; 

eliminating E&H taxes on 1 800 telephone calls; eliminating 

E&H taxes on direct agents used in manufacturing; introducing 

investment tax credit for M&P (manufacturing and processing) 

activities in Saskatchewan — I spoke to that issue already 

speaking to the Liberal leader; reducing the corporate income 

tax rate on manufacturing and processing profits; reducing the 

aviation fuel tax. We do not have a payroll tax, as the PCs have 

in Manitoba. We’ve refrained from implementing health care 

premiums of any sort as they have in PC Alberta. And we have 

recently reduced the sales tax — reduction from 9 to 7 per cent. 

That is the attitude of this government toward business. That is 

the direction to which this government is headed when it comes 

toward business. 

 

And can we do more and should we do more? The answer is 

yes. The difference between you and me is how. We say in a 

balanced approach, not in a give-it-all-away approach, or not as 

the Liberals would have it in a spend-it-all approach, but in a 

balanced approach. And if I may say so, in closing my answer 

to this question, unlike you, sir, I do not believe that this is 

Alabama North. This is Saskatchewan. This is Canada, where 

people still value workers’ rights, honest labour, social 

programs, medicare, and education, and are prepared in a 

proper and sensible way in which to support those programs. 

 



1864  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we thought you’d get there 

sooner than you did. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Premier, with respect to diversification in the 

economy of Saskatchewan, we see some positive signs with 

respect to diversification within our province of our economy. 

One of those areas that is near and dear to me, as you know, is 

agriculture and the whole area of agriculture and 

diversification. And I couldn’t help but sit and watch again with 

wide-eyed amazement and enthusiasm as a few short days ago, 

Mr. Premier, you rose in a sharp exchange with the Liberals in 

terms of the monopoly powers of marketing boards within the 

boundaries of Saskatchewan. 

 

And Lord knows that I’m not a proponent of marketing boards 

here in Saskatchewan or anywhere else for that matter. I’m a 

believer in the free enterprise system. I think there is room for 

monopolies, I think there’s room for dual marketing in terms of 

the operations of our farms, the operations here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But it was, Mr. Premier, a great opportunity for me as a 

Conservative here in Saskatchewan to watch what for a moment 

I thought might be Ernie Eisley from Alberta . . . or from 

Manitoba, pardon me, or Walter Paszkowski from Alberta. Or it 

looked almost for a moment like some of the past speeches of 

Ralph Klein that you were giving that day with respect to 

marketing boards. 

 

And the left-wing within your party must be shuddering at the 

thought, Mr. Premier, of you of all people — of you of all 

people — looking towards the elimination of marketing boards. 

I can’t help but think the Minister of Education and her father 

must have been just running their hands down the blackboard 

with screeches to think that the kinds of things that must have 

been going on in terms of the discussion that was happening in 

caucus the days that you made the decision with respect to the 

changing of the marketing boards here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I’ll give you credit, Mr. Premier, I’ll give you credit — you 

stuck to it and rammed her through without . . . or over the 

opposition of all that left-wing bunch that you have to deal with 

on a regular basis over there. 

 

And it was with great joy that I watched you a few days ago 

give the Liberals a severe tuning with respect to the whole issue 

of marketing boards here in Saskatchewan. Because I believe, I 

think as you do on this subject, Mr. Premier, that if we’re going 

to see diversification in this province, if we’re going to see 

operations in terms of larger-scale hog operations and 

larger-scale operations in terms of the feather industry, if we’re 

going to be in a competitive position with Alberta and 

Manitoba and to the provinces . . . or the states to the south of 

us, we have no choice but to remove the monopoly powers of 

those operations. So that they can have the veil of socialism 

lifted from them once and for all in terms of things like the 

operations of a monopoly and the SPI and things of that nature 

here in Saskatchewan. 

We have to have that kind of diversification in the province and 

I’m pleased to see that you’ve made some steps in the right 

direction with respect to those changes. You have to have that 

here in Saskatchewan if we are going to be globally competitive 

and even in spite of the opposition of the member from 

Thunder Creek over there, I recognize you have to recognize 

that that is imperative if we’re going to see operations flourish 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, now if you could just, just move that same sort of 

thinking towards things like the Canadian Wheat Board here in 

Saskatchewan. And I know you wince, you wince with, you 

wince with feigned pain over there with respect to that whole 

argument about the Canadian Wheat Board. But I think you 

would see the same kind of robust changes in the economy of 

Saskatchewan that will result from changes in the monopoly of 

powers of hog marketing; the same thing could be unleashed 

with respect to the operations of the grain farming sector of this 

economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Does it ever . . . do you ever stop for a moment and imagine, 

imagine the kind of diversification and opportunity that there 

would be here in Saskatchewan? The same as we’ve seen in 

terms of things like specialty crops here in Saskatchewan; the 

same as we’ve seen in things like canola here in Saskatchewan 

— given rise to a whole new industry of biotechnology in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Just think, just think, those are all relatively minor crops with 

the exception of canola. The specialty crops here in 

Saskatchewan are all relatively minor crops when you take in 

terms the overall context of the whole agricultural system that 

we have in this great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Unleash, Mr. Premier, those kinds of opportunities to the grain 

farmers of Saskatchewan. That’s what they are asking for — if 

you go out and ask the future of Saskatchewan farmers. I’m not 

talking about the 60-year-old farmer here in Saskatchewan 

that’s quite comfortable with where his lot in life is today. 

 

I’m telling you, Mr. Premier, go out and talk to the 30-year-old 

and the 20-year-old farmer and the farmers who are making all 

of the changes in terms of diversification; the farmers who are 

looking towards specialty crops and spices and all of those 

kinds of things. Go out and ask them what is necessary to 

diversify the economy of Saskatchewan with respect to 

agriculture. 

 

And I would say, dare say to you, sir, that one of the first things 

that they would say is we have to have some loosening of the 

restrictions of grain marketing here in Canada. That will be one 

of the first things that they will bring to your attention. 

 

(2045) 

 

And as I said, the Garf Stevensons and the Leroy Larsens and 

all of those other old fellows that have had their go in 

agriculture and their day in the sun is diminishing rather 

quickly. I’ll have to say they may not want to see change, Mr. 

Premier, but I dare say to you that the younger farmers of this 

province — the people I think I represent here in Saskatchewan  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

— want those changes. They want to see the diversification 

opportunities opened up that I think you can’t even imagine in 

terms of pasta marketing, in terms of flour production here in 

Saskatchewan, in terms of a number of other niche markets that 

the Canadian Wheat Board just absolutely dismisses out of 

hand and says that those things are relatively minor and 

insignificant in terms of the overall operations and the 

magnitude of the crop that they have to market. 

 

And I think, Mr. Premier, that’s one area again that you have to 

look to if you want to see change. You’ve made some positive 

change with respect to one area of agriculture. Now let’s take 

that big second leap. Let’s take that big second jump, the 

second phase, the road to Damascus change that we need from 

this government, Mr. Premier, the change that we need from 

this government in terms of marketing of the grain products of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 

makes a passionate plea and speech for diversification of the 

agricultural economy — and his members say in an excellent 

speech — and I would say in the core of the speech, which said, 

let’s get diversification, who could disagree with that? It’s the 

issue of how you achieve it where I think I draw the line with 

the Leader of the Conservative Party. 

 

This particular legislation which is before the House, the Leader 

of the Third Party, the PC Party, has magnified into a piece of 

legislation representing somehow the beginning of the 

doomsday of all marketing boards and single-desk marketing 

concepts. It is not that. This is the reintroduction of a piece of 

legislation which was on the books back as early as 1990 and 

had been inadvertently eliminated in the legislation. 

 

Our objective in this particular Bill is to make sure that we can 

make adjustments to collective bargaining — not collective 

bargaining, but the marketing boards — in a balanced and 

reasonable way in concert with the marketing boards and the 

producers involved in that particular process; because I agree 

with the Leader of the Third Party, we have a major decision to 

make in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When you have 3 million hogs or 4 million hogs being raised in 

Manitoba and you’ve got the same amount potentially around 

the corner in Alberta and you’ve got slightly over a million only 

in Saskatchewan and you’ve got a meat-packing industry which 

is rapidly rationalising and economies of scale are taking place, 

some very, very difficult and important decisions have to be 

made. And that one peak question has to be answered by us is, 

are we in the game or are we not in the game? Does 

Saskatchewan want to be in, for example, in the hog industry 

right from production straight through to meat packing and in a 

successful way? And the answer is we do. 

 

But where I disagree with the Leader of the Conservative Party 

is you cannot logically leap from this Bill to say that we are 

against the principle of the Canadian Wheat Board or against 

the principle . . . (inaudible) . . . marketing. We are not. It 

makes no sense for the Canadian Wheat Board to be  

dismantled, as the Reformers and as the Progressive 

Conservative Party in Saskatchewan would have us want. To be 

done away with makes no sense whatsoever because it means 

that the wheat farmer in Sturgis competes as a Canadian against 

the wheat farmer in Alberta or in Manitoba and the only 

beneficiary is the buyer over there in Japan or over in China, 

saying who bids the lowest amount or offers it for the lowest 

amount. That is where we disagree with you. 

 

We very much are strong defenders of the question of the 

Canadian Wheat Board and single-desk marketing. You know 

that. And what we say by this legislation is a very balanced 

approach; one which takes into account the concerns of the 

producers, the consumers, the industry itself, to make the 

necessary changes, we hope in concert and agreement by 

everybody — which I think will be the case — right down, by 

the way, from the Wheat Pool, involving people like Leroy 

Larsen and Garf Stevenson. You’ll be surprised about how 

modern they are in their thinking about this issue — very, very 

surprised. Right from those people, in concert and support of 

what we’re doing, rather than as the member from Thunder 

Creek does, namely put his head in the sand and wished that it 

was back in 1930. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well, Mr. Premier, you’ve got some of it right 

there, but you didn’t get it all right. I’ve never advocated the 

destruction of the Canadian Wheat Board, and you know that’s 

not true. The fact of the matter is, is we advocate a 

dual-marketing situation. And there’s all kinds of examples of 

that. 

 

And I understand the Minister of Agriculture is going to go on a 

little trip here, probably this fall, to look at the operations of the 

Canadian . . . or pardon me, the Australian Wheat Board, which 

has operated in a dual-marketing situation for the past, about a 

year or two, something in that neighbourhood, maybe even 

three. And it’s doing not that bad I would say, Mr. Premier. It’s 

given farmers in Australia the opportunity to look towards 

single-desk marketing, or also look towards the marketing of 

products themselves. And it has done, I think, a pretty good 

service for their farmers. 

 

It isn’t a case of it can’t be done, it’s a case of you don’t have 

the will to do it. And the federal government doesn’t have the 

will to do it. And that’s why they cooked up that cockamamie 

question in the debate about barley marketing to find out 

whether the farmers of Saskatchewan, and indeed the Wheat 

Board jurisdictionary, wanted an all or nothing question. And 

no one . . . I can’t recall of anyone in the agriculture circles that 

was looking for that kind of question to be asked from Mr. 

Goodale and company. 

 

They were asking for a couple of things. Do you want 

single-desk marketing? Or do you want to explore the benefits 

and opportunities associated with dual marketing? That’s what 

the question should have been. And we didn’t see that. 

 

And if it had have been asked that, Mr. Premier, the same result 

that would have come out of the . . . the result would have come 

out similar to what you’re polling came out with — 60 per cent 

in terms of farmers of Saskatchewan wanted to see changes in  



1866  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

that area. 

 

Mr. Premier, I want to move on to some other areas here this 

evening that I think are important to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that I think I will want to raise with you this 

evening. 

 

While we’ve always felt as an opposition party that our job is 

both to oppose; our job is also to present alternatives to you and 

your government. We’ve done that on all occasions I think, Mr. 

Premier. It’s not a case of just simply criticizing or promising to 

spend more. I think that’s an irresponsible position. I think the 

responsible position of an opposition party is to oppose where 

necessary, but always to point out a different way to do things, 

an alternative vision; an alternative view. 

 

It’s also to provide alternatives in terms of legislation. And in 

this session again, as in other sessions that I’ve been involved 

in, Mr. Premier, as you know, we’ve come forward with 

alternatives in terms of legislation. We’ve come forward with a 

number of private members’ Bills that I think you and your 

government should have given more seriously a very close look 

at. 

 

And I think, Mr. Premier, that there are a number of Bills within 

the . . . that are on the order paper these days that would provide 

Saskatchewan people with a more responsible and a better form 

of government; a government that I think provides the people of 

Saskatchewan with the answers to the questions that they’re so 

desperately looking at. Things like the bill of health care rights 

and responsibilities that we put forward; a look towards 

providing some degree of bottom line protection in terms of 

delivery of health care services. 

 

Free vote legislation, Mr. Premier, a piece of legislation that I 

think would unshackle the back-benchers who I know in your 

party who generally are not free thinkers, but nevertheless given 

the opportunity, might surprise us all someday. They might just 

rise up and vote the way they felt their constituents would want 

them to vote, rather than just voting as you tell them to. 

 

I think, Mr. Premier, when you look at the area of successor 

rights, that was a piece of legislation we brought forward to 

amend that Act. And I think that that is something that should 

be looked at, and I hope you will continue to give some thought 

to that. 

 

The whole area of property rights, Mr. Premier. The whole area 

of property rights, particularly with respect to things like we see 

in terms of the whole issue surrounding gun legislation these 

days in Canada, a very topical issue in terms of the federal 

election. In terms of things like the cabinet travel accountability 

and Crown corporation accountability Acts, regulatory reform 

— again areas that I think business is looking at for direction 

from your government. 

 

You made the commitment and you made the promise, Mr. 

Premier, in your last throne speech and in the 1995 election 

campaign, that you would work toward business regulation 

reduction here in Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen anything but  

that. We’ve seen chapter and verse and more and more 

regulation coming down from you and your government on a 

constant basis. We haven’t seen reductions, we’ve seen you 

adding to it in volumes, Mr. Premier. That’s what you’ve done 

with respect to that. 

 

So I would ask you, Mr. Premier, if you’d care to comment on 

those pieces of legislation that we have brought forward, in its 

entirety, or individually if you choose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I have to say to 

the hon. member that indeed it’s correct. The Conservative 

caucus has forwarded a number of specific Bills which in effect 

amount to an alternative vision, an alternative platform. And I 

want to say at the outset that because the government has not 

accepted them this session does not mean that the government 

rules all of them out for every session. It just simply says that as 

we take a look at the legislation, and the ramifications and 

implications of it, we need to be careful before we accept or 

reject it. 

 

The health care rights concept put down in statutory form, I 

think is something which I have always been intrigued with. 

But I also know, if I may, putting on my legal hat, that with 

statutory provisions, lies buried within those sections, the 

possibility of legal and political bombshells to do more damage 

to health care rights than what the authors intended or what all 

of us as legislators might have intended. 

 

It takes a lawyer or two to take a look at a particular provision, 

and some decision by a judge, no matter how well-meaning, to 

blow apart a fundamental concept. And therefore you cannot do 

something like this, which has some merit, overnight. It needs 

to be looked at very, very carefully, and we continue to look at 

it. 

 

(2100) 

 

The question of free vote legislation, I think is something that 

all legislatures are moving towards. I’m not opposed to taking a 

look at free vote legislation in some areas. I have to tell you 

where my biases lie, however. I am not a proponent of 

plebiscitarian democracy. I believe in the parliamentary form of 

democracy where MLAs are elected; a government is elected; 

we stand to be judged by the public at election time whether we 

did a good job or a bad job. 

 

However, if we can in some way judge the question of 

plebiscitarian democracy versus more freedom of expression by 

all MLAs, who could be against that? Not one of us is the 

possessor of all knowledge. We seek the advice of everybody to 

make sure the best programs are designed. 

 

Finally on regulatory reform, I want to make a comment. We 

are committed to subjecting all regs to a sunset clause — all 

regs to a sunset clause — and taking them off the books after 10 

years as a matter of course. Reviewing 10 per cent of all regs in 

each of the next 10 years, because there’s a huge volume of 

them, passed by your administration, passed by the Liberal 

administration, passed by our administration, going all the way 

back to the Blakeney administration. We want to eliminate 25  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

per cent of all regs in a process, if found to be redundant, 

outdated, ineffective, or unnecessary. 

 

And that’s exactly what we are doing. During ’96-97 we are 

hoping to eliminate 130 regs as redundant and in the process of 

being repealed. And I have them here, these regs which have 

been identified for repeal. I’m not sure whether I can table this 

because it isn’t a complete list, but it does have, as the numbers 

indicate, 142 in total. Maybe it should be more than that, but it 

is a significant step forward. 

 

And for the first time ever in the Saskatchewan legislature, we 

are putting regulatory reform initiatives as a priority to try to 

make the climate for investment and individual freedom one 

where people have this sense of less oversight by the 

government. That’s a direction we’re heading, just like in one 

of my earlier answers to you, that’s a direction we’re heading 

with respect to tax breaks for businesses and the like. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, as you 

know, we are in the throes of the federal election campaign, and 

frankly I’m a little surprised that we were able to schedule the 

estimates this evening, particularly when we’ve seen that the 

federal NDP leader, I understand, is in town . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  And in trouble. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  And in trouble. In town and in trouble here in 

Saskatchewan, there’s no question about that. 

 

And I’m surprised to see that the Saskatchewan campaign 

manager for the NDP is here this evening, in spite of the fact 

that the campaign is grounded and being driven into the ground 

by things that are happening by your government here in 

Saskatchewan. We see that the campaign is unfolding and 

things are moving along very well. It appears to me that the 

NDP, given the latest polling results in The Globe and Mail — 

which I know you follow very carefully — are in the areas of 

looking towards capturing one seat. You have to wonder who’s 

going to be the lucky one — whether it’s going to be Nystrom, 

or Solomon, or whether Alexa will take it out in Halifax herself. 

 

(2100) 

 

But we, Mr. Premier, as you know, when asked whether or not 

we would be . . . whether we would be participating in the 

federal election campaign, I said no, and that we wouldn’t be 

involved in the federal election campaign. We wouldn’t be 

involved in the federal election campaign because our first 

responsibilities are here to this legislature. And that’s why 

we’ve asked our members to be involved . . . that’s why we’ve 

asked our members to contain their activities to the legislature 

here. 

 

And I have to say . . . and I see the member from Albert South 

chirping in the background over there. He’s done more to 

damage your campaign, Mr. Premier, in the last few days than 

anything you’ve done in your entire life. He’s done more to 

discredit in the last few days . . . 

 

But nevertheless, Mr. Premier, I think that . . . I wish that you  

would have come up with a similar policy with respect to the 

operations and the activities of your members. And I wonder 

. . . it’s probably not too late to restrict them to their activities as 

related to an MLA, and ask them to confine their activities to 

their responsibilities that they’re elected for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, my position is that . . . 

By the way, talking about independence and free votes, 

individual MLAs are responsible people who have 

responsibilities and carry them out, I think by and large, 

responsibly, by exercising individual judgement calls, as are 

required. And I tell you that the members of this side of the 

House have decided that they are going to take part, such as 

they can take part, in federal election campaigns, not on the 

government time, on the Legislative Assembly time. 

 

For example, you’re talking about the Leader of the New 

Democratic Party, Alexa McDonough, who I think is fighting 

an excellent campaign for the New Democratic Party. And I 

would argue this has elevated the debate in Canadian political 

life to a level that should be elevated. This voice has been long 

too silent. If she comes to Saskatchewan again before this 

election is over — I’m hoping that she will — if there should be 

a pancake breakfast on a Saturday or a Sunday, I’m going to be 

there. I’m going to be there to show my support for Alexa 

McDonough and to show my support for the party. 

 

That is what all MLAs of all legislative assemblies and bodies 

have done throughout the piece. And we should do it; should 

use it judiciously — that’s right, authority, and responsibility — 

carefully and responsibly. And I believe our MLAs are doing 

precisely that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, while 

Alexa may have worked at elevating the debate in this election 

campaign, a couple of your members have done their very best 

at lowering the level of debate within this election campaign. 

And when you spoke of individual judgement calls, Mr. 

Premier, a couple of them come to mind that I think have done 

a very, very grave disservice to you and your government as 

well as the legislature in the whole debate surrounding the 

operations of how we should conduct ourselves and what we 

should or shouldn’t be saying as MLAs. 

 

Mr. Premier, the intolerant remarks of one of your MLAs, of 

which he responded to the next day by apologizing to the 

legislature and to the people involved at that time. I have to say, 

I think they were a little bit out of character for your 

government, and I’m pleased to see that it was out of character 

for your government, but nevertheless it was said. I think it was 

irresponsible, and I think given the youthful exuberance of that 

member, I think we can excuse him for that in that we would 

hope that he’s learned a very, very valuable lesson just as we all 

learn those valuable lessons here in the legislature. 

 

But it still seems, Mr. Premier, that given the continual — or 

pardon me — the activities of the Justice minister the next day 

and him having to apologize for the remarks that he made, and 

more recently the remarks of the Minister of Agriculture, I  



1868  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

think maybe give reason to question whether or not there’s a 

need for some degree, some policy, some protection, that the 

people that have other political views, other political ideologies, 

will not be subjected to that kind of thing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, given the severity of the reaction that your 

government has received on this issue, I’m wondering whether 

you are giving any consideration to coming up with some sort 

of policy with respect to those kinds of things to provide you 

with — and this legislature with — some distance from that 

kind of activity in the future. And on top of that, are you going 

to be asking the Minister of Agriculture to apologize for the 

comments that he made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, in my many years in 

this Legislative Assembly, I have taken the position that when a 

member misspeaks himself or herself in a circumstance of this 

nature, there should be an attempt to make a remedy at an early 

as possible a date. Look, all I can say with respect to the 

member from Regina South is he said his remarks were 

inappropriate. And they were inappropriate. I believe he’s 

actually communicated the same to Mr. Manning. The issue is 

dead. That’s the position that I have. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 

will defer to the official opposition and the third party this 

evening to ask the wide-ranging questions to you, Mr. Premier. 

But I have but one area to raise and I will do so in the context 

of some preliminary remarks. 

 

I’ve had the very good fortune of being on several standing 

committees, the Rules and Procedures Committee, the 

Constitutional Affairs Committee, the Crown Corporations 

Committee, the Board of Internal Economy, and the Public 

Accounts Committee. I feel very fortunate indeed to have been 

part of these committees, and particularly pleased to have been 

able to participate in the Public Accounts Committee since 

1991. So one of the things that of course has arisen from that 

has been the opportunity to watch it year after year. 

 

Now I see a trend developing and what I’m going to be stating 

as a prelude to this will, I hope, lend itself to the question that 

I’ll be asking you this evening. The mandate of the Public 

Accounts Committee is to assist our Assembly in holding the 

government accountable for taxpayers’ money and for 

stewardship over public assets. And to fulfil its functions and 

meet its responsibilities, the committee undertakes to review, 

examine, and evaluate the financial and administrative activities 

of government departments and Crown corporations cited in the 

Public Accounts and in the report of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

The Public Accounts Committee must be able to examine all 

government organizations in a non-partisan way. And one of 

the ways that this is done is by having government officials 

come to it rather than ministers, as in the case of Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

In other words, there is by the very mandate outlined for the 

Public Accounts Committee, it demonstrates that there’s 

supposed to be an examination of the administration rather than 

an examination of policy per se. 

Now I am very concerned about a particular trend that I’ve seen 

unfold. I actually don’t know if you’re familiar with this and 

perhaps that’s one of the reasons I’m raising this this evening. 

If you are familiar with it I think that you need to be on public 

record for the people of Saskatchewan just exactly why it is you 

would support such a trend. The trend is to refer Crown 

corporation issues away from the Public Accounts Committee 

to the Crown Corporations Committee, and as I stated they have 

two very different mandates and two very different approaches. 

And I find this trend very disturbing and unfortunate. 

 

Now I’m going to just give you an illustration if I may, and I 

didn’t even bring the verbatim, but I would suggest that you 

examine the verbatim from not today’s meeting but of the last 

one for Public Accounts. And this is something that has 

happened more and more frequently, which raises concern for 

me, and this did not happen in the past, Mr. Premier. Within 

five to ten minutes of the beginning of a Public Accounts 

Committee meeting there will be a member from the 

government side who will state: I will be moving a motion 

where the following recommendations of the Provincial 

Auditor’s report will be referred to the Crown Corporations 

Committee. 

 

Now as a provincial . . . pardon me, as a Public Accounts 

Committee we have not had an opportunity to listen to each 

other’s views, to discuss these in any kind of open debate, to 

either have some repartee at all, and yet it’s been made 

unequivocal from the beginning that in fact this is simply going 

to be referred by motion to the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Now perhaps it was an illusion in the past that there was going 

to be any real debate at all that was going to be listened to but at 

least we went through the motions that this was going to take 

place. And one really felt as if one could participate in this 

exercise. 

 

Now it’s not only what’s happening in the committee. I think 

we’ve seen illustrations of what has transpired with the 

Provincial Auditor’s office and even ministers, senior ministers 

in your cabinet, who have been making public comments, and 

some would view those as undermining the position of the 

Provincial Auditor and his office. But given that this has 

occurred, which seems consistent with what I see unfolding in 

the Public Accounts Committee, I think that’s for real concern. 

 

Now as well, Mr. Premier, what I’d like to do is simply remind 

you of what really transpired in 1991, 1992, 1993. This was the 

time of the Gass Commission. It was a time when the Provincial 

Auditor and his office, the work of his office and his 

recommendations, were things that were welcomed by your 

government; were not only welcomed but heartily supported by 

your government; were seen as extremely important for the 

well-being of the province. And I would state that because of 

that support there were extraordinary gains made by this 

province that have been recognized nationally. 

 

I think the work of the Provincial Auditor’s office in the 

province of Saskatchewan has been recognized nationally for 

one reason. That is, sir, because not only were his  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

recommendations made but your government accepted them 

and implemented many of them. 

 

Now it’s on that basis that I pose this to you this evening. Are 

you as concerned about this trend as I am? Because it most 

certainly looks as though the action of your government, the 

actions are to in fact undermine the Provincial Auditor’s office 

or at least, at the very least, it’s showing greater disrespect than 

what I’ve seen in the past. This will be history repeated in this 

province if this continues into the future. And I would like your 

comments on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member raises again a very important question but I have to 

answer it in these terms. I would need to have an example — I 

don’t mean today, we could do this in correspondence — a 

specific example where the hon. member believes that in the — 

or two or three examples — where the hon. member believes 

that in the consequence the net effect of this kind of a motion 

somehow has the effect of undermining the role of a Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

And I’ll tell you why I say this. There have been I think, two 

major developments in the last several years which have taken 

place certainly in this legislature and maybe other legislatures 

with respect to provincial auditors. First with respect to our 

Crown Corporations Committee, the Provincial Auditor now is 

into Crown Corporations, as we know by the very heated 

exchange surrounding comments made respecting surcharges 

on SaskEnergy . . . or SaskPower. And accordingly, very often 

there will be a matter which could come before Public Accounts 

Committee which could quite properly be referred over to 

Crown Corporations without diminishing the Provincial 

Auditor at all because the statements made by the Provincial 

Auditor in Crown Corporations, as we witnessed by the debate 

of this last session, still gets fully and properly aired 

 

(2115) 

 

So the mandate has been changed and the mandate has been 

changed whereby on a . . . not a case-by-case basis so minutely 

and finitely determined, but in general terms on a case-by-case 

basis, the committee will have to make a decision whether it’s 

dealt within the purview and the mandate of Public Accounts or 

within the purview and mandate of some other committee of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The other factor which I think must not be lost sight of, is a 

phenomenon which is an interesting one to which all 

governments grapple and do not have an easy answer. And that 

is the insertion of the auditor’s belief. I’m not now 

personalizing anybody. This is now arisen before Mr. Strelioff 

and has continued on for some years in a number of 

jurisdictions. I think they call it audit for value or value for 

audit. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Value for money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Value for money, value for money 

audit is what they call it, is the expression. And this is, 

relatively speaking so far as I can understand, a relatively recent  

insertion into what you said in your preliminary remarks, the 

administrative side of auditing. 

 

Because a traditional auditor will take a look at the dollars in 

and the dollars out — not to minimize it, I say bean counting — 

and say this is what it is; it’s been properly accounted for. 

 

But when the Provincial Auditor says, but I’ve got a new role 

and that new role is in addition to bean counting; I am going to 

put my judgement call, my value, on whether or not that money 

was properly spent, then for all governments there’s an 

immediate difficulty. Because at the end of the day, it is the 

government that makes the judgement calls on the expenditures 

and whether it’s properly . . . and put in the correct areas. 

 

We’ve had much debate already over many hours this evening 

where the opposition parties say, hey, you as a government, 

you’ve got your priorities all wrong. You’re not getting value 

for your money. You’re into Guyana. You’re doing this, you’re 

doing this; you’re not doing that. And that’s where it should be 

because we are the elected people. We’re supposed to do it in a 

public forum. 

 

And I’m not criticizing the Provincial Auditor — please — for 

one moment for saying that there is a role for value for money. 

But once you get into value for money added to the pure 

administrative side of auditing, you are into of necessity public 

policy. Public policy which is formulated by a government, 

formulated by a caucus, formulated in the past in majority vote 

by a Legislative Assembly — not by a Provincial Auditor, no 

matter how he or she may be qualified or well intentioned or 

well motivated. And that’s what’s happened. 

 

And so on occasion we take the view that if the Provincial 

Auditor comes in and says, I have done an audit on a particular 

project or department of government or on a particular Crown 

corporation, and in my judgement, this has not been money well 

spent, I have to take that very, very seriously in account. 

 

But at the end of the day, I have to run and get re-elected and he 

doesn’t. At the end of the day I’ve got to be able to justify that 

expenditure or I get defeated. He doesn’t. That’s not to say that 

he can’t make those comments. 

 

But it is to say that a bureaucrat — I use this in the best sense of 

the word — the technician, the bean counter, now moves from a 

different area. He moves from the area of bean counting into 

deciding whether or not that money should be put into, for 

example, children’s action plan, child’s action plan, in a 

number of those areas. 

 

And so I will close, and I’m sorry for being long-winded but I 

think this is a very important question. I give my answer by 

saying that I would need to know by one or two or three 

examples — and you’ve referred me to one matter on the 

record, perhaps one or two others will do it — to see whether or 

not there’s some sort of a systematic approach. 

 

There is no policy of this government for a systematic approach 

to getting it out of Public Accounts and into Crown 

Corporations. I’m only saying that the mandate of Crown  



1870  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Corporations has changed and the mandate of the Provincial 

Auditor has changed for value-for-money, resulting in both for 

that office and for this Assembly, some areas of grey and 

confusion, which is quite understandable. And we should be 

able to agree to disagree and be able to do it civilly, and to do it 

in a way which still gets the expenditure issue out before the 

public for proper debate. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Premier, I beg to differ. I am 

absolutely astonished, Mr. Premier, that you would suggest that 

the mandate of the Provincial Auditor has changed. It has not 

changed for decades, nor should it change. I don’t know where 

you get this idea that he’s doing value-for-money audit 

comments. His report has not substantially changed in its . . . in 

the way in which it has been presented. In fact any 

modifications have come as a direct result of agreed-to changes, 

often national in nature, by auditors . . . the Canadian auditing 

guidelines. 

 

And I find it very interesting, if you’re wanting a significant 

example I will give to you a significant example — Workers’ 

Compensation Board, where your government has called upon 

lawyers to give a legal opinion, not only from the Department 

of Justice but elsewhere, in order to state that the WCB 

(Workers’ Compensation Board) should not come before the 

Public Accounts Committee, that it should be in front of the 

Crown Corporations Committee. And I’d like you to know, sir, 

that I’ve gone back and looked at the statutes. Since 1907 the 

Workers’ Compensation Board has been mandated to be in 

front of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

So this is very confusing. If you don’t consider this to be a 

substantive change, a different trend, then I don’t know what is. 

It’s of great concern to me. And all that I’m stating . . . I don’t 

have the years and years and years of experience in this House 

as you do. I have but a small window of experience and I am 

telling you that I see a change, a significant change, a trend that 

has begun in the last two years, and it is becoming troublesome. 

And I most certainly hope that this is something that you would 

see important enough to look into because very often when 

people are sitting inside the jar, they don’t know what’s going 

on at all. If you’re sitting outside the jar you can see how many 

beans are inside. And I really do hope that this is something that 

your government will take seriously because it most certainly is 

a different tenor in the Public Accounts Committee from 

anything I have experienced in the past. 

 

Now the member from Kindersley raised something that I 

thought was very important. And that was an alternative vision, 

the fact that the role of opposition is to not simply oppose and 

criticize but to offer alternatives. And I too placed before the 

House three private members’ Bills this session; one, I think as 

you know because you’ve made comment on, regarding session 

dates, where I most certainly believe we can benefit from 

having a three-week fall session where the most controversial 

Bills are placed before this House, allowing members of the 

opposition and members of the Legislative Assembly at large to 

go to various constituents and stakeholders to determine what 

impact these Bills would have on them. 

 

As well it would call for a shorter session after Christmas. It  

most certainly I think would be beneficial to all to have 

predictable session dates. I know we do not agree on this, but 

there have been many, many people who have made comment 

that they don’t know when the sessions are taking place in 

Saskatchewan. I think predictability is good for people. I most 

certainly think that it’s something that would allow various 

groups to be able to deal with all of us better, and I think it 

would allow us to deal with our constituents better. 

 

There are other benefits to it as well, but that aside and the 

other Bill that dealt with set election dates aside, I have one Bill 

that is very, I think cogent to the debate at hand, and that is 

about allowing the Provincial Auditor to come to the bar of this 

Chamber and speak to all of us since he is mandated to report to 

the Legislative Assembly. People think that it’s simply good 

enough for him to table his report. They may think it’s simply 

good enough that he calls a news conference and gives the most 

important points to the media, whereby we pick up from them 

what we think the important points are, or we take it upon 

ourselves to read page by page, dozens and dozens, and 

hundreds of pages of the Provincial Auditor’s report. Methinks 

that if 58 members of this Assembly do this, we should all be 

given great credit. 

 

Not everyone is a member of the Public Accounts Committee 

and does this, but I most certainly think that it would be of great 

value to all of us as individual members in this House to have 

the Provincial Auditor come to this Chamber and give his report 

to 58 out of 58 elected members of the Legislative Assembly. 

What he is mandated to be able to do, we should put into action 

so he can come and speak to us directly. 

 

I’m wondering what your views are on that. I don’t believe for a 

moment you would be supporting it, but I most certainly am 

interested in your views. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  You shouldn’t judge me so quickly, 

but I do want to say that, first, about the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, if I can . . . Actually I’ll have to back up. 

 

With respect, during the member’s time of distinguished service 

in this House, it is correct to say that what she has seen the 

Provincial Auditor do on the value-for-money concept is what 

has been going on. I don’t mean to say this arose one year ago 

or two years ago. In fact I recall, when I was a part of the 

Blakeney government in the mid-70s, where this issue was 

emerging. I even remember when I retired from politics with the 

consent of the majority of the voters in Saskatoon Riversdale in 

1982, attending a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 

seminar — I think it was in Toronto — where this very topic 

was on the table. It is a new development, which is what’s 

involved in it. 

 

Now let me just elaborate on what I’m saying. If you take a 

look at the auditor’s mission statement himself, he writes, the 

auditor writes, the office writes: 

 

Our office serves the people of Saskatchewan through the 

Legislative Assembly. We encourage accountability and 

effective management in government operations through 

our independent examinations, advice, and reports on the  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

management of public resources entrusted to government. 

 

Accountability and effective management. I argue however that 

the words there that I’ve read — you have them before you — 

do not have words to the effect: and to comment on the 

priorities of government in question or to comment on whether 

or not programs are of proper value in question. 

 

And again this is so . . . I mean I don’t want to get into this 

because there’s no use me wishing that things were otherwise. 

That’s not my point. My only point is that they are emerging 

continually, expansively, in all legislative assemblies, along that 

line. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board example is an interesting 

one. I think I am correct in saying there is not a single penny of 

taxpayers’ money in the Workers’ Compensation Board — not 

a single penny. This board is independent by law. It is 

independent by statute. It is employers’ employees’ money, if I 

can put it that way. 

 

Now the Provincial Auditor says he wants to see whether or not 

money which is not even taxpayers’ money, not within the 

statement that I can see, at least the statement that I read . . . that 

it should be looked at. 

 

Well maybe it should be looked at; maybe it shouldn’t be 

looked at. But what I think we as a government have a right to 

do is to at least have answered for us in this circumstance where 

there is no taxpayers’ money, is this a proper way — not a 

proper way — is this within the mandate of the Provincial 

Auditor? We can do that without attacking the Provincial 

Auditor. He doesn’t assume this to be an attack. No problems in 

this regard at all. I think it’s an issue which needs to be 

addressed and is properly before us now and in due course will 

be addressed. 

 

Now leading specifically to your question about the three Bills. 

I have to make a comment on the fixed-dates concept. This 

again I think is an intriguing idea, and I’ve debated this in my 

own mind and with others on a number of occasions. 

 

I remember, if I may be permitted to take up just a few more 

extra minutes of the House, Mr. Chairman, some several 

months ago of an example in the United States of America, in 

the state legislature of Texas — it’s a true story. In Texas, 

Governor Connally was seeking the Republican nomination. He 

was the Connally of Kennedy’s fame, had switched parties from 

Democrat to Republican and was attempting to enact in the 

state legislature a particular piece of legislation which was 

viewed at the time as being very much a boost for his campaign 

for the Republican nomination for president. 

 

(2130) 

 

Six Democrat state senators decided to break the quorum 

requirements of the state legislature — I think it was six; I’m 

going by memory now — and they simply vacated the state 

legislature. Actually they got the nickname of the Texas killer 

bees, because they were killing Connally’s great legislative 

move to get a jump on the presidency nomination for the  

Republican Party in the United States. 

 

And what the state governor did was he issued the state troopers 

to find and to arrest those legislators. Now why do I tell this 

story? Because in Texas . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Lord only knows. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well Lord knows you may not, but 

I’ll tell you, you may not but the good Lord does know — 

because in Texas they have a fixed period for the legislature, a 

fixed start and a fixed closing. And those six Texas killer bees 

knew that if they could go to 121 days — end of the session, 

end of Bill. 

 

And that is not Texas; it permeates the entire United States of 

America. It permeates it right from the presidencies. The beauty 

of the parliamentary system is this House does not recognize 

political parties. The beauty of the parliamentary system is, at 

least in theory — I know it doesn’t happen in practice — but in 

theory we could break down party lines on any grey issue. Let’s 

say a national unity crisis — God forbid — should come up 

after June 2. We could break down on non-party basis in order 

to make some decisions. The great beauty of the parliamentary 

system is to be able to convene a session when required. The 

great beauty of the parliamentary system is that you can call an 

election. 

 

I often hark back to the days of Woodrow Lloyd and Tommy 

Douglas, were stuck when Liberals and Conservatives ganged 

up on the CCF to form the KOD (Keep Our Doctors) to kill the 

medicare Bill. I recall full well the late premier Ross Thatcher 

— he wasn’t premier at the time — kicking at the doors of the 

legislature, kicking the door of the legislature to get in. I recall 

full well how the doctors went on strike 18 days, thanks to the 

Liberals and the Conservatives. 

 

And I tell you, I was here as a young student, volunteering my 

time to try and get medicare through this whole battle. And 

that’s why, if I may just get off on another topic, I smile when I 

see some of those people . . . not you, ma’am, I’m not talking to 

you as an individual, but some get up, who today are the great 

defenders of medicare who were at the doorsteps of this 

legislative buildings trying to kill medicare. And Woodrow 

Lloyd was I’m sure, contemplating that there was a democratic 

impasse, and he was two years into his term, and maybe the one 

thing that he could do to solve the democratic impasse was to 

say in the parliamentary system, we’re calling the election. 

 

He didn’t. He didn’t. He had the guts and the strength and the 

vision and the wisdom, and we got medicare, and he died six, 

seven years later, I’m sure, through all the stress and the strain 

that went through that operation. 

 

That’s the beauty of the parliamentary system. What about the 

Provincial Auditor to come to speak to the bar? 

 

I’ve actually had that experience. I had a person by the name of 

Hewitt Helmsing . . . I think some members in this House will 

know who Mr. Hewitt Helmsing is. One of the Conservatives 

got up in this legislature and said that things were so terrible in  



1872  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

health care in the 1970s that they couldn’t even paint the 

hospital rooms. That was the allegation, that there was filth 

everywhere. And Mr. Hewitt Helmsing was the head of the 

predecessor of SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations) at the time, and we called him to the bar here of 

the legislature, and he spent the hours in the legislature under 

oath, under cross-examination, under new rules to tell his side 

of the story. And I tell you, he did very well. I disagree with Mr. 

Helmsing’s political beliefs, and I sure as heck disagree with 

his political machinations, which I don’t need to tell the hon. 

member about. But nonetheless he was at this bar, and it didn’t 

work. It did not work. 

 

The Provincial Auditor’s forums are the most important forums 

that he has. They’re written. They’re detailed. They’re 

documented. They’re audited. They’re put forward by 

accountants. They’re put forward by experts. They’re tabled. 

They’re explained to the press. They’re explained to the 

journalists. We answer questions for good or for bad in this 

House, even as we do today in this estimate system. Nothing 

prohibits them from expanding that report or contracting it or 

going into value-added-for-money audits, however he wants to 

describe it. 

 

It is a great system. To me, I think that we ought to rejoice in 

what has been a pretty good system which albeit has tensions; I 

acknowledge that. It can’t help but have tensions. But please, 

everybody should give respect to each other — the government 

on its priorities, the Provincial Auditor for his management and 

accountability of government operations approach. And we may 

from time to time agree to disagree. Why not? It’s always been 

that way in the past, and it will be, I guarantee you, long after 

I’m gone from this legislature, from future governments as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Premier, you’ll be so delighted to 

know that there is no set date for ending a session in my private 

members’ Bill that will never see the light of day. And many, 

many parliaments actually have set session dates. This is not 

something where one has to conjure up some story from Texas 

south, and potential abuses of people’s freedoms and so forth. I 

mean there are parliaments in Canada that have set session 

dates. 

 

And people may wonder why it is that there is any importance 

at all about setting this in law, and I would like to recall a story 

myself. One Laurence Decore in Alberta, had a book on reform 

of the legislature. And what he did was to go to one Ralph 

Klein, and he sat with him and he said: listen, why can’t we just 

agree to certain specific things that would change the way that 

our House would work. And there were some gives and some 

takes, and they arrived at a certain number of things. Some 

things that in fact that Mr. Klein didn’t particularly want, but he 

ended up agreeing to. 

 

And even though there are parliamentary systems across 

Canada that have set session dates, one of them that was not set 

in law was in Alberta. And guess what happened? People very 

much appreciated having three weeks in the fall where all of the  

controversial Bills were tabled. In fact all-party committees 

went out and would work on some of these with the public. 

There are as many private members’ Bills that are ever tabled 

— in some cases, more in Alberta — than the government 

tables, and all-party committees go out and work on those. 

Some very innovative and creative ways of doing things. 

 

But aha, what happened with the set session dates in Alberta? 

They were done, not just with a handshake, they were written 

down, but they weren’t in law. Laurence Decore is dust and a 

second election comes along, and guess what? The arrangement 

between Mr. Klein and Mr. Decore doesn’t exist any more. And 

I think it’s unfortunate. But there are lots of places in this 

country that have benefited from set session dates, and they 

very much enjoy them. In fact the predictability that arises from 

this allows for people to do their jobs better. And I don’t know 

why it is we have to be threatened by something like this. 

 

Now if indeed there was a presentation in this House by 

someone who came in and, as you stated, did a good job, 

illuminated on the problems in health care of the day, or at least 

put to rest some of them, as far as the government is concerned 

— that’s great. Although the members of the opposition or let’s 

say the government members — I don’t know what year this 

was — were not in agreement. So what? At least people had an 

opportunity to hear it and hear it firsthand. 

 

I would like to think that we would all be better off to hear 

things not filtered, but directly. And I agree that it’s great that 

we have the Provincial Auditor in Public Accounts; it’s great 

that he now sits in Crown Corporations; it’s wonderful that he 

sets out all of his reports; it’s great that he’ll call a news 

conference, and we can get it filtered through the journalists. 

But I don’t happen to think that it’s good enough. 

 

And I’m disappointed that we don’t see eye to eye on this. But I 

most certainly would like to see us at least reach a little bit for 

trying to do things differently that could in fact enhance the 

workings of the Legislative Assembly, rather than seeing any 

change at all as a threat. 

 

And my questions to you this evening, Mr. Premier — and I do 

appreciate the opposition parties allowing me to pose questions 

to you tonight — my questions are finished. And I thank you 

and your officials very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much. And I just 

simply want to say that I don’t view them as a threat at all. You 

may not believe this, but I don’t view them as a threat. What I 

do view them as is a question of practical application. 

 

And by the way, I want to close my remarks by saying in 

response to your questioning, to me in my experience — I 

mentioned this to one of the people over on the opposition side 

the other day — what makes this place work is not the formal 

rules. What makes it really work are the informal rules. And we 

may need to elevate some informal rules into formal rules. But 

essentially it is the arrangements that we arrive at through 

civilized discourse which make the place as effective as it is. 

 

And every one of these Bills that you’ve tabled — I say this  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

quite genuinely and sincerely — merit serious consideration. 

But I would ask you to at least accept that with them, when I 

say they merit serious consideration, they also have with them 

some serious debits too, at least as I’ve tried to explain them to 

you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Premier, 

I’d like to ask a couple of specific questions to some of the 

areas that I alluded to earlier on in the time. And as you’ve 

indicated, time has passed by rather quickly tonight. 

 

Mr. Premier, we sat here a couple of months ago and we 

listened to the Minister of Finance deliver her budget, a budget 

that contains some good news in the form of a sales tax 

reduction that took us back to the point we were at in 1991. I 

found it ironic that on the same day, the Premier took it upon 

himself to criticize the Devine government’s brand of tax 

reductions. And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I thought it valid 

criticism. 

 

Since the Premier is so fond of reading from old quotes, 

perhaps I’ll take the opportunity to do the same. And this one 

isn’t that old, Mr. Premier; in fact it’s from March 20 Hansard. 

In question period on that day, which of course was the day of 

the budget, the Premier said this in response to a question 

regarding the provincial sales tax. He said to the member of the 

third party, and I quote: 

 

You’ll remember how your taxation policies were: 

(meaning the Tories) you put on a tax on lotteries, then you 

took it off and you said there’s a tax break. You put on a 

tax on used cars, then you took it off and you said there 

was a tax break. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, I couldn’t agree with the Premier more. 

It’s simply not fair, nor is it honest to take credit for lowering 

taxes when it was you who put them up in the first place. 

 

No sooner had the Premier made these statements then his 

Finance minister stood up and told the people of Saskatchewan, 

that through the goodness of her own heart, she was lowering 

the sales tax to 7 per cent. And like the Tories in the ’80s, she 

called it a tax break. They put it up; they take it down; and it’s a 

tax break. 

 

I’m certainly beginning to see why some members of the third 

party voted for the budget. It follows the strategy of Grant 

Devine to a T, as the Premier so kindly pointed out on March 

20 with his own words prior to the introduction of the budget. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell the people of Saskatchewan how you 

arrived at this tax reduction plan versus the needs to address the 

provisions of services to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I say, with the greatest 

of respect to the Leader of the Opposition, sometimes it’s 

difficult to answer his questions tonight because — it’s 

probably my fault — the logic is very, very, very difficult to  

follow. 

 

We increased the taxes on the sales tax from 7 to 9. Why? 

Why? Because we were facing a deficit of $850 million. And 

how would you find the $850 million deficit to eliminate it? 

You’re already criticizing us on health care and highways, take 

$850 million of those programs, you have absolutely nothing 

left. We were forced to increase. 

 

Now we have a turnaround budget and we’re able to reduce it. 

Somehow in your logic that parallels a situation where, under 

the former administration, out of the clear blue there’s a tax 

reduction which they make you believe that it’s for ever, and 

then all of a sudden it’s back on again, when it’s not for ever. 

That’s what I was speaking to. And how the two can be made 

comparable — perhaps it’s not your logic track, maybe it’s my 

logic track — but I have to tell you with the greatest respect, I 

simply cannot follow that. 

 

(2145) 

 

But the substance of your question is: how did you decide on 

this? And the substance of the question needs to be answered in 

this substantive way. We have taken the point of view that as a 

general principle, a general direction, when we are in surplus — 

we campaigned this way in 1995 — one-third of the surplus, 

roughly, would go to tax reduction; one-third to program 

enhancements; one-third to debt reduction so that everybody 

benefits. I repeat again, not in watertight compartments, but 

depending upon where the needs are. 

 

Thus we were able to, given the surplus and the tremendous 

turnaround by the people of Saskatchewan, provide $180 

million relief on taxes, provide all the money that we did for the 

social programs that I talked about, from health care to 

education, and also pay down the debt. That is what is going to 

guide us. 

 

By the way, I hear something similar from the federal Liberal 

party in this election campaign. Only they don’t have one-third, 

one-third, one-third. Lo and behold, what do the federal 

Liberals have? — one-half, one-half. One-half is debt and tax 

reduction and the other half is for program reduction. 

 

So as Yogi Berra says, you know, how do you want your pizza, 

in four slices or eight? He says, I only want it in four because I 

don’t think I can eat eight. It’s the same situation. Cut your pie 

however you want it: one-half, one-half; one-third, one-third, 

one-third. That’s roughly our line and that’s what we did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. At this stage of the 

game maybe we prefer saskatoon pie versus pizza. 

 

Question, Mr. Premier, regarding health reform. And a number 

of people in Saskatchewan, not only in my constituency but 

throughout Saskatchewan, have raised concerns about health 

reform. And as you know from being present in the House, 

whenever we’ve asked questions of the Minister of Health, the 

three answers that I think we received were: first of all, it’s the  



1874  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

federal government’s fault; secondly it’s the former 

Saskatchewan government’s fault; or thirdly, it’s the district 

health care’s fault. I mean there was an excuse for every season. 

 

Mr. Premier, we’ve heard the Health minister throughout this 

session state that this government is doing its job on the health 

care front. And he backs up his contention by saying that the 

government still spends every bit as much on health care in 

Saskatchewan as it ever did. And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

there’s no denying that. 

 

But I submit to you, sir, that this fact doesn’t offer a defence for 

your health care reforms. Far from it. Because while you 

contend that everything is just fine with the health care system 

in Saskatchewan, many people here are having to make do with 

less and less service with each passing year. 

 

We’ve seen communities lose all of their acute care services. 

We’ve seen hospitals converted to health centres. Then they’ve 

subsequently closed. We’ve heard from nurses who say they are 

short-staffed and overstressed because of lay-offs. We 

constantly hear from Saskatchewan residents who are unable to 

access nursing homes for their elderly parents. 

 

We’ve seen this government, who say they are so committed to 

universal medicare, move to de-insure many important services. 

Since coming to power, this government, the self-proclaimed 

defenders of medicare, not only failed to restore children’s 

dental program as it promised, they ended it all together. 

 

They did not restore Saskatchewan Drug Plan as they had 

promised. They gutted it completely. 

 

Since coming to power this government has de-insured eye 

examinations; they’ve de-insured chiropractic services; they’ve 

put higher charges on ambulance services. 

 

They’ve virtually embraced the concept of pay-as-you-go 

private nursing homes, having abdicated their own 

responsibility to the elderly citizens who built this province. 

 

All this and we spend just as much as we always did. 

 

So the question this government has to answer, and it hasn’t 

done it yet, is just where is the money going. Is it simply 

disappearing? Because it’s not getting to where it’s needed. 

 

People throughout Saskatchewan are telling you they aren’t 

happy with the service you’re providing. These are the people 

who aren’t impressed by the fact you’re spending every bit as 

much on the system as you ever did because they’ve been left 

out of your reformed health care system. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you admit that the wellness model is not 

doing well and how will you address the concerns of so many 

citizens across this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Thank you for that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  My colleague says that I should start 

off by saying thank you for that question. And indeed, I’m 

going to thank the Leader of the Opposition for that question: 

thank you for that question. 

 

I’m going to take a few moments to answer it. First the hon. 

member says where is this money going? Well in the 97-98 

budget, 1.63 billion is the expenditure and it is an increase of 

$57 million on the base for district health boards. By the way, if 

we take into account the 2 mill levy and the public health 

contributions, the total increase is more like 70.8 million. But 

that’s fair enough. You may not want to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Fine, don’t accept that figure. But tell me if 

you can accept the 56.5 million? Well of course you can’t 

accept that. Of this the district health boards get an increase of 

51.3 or nearly a 5.5 per cent increase over the 1996-97 budget. 

 

And where does the money go? The money increases, funding 

increases go 38.8 million to secure and sustain hospitals and 

nursing homes; 3 million to improve emergency services; 8.5 to 

strengthen rural and northern health services; 6.3 to enhance 

home care and community services. I know it’s never . . . not 

enough for you folks, you great defenders of medicare who are 

at the door; you were trying to kill it just a few years ago. 

 

Other initiatives go all the way from the Health Services 

Utilization Commission, to the child benefit program, to capital 

improvements including an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 

for Regina, the Calder Centre, and I could go on and on with 

respect to the specific programs of where this money goes. 

There is where the money goes. 

 

Now let’s just talk a little bit about where you come from in 

health care. Let’s just hear a little bit about this. Now here’s the 

situation, Mr. Chairman, which I am going to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan over and over and over and over and over again. 

I have in front of me a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) TV 6 p.m. interview by Costa Maragos, dated 

November 25, 1996. And this is an interview after Mr. 

Melenchuk was chosen the Leader of the Liberal Party. And I’m 

going to read the transcript, which goes like this, Mr. Chairman: 

 

Melenchuk: I was thinking that Saskatchewan people have 

done a tremendous job because their taxes, utilities, and 

tariff rates have been increased 1.3 billion since 1992, and 

that balancing occurs at a direct transfer from their bank 

accounts to the bank account of the Saskatchewan 

government. 

 

Maragos: What inefficiencies would you find to make up 

that $1.3 billion? 

 

Melenchuk: Well, health care . . . 

 

Maragos: How much would you save there? Give me a 

number. 

 

Note the figure was 1.3 billion. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

Melenchuk: I don’t know, because I haven’t seen the 

numbers. I’ll have to look at the numbers. 

 

This is the leader of your party. 

 

Maragos: If you don’t know, then how can you say that? 

 

Maragos asked the question, if you don’t know how can you 

say it? 

 

Melenchuk: Because I know that there are inefficiences in 

the system (and get this, Mr. Leader of the Opposition) and 

I understand health care reform, (the Leader of the Liberal 

Party says, and I’ll tell you how he understands it in a 

moment) and I understand health care systems, and I know 

that there are inefficiencies in the system right now. 

 

Note those words. I know there are inefficiencies in the system 

right now. You please will get up and tell this Legislative 

Assembly where those inefficiencies are. Where do you and 

your leader say those inefficiencies totalling $1.3 billion are? 

The budget’s only 1.6 so you tell us where the inefficiencies 

are. Well, Maragos says . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  More salaries incurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  

 

Well what other inefficiencies do you see then if you think 

you can make up this $1.3 billion? 

 

Melenchuk: You have to look at the whole strategy. You 

have to look at the big picture in terms of how we meet our 

financial commitments as a government. What we have is a 

situation where our businesses are stifled in terms of 

opportunity that they have here, because of repressive 

actions and there are other things too. 

 

There’s your answer. There is a medical doctor — the good 

doctor — says, he knows that there are $1.3 billion of 

inefficiencies. He won’t tell us where. You, sir, won’t tell us 

where. All that you tell us is that we’ve got to look at the big 

picture. We’ve got to look at the whole picture. 

 

And you have the audacity to get up in this Legislative 

Assembly and accuse us when I gave you the breakdown of 

where the money goes. I’m not giving money to health care. 

How dare you can do that. Shame on the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan for pulling this kind of a fraudulent position on 

health care on the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Well I tell you, maybe the good doctor won’t tell Costa 

Maragos where he’s going, but you know he has told other 

people where he’s going. 

 

Just before he got elected leader, maybe it was election day — 

in fact it was election day, you will remember this, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition — Saturday, November 23, 1996, had some 

pretty good numbers going right into final ballot. You know 

what he says? This is the new leader, November 23, 1996 

quote, the 43-year-old Regina native said: the first act — get 

this — the first act of a Melenchuk government would be to  

pass legislation that disbands the provinces 30 district health 

boards and replaces them with local, unelected boards that are 

independent of government. 

 

How does that work? Who does the appointments? Who is 

going to appoint unelected boards and make them independent 

of government? And do away with them. No, no . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Details, mere details my colleague says. Maybe 

we should look at the whole picture. That whole, big old 

picture. 

 

Well you know, then on November 27, right after he got a hold 

of the leadership, he gives another interview to the Leader-Post 

and you know what the Leader-Post says? “Melenchuk sees 

private clinics as a safety valve.” 

 

“Private surgical clinics should be permitted to open in the 

province in order to reduce hospital waiting-lists,” says 

Liberal leader Jim Melenchuk. 

 

That’s what he says he should do. 

 

By the way, this is not a new idea for the good doctor — not a 

new idea — because way back in 1994, guess what? Here’s 

what the Regina Leader-Post has — another headline: “Doctor 

believes private clinics are inevitable.” 

 

Who was the doctor? Jim Melenchuk. He was president of the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. He says: 

 

Pointing to Calgary and pointing to North Dakota, he said 

that’s why the province should allow private clinics here 

where practitioners bill medicare for providing treatment 

and bill customers for the costs associated with providing 

the treatment. One solution the doctors have proposed is to 

open up a private clinic in which they would perform 

surgery for their usual fee and charge the patient a fee to 

recover the costs. 

 

That’s what your doctor says. That’s what your leader of the 

Liberal Party says — private clinics. 

 

Well not enough to do that. He repeats it again in 1995. He says 

the MDs (medical doctors) are the last defence against poor 

health care. SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) Jim 

Melenchuk attacked what he called the new religion of 

population health. Again, he’s back onto private clinics. 

 

Then on May 2, 1996, he’s still on private clinics, quote: 

“Allowing private services would augment the publicly funded 

ones,” he says. 

 

And then lo and behold, what do we have in the legislature? 

The member from Arm River and the right-hand man to the 

election of Jim Melenchuk as Leader of the Liberal Party; the 

right-hand man seated behind you right there. The member from 

Arm River, the right-hand man, he says, if the people are 

prepared to pay, then I think we should let them pay. He too is 

in favour of private care, two-tier — member from Arm River 

— and private clinics. 

 



1876  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

That’s only part of the story, only part of the story — $1.3 

billion he’s going to find from inefficiencies. And you’ve got 

the audacity to tell us . . . criticize us. 

 

You’re not going to get away with this. You’re not going to get 

away with this. In the next two to three years, you’re going to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan where you’re going to find that 

1.3 billion and whether or not you stand up for private clinics. 

 

(2200) 

 

I tell you the confusion of the Liberal Party. You never 

supported the medicare scheme. You don’t now and you never 

will. You’re seeing in Ottawa with a tax on our transfer 

payments, no wonder the Canadian Medical Association in its 

own CMA (Canadian Medical Association) News — CMA 

News, April 1997. You know what the headline says, Mr. 

Chairman? “Ottawa fails to protect medicare.” The Canadian 

Medical Association. 

 

Liberals. Liberals at home, Liberals in Ottawa, Liberals, 

Liberals, Liberals everywhere, opposed to medicare and health 

care. Mr. Chairman, let nobody be mistaken about this. There is 

only one party that is in defence of medicare, in making it the 

best possible plan for the 21st century, and that’s this party right 

here, on this side of the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. I knew that you 

were fond of quotes, and I wanted you to have that opportunity 

to use that entire file that you had brought with you. I think I 

asked the question, I believe I asked the question, about the 

concerns of the people of Saskatchewan right now. And at no 

time did I indicate to you that you were spending less. In fact I 

said that you were spending the same amount, and that it is $1.6 

billion. 

 

My question, Mr. Premier, was around the issue of what are you 

going to do? How are you going to answer to people who talk 

about the fact that they travel hundreds of miles to get to a 

system in Regina? How are you going to answer the question 

about people who now are reporting to us that indeed they’re 

sitting on a 18-month waiting-list for something like hip 

replacement that needs to be done now because they are in 

pain? Those are the concerns that we had, Mr. Premier. 

 

The other couple of points I want to close with, Mr. Premier, is 

around two things. Yes, November 23, 1996, what was indeed a 

good day for the Liberal Party in terms of a very sound 

convention and some very, very keen ideas that were proposed. 

But I also want to remind you, Mr. Premier, that even though 

you’ve been here for 31 years, and you may recall the incident 

at the front door to the legislature, most of us don’t. 

 

And this is a new era, and we’re moving into the 21st century. 

And we want to be part of the development of Saskatchewan, 

not the hindering and the dragging down of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  So with those closing remarks I want to thank 

you. I know that you’ve endured the questions for three hours. 

And indeed, maybe my approach has been different. And I want 

to thank you for your sincerity and your comments in terms of 

dealing with my questions, even though you may have thought 

that at times my preamble may have been a bit long. I apologize 

for that. I want to thank your officials for being present to this 

late hour. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 

Leader of the Opposition on what I think was an admirable job 

in questioning the estimates. I want to thank the Leader of the 

Third Party and the member from Greystone. The debate was 

lively and on important topics. And if I may say so, the time 

was used very efficiently. 

 

I accept the thanks on behalf of my officials, who — I want to 

repeat in the closing words of the member from Social Services 

— throughout entire government have really done a yeoman’s 

job under great pressure. We owe a lot to them . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . A yeoperson’s job or a yeoman’s job? The 

Women’s Secretariat minister is not liking my language. 

You’ve done a wonderful job for the people of Saskatchewan. 

And I think we all owe a debt of gratitude to them all. 

 

Thank you all for your questions tonight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just want to 

add my voice of thanks to the Premier and his officials for their 

estimates this evening. I think it’s been a lively exchange of 

views here this evening. And I think we’ve all been able to lay 

on the table what our thoughts are with respect to the future of 

Saskatchewan. So I thank you, sir, for your attention this 

evening. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 8 — authorized by law. 

 

Vote 10 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Electoral Expenses 

Vote 34 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1997, the sum  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

of $206,842,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1998, the sum 

of $3,368,083,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I move that the resolutions be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave 

of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That Bill No. 76, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Years ending respectively on March 31, 1997, and on 

March 31, 1998, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

first time. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly and under 

rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

request leave of the Assembly to make a motion which would 

set the hours of sitting for tomorrow. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly, that: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly shall sit on 

Wednesday, May 21, 1997, from 10 a.m. to 12 p.m. and 

further, this Assembly shall recess from 12 p.m. until 1:30  

p.m. and that Routine Proceedings shall commence at 1:30 

p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:16 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund  Executive Council  Vote 10 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1849 

  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1849, 1873 

  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................1857, 1876 

  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................1868 

 General Revenue Fund  Executive Council  Electoral Expenses  Vote 34 .................................................................1876 

 Motions for Supply 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1876 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1877 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1877 

MOTIONS 

 Hours of Sitting 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1877 

 

 


