



















































Hansard: May 06, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1395 

 May 6, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens from the communities of Yarbo and Gerald in the 

province of Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present a petition, to do with the creation of regional 

telephone exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The community involved is Odessa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid the fight against youth crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to support the 

creation of regional telephone exchanges. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I’m just 

absolutely delighted, Mr. Speaker, to introduce this fine, fine 

group of young people seated in the west gallery to my 

colleagues. 

 

There are 86 students there, Mr. Speaker, and they are from a  

very special school, St. Angela Merici. Now this school 

provides me the service of delivering a newsletter in my 

constituency every month and so I’ve got to know many of the 

students well. And it’s such a pleasure to see them here today, 

And I know that they also have a very warm spot in their heart 

for my friend, the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

They’re accompanied by their teachers, Laurianne Jacques, 

Elaine Giroux-Sylvestre, Jim Walker, and Sean Chase. And a 

group of that size certainly needs some chaperons and they are 

Yvonne Wagner, Brenda Yeske, Greg Marshall, Annette 

McFarlane. And they are also accompanied by Yvonne 

Richards, Roy Schneider, Mrs. Jakeman, Denise McLachlan, 

and Ann Zerr. 

 

Now they’re going to spend some time here in the gallery and 

they are then going to have a tour, and after that we’re all going 

to meet in room 218 for drinks and questions. 

 

So please join me in extending a warm welcome to this fine 

group of students from St. Angela Merici School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and all members of the legislature, 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a group from all over 

Saskatchewan — Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Indian Head, and a 

number of other communities around Saskatchewan that are 

here today, very interested in today’s proceedings. They are a 

group which has a great deal of concern, Mr. Speaker, with the 

no-fault insurance program here in Saskatchewan. They call 

themselves the victims of no-fault insurance. 

 

And I’d ask all member to please welcome them here this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as the member 

for Regina Qu’Appelle mentioned, I have some relationship 

with the students from St. Angela Merici School, who I too 

must say are very special people, and certainly very special to 

me. Until recently I was a teacher there at this school and in fact 

had the opportunity to teach some of the students when I was 

subbing for some teachers . . . for a couple of teachers who were 

not able to be there. 

 

I want to join with members in the House and ask them once 

again to join me in saying a very warm welcome to these 

students from St. Angela’s School. I’ve not been away long but 

I miss them already and it’s nice to see them here, and I hope 

that they enjoy their visit with us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today, 

Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 

the members of this Assembly, my wife, Jeanette, who has 

joined me today and has taken a day off from seeding to be  

  



1396  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

with us today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Chrétien Speaks to Regina Chamber of Commerce 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this morning the Rt. Hon. 

Jean Chrétien became the first Prime Minister of Canada to 

address the Regina Chamber of Commerce. He told a large and 

enthusiastic audience that this election is about reaffirming our 

values in the kind of Canada we want to see in the next century. 

A Canada which, if the Liberals are asked to lead us again, will 

include a balanced budget, the preservation of medicare, a 

vigorous attack on child poverty, and a renewed commitment to 

job training and job creation. 

 

The Prime Minister told us that Canada has the strongest 

economy of all the G-7 members and has recently been 

described by Time magazine as the envy of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the NDP (New Democratic Party) are 

recalling their election platform to correct their wrong figures, 

and Jean Charest is busy with his barbecue — still at the old 

Tory tricks of cooking the books — Canadians know who they 

can trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this hand was shaken this morning by the Prime 

Minister of Canada and for the rest of the day I will make it 

available to other members to touch, who may not have been as 

fortunate as me to meet this great Canadian. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Books presented to the Prime Minister 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a rare event but I 

do agree with the member for North Battleford that the Prime 

Minister is in Regina today, and it has something to do with the 

election. And I am told that at one of his events he was 

presented with books by authors who are also teachers at the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, University of Regina. 

 

And I wonder if anyone told the Prime Minister that he would 

not have to pay any PST (provincial sales tax) as opposed to the 

GST (goods and services tax) on those books, because they 

were purchased in a province that encourages reading — even 

of “red books,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I wonder if anyone told him that to get the available 

sunlight he would have to start reading them an hour earlier in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And after all, this is foreign 

territory to him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Humboldt Students in the Canada World 

Youth Exchange Program 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would  

like to recognize two constituents of mine, Ryan Germain and 

Todd Hartlaub of Humboldt, who have been selected for the 

Canada World Youth Exchange Program. 

 

They will be heading to opposite ends of Canada and opposite 

sides of the world. Ryan will be in Newfoundland and Jamaica, 

while Todd will be in British Columbia and then Indonesia. 

 

Both students attend the University of Saskatchewan and start 

their exchange in September. Between now and that time they 

are required to raise $1,500 from the community. The 

fund-raising is an integral part of Canada World Youth 

Exchange Program though it covers only a portion of the total 

costs. 

 

And I commend Ryan and Todd on this endeavour. We look 

forward to hearing from them when they get back to certainly 

educate us on everything they have been educated on. 

Congratulations, Ryan Germain and Todd Hartlaub. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Spinal Health Care Week 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I was a 

civilian kindergarten teacher 10 years ago, I stood with my class 

along the Trans-Canada Highway east of Regina on a cold 

February morning and watched my students high five Rick 

Hansen as he rolled by on his round the world “Man in Motion 

Tour.” It was a thrilling moment for them and for me as well. 

 

As we all know, Rick Hansen was a young man confined to a 

wheelchair by a spinal injury and he was circling the globe to 

call attention to and raise money for spinal research. At the 

same time, he inspired others with spinal injuries to lead their 

lives to the fullest with their disability, not despite it. In a 

decade typified by selfishness, he showed the world a selfless 

devotion to the welfare of others that was a much needed tonic. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to say that Rick Hansen is 

back. He is back in Regina and at a very appropriate time. 

Appropriate because the week of May 1 to May 7 has been 

declared Spinal Health Care Week, a week in which students in 

particular are taught about spinal health and the benefits of 

preventing spinal injuries. 

 

Eight of ten Canadians will have back pain in their lives. It has 

been estimated that back pain costs $6 billion a year. Education 

on proper spinal care can help prevent back pain. Research like 

that promoted by Rick Hansen will lead some day to a cure for 

spinal injury. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Recreation Volunteers Honoured 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, April 26 the North Central 

Regional Recreation Association recognized 11 long-term 

recreation volunteers at Ed’s Inn. The Special Service Award 

went to Michael Dutchak of Blaine Lake, and Murray and 

Louise Smail of Christopher Lake. 

 

David Howe of Marcelin and Leona Neufeld of Rosthern were  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

awarded by North Central Regional Recreation Association for 

the sports category. The Recreation Award went to Henry 

Borysiuk of Paddockwood, Bill and Rose Palibroda of 

Weirdale, and Debby Hydamacka of Meath Park. The final 

award went to Don and Irma Brunsdon of Holbein for culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is people like them who make Saskatchewan 

such a great province to live in. Once again, I would like to say 

hats off to those people who dedicated their many years of 

volunteer service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Polonia Dance Ensemble Performance 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 

on Saturday evening the Polonia Dance Ensemble of Regina, a 

group to which I used to belong just a few short years ago, held 

their ninth annual performance of Polish folk song and dance 

here at the Performing Arts Centre in Regina. 

 

Almost 400 patrons were treated to a cross-section of lively 

Polish folk dance, which included famous national dances such 

as the Oberek, Kujawiak, Krakowiak, and Mazur, combined 

with a lively set of regional dances such as the Lubeslki, Sacz, 

Cieszynski, Kaszubski Suites. 

 

This year’s guest group were Les danseurs de la rivière La 

Vielle from Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker, a group which I’m sure 

is familiar to the hon. member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this annual program of the Polonia Dance 

Ensemble of Regina coincides with the May 3 Constitution Day 

holiday celebrated in Poland and in Polish communities 

throughout the world. The Polonia Dance Ensemble is affiliated 

with the Polish Canadian Cultural Club of Regina and St. 

Anthony’s Parish of Regina. 

 

Last July they represented Canada at the prestigious 

International Festival of Polish Folk Dance in Rzeszów, Poland. 

 

The Polonia Dance Ensemble are great ambassadors of 

Saskatchewan and Regina, and I wish to remind my hon. 

colleagues that next year will be their 10th anniversary 

performance, which should be a very special event. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agri-food Industry Diversification 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s evidence 

throughout Saskatchewan that our agri-food industry is 

diversifying. A few weeks ago my colleague from 

Battleford-Cut Knife mentioned a new pelleting plant that is 

being built in the Wilkie area. This is welcome news for grain 

and livestock producers in the region. 

 

Yesterday a similar announcement was made regarding the 

building of a new plant in Melville. Construction of the new 

plant will commence sometime this spring and should be  

completed by this fall. Mr. Speaker, a $200,000 portion of this 

start-up cost for the new plant is being contributed by the 

agri-food equity fund, which we all know was established to 

assist Saskatchewan companies finance new and value added 

agricultural businesses. 

 

This is the eighth such investment by the agri-food equity fund 

since it originated in 1994. Saskatchewan is diversifying and 

expanding its agri-food industry, Mr. Speaker. This government 

is committed to helping diversification take place, dedicating 

$20 million to the ag-food equity fund over five years shows 

our commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new pelleting plant in Melville will directly 

benefit both grain and livestock producers, but it will also 

benefit the local economy. As a farmer, I’m glad to see such 

diversification projects like the one in Melville that will only 

add to our growing economy. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Professorship in Petroleum Engineering 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday, I 

had the privilege of being on a tour of our Saskatchewan 

Research Council’s lab facilities here in Regina at a time when 

a special agreement was being signed between the Research 

Council and the University of Regina, an agreement for a 

professorship in petroleum engineering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed important in a province where a 

number of our explorations and attempts to have oil is much 

more difficult than that in our neighbour to the west, in Alberta. 

The impressive displays of experimentation with various ways 

to extract oils from the ground, as well as to further the uses of 

emulsions to move heavy oil to be able to further the goals of 

horizontal drilling, and to be able to provide that expertise is 

now in a partnership agreement with the University of Regina. 

Dr. Amit Chakma is the dean of engineering there, who will be 

forming the partnership. 

 

The labs, as well as the library, impressive library for the 

Research Council, will be available to the University of Regina 

students. 

 

Indeed an advancement for our oil and petroleum industry and 

an advancement for the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Northern Economic Development 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 

has given the go-ahead to the McArthur River project, the  

  



1398  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

biggest uranium mine in the world. This is exciting as it will 

provide jobs and economic benefits to this province. 

 

While the project is good news, it still does not address the 

more serious problems facing the North such as inadequate 

housing, a crumbling highway system, and the lack of a 

secondary approach to social and economic community 

development. 

 

And these problems will not be solved unless the government 

looks beyond the one-industry mentality and develops a 

comprehensive plan for northern economic development as the 

provincial government’s financial picture continues to improve 

because of this mine. 

 

Max Morin, the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, said in a Star-Phoenix 

article, quote: 

 

It’s catch-up money so we can catch up with the rest of the 

province in terms of infrastructure and employment. 

 

Will the minister commit to a definite meeting date with 

northern leaders, stakeholders, and government representatives, 

to develop an economic development vision for northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this question is out of 

date. I’ve extended an invitation to the northern leaders to meet 

with myself and several of my cabinet and caucus colleagues in 

Saskatoon, I think on or about May 12 or May 13. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We don’t want to 

be faced with dying and desperate communities as resources are 

being taken out. We must begin diversification now in northern 

Saskatchewan. And this province has that responsibility to 

people of the North — to create a diversified economic 

environment which will give people hope for the future instead 

of despair. 

 

Recommendations made in the provincial-federal panel called 

for employment figures to increase 6 or 7 per cent from 50; as 

well as a commitment to ensure that 35 per cent of goods and 

services to a development be bought from northern contractors. 

These should just be guidelines, and this government should 

aim for more; although it has made no firm promise to follow 

through on these recommendations. 

 

Will the minister or the Premier explain what is being done to 

ensure that these recommendations are addressed and 

enhanced? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said the 

question is a couple of days late at least, if not a couple of years 

late. The invitation has gone out to the northern leaders to talk 

about all of these various issues which the hon. member raises  

in his question. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member that you would be of assist . . . 

of invaluable assist to the people of northern Saskatchewan if 

he would write letter to the Prime Minister of Canada urging 

him to nominate a nominee . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now 

just listen to me; to nominate a nominee to take part with us in 

this dialogue with northern leaders. 

 

I’ve written to the Prime Minister asking him to do so. I think 

you being a Liberal and coming from the northern area, you 

should do the same thing on behalf of your caucus. Invite the 

federal government to represent . . . be represented there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If my writing a 

letter to the Prime Minister would help develop a long-term 

strategy for northern Saskatchewan, I most certainly will take 

that opportunity. 

 

But this long-term strategy must include economic development 

at the community level, it must include job creation and 

employment, as well as meet the recommended targets by these 

panels. 

 

Max Morin again, the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, says and I 

quote: “If Saskatchewan has a 6 per cent unemployment rate, 

that’s the unemployment rate that we want up here.” 

 

By up here, Mr. Speaker, he means northern Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of the North have every right to demand 

this. 

 

Again I ask the Premier or the minister to commit to providing 

such initiatives; so that the people of northern Saskatchewan 

will have a chance and a better quality of life — initiatives that 

have definite dates for meetings and certainly action plan for 

northern Saskatchewan as well. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member may or 

may not be aware, I believe he is aware, that certainly in the 

history, the recent history, the last 20, 25 years of uranium 

mining in northern Saskatchewan particularly under the 

Blakeney administrations — and I want to say commitment also 

continues under the current administration — there has been a 

solid track record of involving Northerners, people living in the 

North, in employment opportunities and job opportunities, 

contracting out opportunities, the kinds of issues which he has 

raised. 

 

In fact it was unprecedented anywhere in Canada in the mid 

1970s when, under then former premier Blakeney, those rules 

stemming from the Bayda Commission, and also, if I may add, 

the Mitchell Commission who’s now a colleague of the cabinet 

— current provincial cabinet — those recommendations were 

adopted. 

 

Now we have to continue moving up — continually moving up.  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

We have to continue to expand the economic opportunities for 

people in the North, as we do for people all over Saskatchewan. 

That’s what this dialogue with northern leaders is all about; 

that’s why I’m asking them to attend; and that’s why I’m urging 

the provincial Liberal caucus to join us by asking the Prime 

Minister to nominate an appropriate representative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the legislative committee on 

Public Accounts met this morning and some of us, members of 

the committee, were expecting to question workmen’s 

compensation board officials about a number of concerns raised 

by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

However, prior to any of the questions being asked by the WCB 

(Workers’ Compensation Board) officials, government 

members introduced a motion to seek legal opinions as to 

whether the board should be autonomous or even open to 

review by the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Will the minister in charge of workmen’s compensation board 

tell this House if he believes the board should be accountable to 

the government and to the Legislative Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member will know, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Workers’ Compensation Board is a quasi-judicial 

tribunal constituted by an Act of this Assembly. She will know 

that it operates independently of government without expending 

any public funds at all. Indeed on the contrary, the board makes 

a contribution to the programs of government by paying for the 

occupational health program and the Workers’ Advocate 

program in the Department of Labour. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board has never in its history been 

asked to appear before the Public Accounts Committee. 

Recently it has voluntarily submitted to appear before the 

Crown Corporations Committee and it has agreed to continue 

that, and indeed dealt with the very points raised by the auditor 

during a meeting this year of the Crown Corporations 

Committee. 

 

So the question it raises, as to the appropriateness of it being 

before the Public Accounts Committee, is a good question, a 

legal question. If the legal opinion is that it is required to do so, 

it is more than happy to do so. But until then, of course, we 

should await those legal opinions before making up our minds 

whether or not they have to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the Workers’ Compensation 

Board includes three members who are appointed by order in 

council and report to cabinet. Workers’ Compensation Board is 

a government body and the Workers’ Compensation Board is 

government regulated. Workers’ Compensation Board officials 

appeared before the Crown Corporations Committee in January  

and the Workers’ Compensation Board is even referred to in the 

government’s summary financial statements. 

 

Will the minister explain why then the Workers’ Compensation 

Board shouldn’t be accountable to this government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think, Mr. Speaker, that if the member 

wishes to be fair about these questions, if she wishes to be fair 

about these questions, she will agree that the Workers’ 

Compensation Board already accounts to this Assembly. It does 

so through the filing of an annual report. It does so by, and for 

years has done so, through the Minister of Labour during 

consideration of the estimates of the Department of Labour. I 

can recall many, many years in which the subject of the 

Workers’ Compensation Board has been included in the 

questions asked by the opposition during the consideration of 

the Department of Labour’s estimates. So it continues to do 

that. 

 

It also voluntarily appears before the Crown Corporations 

Committee when any question at all could be asked, and indeed 

many have been asked. I don’t see why it would be important to 

this member that the board appear not before one committee but 

two. I don’t understand what would be the purpose of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, in 1993 this government made 

changes to The Workers’ Compensation Act establishing that 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, which is in essence the 

cabinet, may make regulations setting out guidelines for the 

decisions . . . making decisions by the board. So clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, government does oversee the Workers’ Compensation 

Board. That’s the end of the story. 

 

The people of this province who are injured on the job deserve 

and demand accountability. After all, if the Workers’ 

Compensation Board is not accountable to government, where 

are the workers supposed to go for assistance? Is this just one 

more step this NDP government is taking to distance itself from 

any responsibility and any accountability for anything? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the member is going to 

ask those written questions no matter what kind of an answer I 

give. That’s obvious. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the board is accounting, to use . . . 

to the people of this province, as the member used that very 

term, in a way in which it never has before, by appearing before 

the Crown Corporations Committee — a committee of this 

legislature, a very distinguished committee — and by 

submitting itself to any questions that any member of that 

committee has to ask of it. 

 

Now if that isn’t accounting, I’d like to know what is. And if 

one committee is not enough, is two enough? Should we think 

of three or four or five? Really, we have to be practical about 

these things. Every member of this House is busy. We don’t 

need to go duplicating things from committee to committee.  

  



1400  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

Surely it’s enough to appear before one. 

 

But let me say, Mr. Speaker, the board is prepared to observe 

whatever its legal obligations are, and if the legal advice that is 

received by the committee is to the effect that it has to appear 

before the Public Accounts Committee, it is more than happy to 

do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance). 

 

Mr. Minister, the Government of Manitoba recently initiated a 

public review of their no-fault insurance program. This review 

was a commitment made by the Filmon government when they 

first introduced the no-fault insurance program. They are 

following through on that commitment now. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Manitoba government is willing to admit that 

their no-fault insurance program isn’t perfect and they are 

seeking public input on how the system could be improved. Mr. 

Minister, will you initiate a public review of the no-fault 

insurance program here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to respond to the member from Kindersley by indicating 

to him that we implemented in Saskatchewan a no-fault 

insurance program in 1995 after extensive review and study of 

the type of program that we wanted to see in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think what the member needs to recognize is that in Manitoba 

the no-fault insurance program there was introduced a year in 

advance of us. We have always said in Saskatchewan that in the 

preparation for looking at the future of what the no-fault 

program might be here, we would be examining that through a 

window of approximately five years. With the implementation 

of the program beginning in 1995, it’s always been our 

commitment that we would have a formal review of the 

program some time within that period. 

 

At this point in time, there are a number of things that are 

occurring throughout the province. Just recently, we completed 

the final stages of getting the tertiary care services in place. 

Some of our secondary care services or support services at the 

regional centres are just being established. When that program 

has a bit of time behind them, rest assured that that program 

will be evaluated on those bases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, five years is a long time to wait for many residents in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Carol and Jan Markwart’s case 

is well-known. They lost a daughter, sir, their well-being, and 

much, much more. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is only in extreme cases that criminal charges  

are ever laid against a driver. Usually that driver is drunk, or 

driving in a way that is dangerous to the public. And charges 

are laid only in about 5 per cent of all traffic accidents. 

 

Charges were laid in this case against the driver that hit the 

Markwarts yet your government took away their right to sue 

and their right to dignity. Mr. Minister, your no-fault system has 

failed the Markwarts, as it has failed many other Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you review . . . begin a review today, rather 

than waiting five years from now, review your no-fault system 

and give back the right to sue to the 5 per cent of victims where 

criminal charges were laid against the other drivers? Will you 

do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to respond to the member from 

Moosomin by indicating clearly to the member, as I’ve already 

outlined in my previous statement, that the review of the 

no-fault program will happen in a formal way sometime in the 

period that we have identified. But to also advise the member 

from Moosomin that we continue to monitor the progress of the 

no-fault insurance program in Saskatchewan on an individual 

basis. 

 

It’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that any time that a family or an 

individual is involved in a car crash, there is a great deal of 

trauma and certainly a great deal of crisis that families 

experience. And we appreciate that and understand that. In the 

process of working through the no-fault program, what we 

have, Mr. Speaker . . . is initiated a number of support services 

across the province to help individuals and families through that 

process. 

 

And I say to the member opposite that in Saskatchewan, we 

treat people who are involved in drinking and driving offences 

in a very, very serious fashion. And the results around, certainly 

the Markwart case, are difficult and we’ve met with them on a 

number of occasions. But the individual who was involved in 

the accident, the ambulance driver, is currently being dealt, as 

we read, by the court system. And in Saskatchewan, drinking 

drivers are dealt with in a very harsh manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

if you think no-fault insurance is working so well, then you 

obviously haven’t been listening to some of the people whose 

lives have been devastated. 

 

Brenda Kienas of Grenfell was seriously injured in an accident 

last year and she can’t afford to wait for five years. At the time 

she was just finishing her education to become a nurse’s aide. 

She already had a job lined up after she completed her training. 

But as a result of her injuries, she was unable to take that job. 

 

Mr. Minister, she is not being compensated for her loss of 

income from that job. She’s only receiving a small loss of 

studies benefit. Mr. Minister, students who are injured receive 

only a small benefit with no compensation for a lifetime of lost 

earnings. Is that fair? Isn’t it something that should be looked at 

as part of a public review of no-fault insurance? 

 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

But I want to assure the member that in the implementation of 

the no-fault program in Saskatchewan, when he makes 

comparisons, and he calls for the old tort system to come back 

into its origin again . . . And I want to just say to the member 

that there are some people who hold that view, but there are 

many others who do not hold that view. 

 

And just recently I met with a group of individuals from Prince 

Albert, and some of them are here today. And the individual 

who was the spokesman for that group, Mr. Member, indicates 

here that he said that the group is not necessarily looking for a 

return to the tort system, is his quote, where legal claims were 

launched against the drivers with no fault necessary. 

 

And I say to the member that when you take a look at the 

personal injury protection program today and all of the benefits 

it provides over the tort system, they’re extensive. And I can 

read some of those to you. 

 

For example, Mr. Member, I want to say to you that students in 

particular, who receive a maximum of $13,000 for each school 

year they miss, under the old program that was $75 a week for a 

period of 52 weeks. 

 

This is a significant increase in that particular area as referred to 

the student alone. The other benefits are related to that where 

we’ve provided for medical services which are well over 

$500,000 as compared to 10, and the program isn’t working 

fully but . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

Marilyn and Stan Fabish from Prince Albert had the unfortunate 

luck of being in a car accident on January 1, 1995, the first day 

your ill-conceived no-fault took effect. A couple of weeks after 

their accident your government hired people to follow the 

Fabishes and videotape them. We understand you have many 

families under surveillance right now. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you paying someone a good deal of 

money just days after an accident to see if you can get out of 

compensating them. It’s not like this was a year after the 

accident and you questioned the injuries and pain. You are 

probably paying SGI secret police more money than it would 

cost you to be fair to these families in the first place. The 

Fabishes are now on social assistance, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, if your no-fault system is fair, why are people 

who were employed forced to rely on social service assistance? 

Why is that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I want to respond to the member 

from Rosthern by indicating to him, first that I’m not in the 

position to share with the member all of the details as they 

relate to the particular cases that we work with. But if the 

member wishes to pursue that through, in this case the Fabishes, 

certainly he is free to do that, and they can provide him with the 

kind of detail on which we’ve provided them on this particular 

case. 

But I want to assure the member from Rosthern that the fact 

that we have surveillance officers today that are working within 

the corporation of SGI, doing examinations as to see whether or 

not people are in fact using the system in an inappropriate 

fashion, that’s not new, Mr. Member. Those surveillance people 

have been there forever. And we haven’t added any additional 

members to that. We don’t employ any more surveillance 

officers than we did in the past. It continues to be the way in 

which we do business and ensure that people who are on the 

program have entitlements into a further period. 

 

You asked me the question earlier about whether or not the 

program is working fully. Well of course there are things that 

we can do to improve the quality of the program. And we’re 

doing that as time goes on. We’ll always ensure that we can 

enhance that and make sure that the program can be as strong 

that we can make it for the residents of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, indeed you are correct. Your 

no-fault insurance program isn’t working very well. There are 

dozens of examples of people whose lives have been devastated 

as a result of your no-fault insurance program. A group of those 

people have banded together to form the victims for no-fault 

insurance support group. They are calling for your no-fault 

insurance plan to be amended to include a victims’ bill of 

rights. 

 

Mr. Minister, the victims of no-fault insurance have some very 

good ideas about what they want to see in that victims’ bill of 

rights. These amendments could be developed through a public 

review of the no-fault system just like what is taking place in 

Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that your no-fault insurance 

program isn’t working well? Will you initiate a review of the 

no-fault insurance system and commit to developing a victims’ 

bill of rights? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I want to first of all indicate to the 

member, as I already did his colleague, that I had an 

opportunity to meet with the coalition in Prince Albert. And 

when I met with the coalition from Prince Albert, I quoted a 

couple of minutes ago what the Chair of that particular 

committee indicated. And what he said is that he wasn’t 

necessarily concerned about the change in the no-fault system 

back to the tort. 

 

Where the major concern was, Mr. Member, is the fact around 

the rehabilitation services. Currently we put in, in the 

neighbourhood of $25 million into rehabilitation for people who 

are injured with soft tissue in this province. That is more than 

anywhere else in the country. 

 

We have a working relationship today with the World Health 

Organization to ensure that we can monitor the progress of this 

program into the future. Furthermore we had a university study 

that’s being undertaken as we speak today, that will report in  

  



1402  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

about 10 months, that will identify for us the kinds of progress 

that individuals who are involved in car crashes are subject to. 

And we’ll report that. 

 

And later this day we’re going to be involved with Mr. Rick 

Hansen in terms of ensuring that into the future we’ll be able to 

provide additional revenue for them as it relates to soft-tissue 

injuries across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agricultural Credit Corporation Bills 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A number of 

farmers have contacted my office after receiving letters from 

the Agriculture Corporation of Saskatchewan and what ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) is doing is 

requesting that they make good payment on their outstanding 

crop insurance balance. 

 

In essence the NDP government, which is, of course, in the 

process of winding down ACS, is now trying to collect from 

farmers who received GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

bills under the GRIP wind-up program. Will the Minister of 

Agriculture tell us today how many farmers have received 

letters from Ag Credit and how much money has AC been 

assigned to collect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s 

question, ACS is doing some of the collections in that area. The 

process is the same; if there’s an outstanding bill for crop 

insurance, whether it be from GRIP or from Crop Insurance, it’s 

handled in exactly the same manner as it has always been 

handled because Crop Insurance does the administration. 

 

And this is a process of just being responsible to taxpayers by 

collecting money that’s due and owning to the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I don’t know. If the member’s suggesting, 

if the member’s suggesting that we shouldn’t do that, then I 

would ask him what he would suggest we do for outstanding 

bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course the 

problem started back when this government broke a contract 

back in the early ’90s and introduced retroactive legislation 

which of course is before the courts at this very time. 

 

It was compounded by a promise in this House by the former 

Agriculture minister, Darrel Cunningham, who said that farmers 

would not have to repay any bills and of course they could have 

done that by paying out the $188 million that this government 

stole from farmers, and the farmers that got payments could 

have gotten more. 

 

Can the minister tell us today whether he’s trying to collect this 

money before the court settlement appears. So that after that 

time, if the court goes against them, they won’t be able to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite  

can dramatize all he wants by accusing the government of 

stealing. 

 

Does the local co-op steal from farmers when they collect their 

bills from farmers? Is that what he is insinuating? Does the 

local fertilizer dealer steal from farmers when he collects his 

bills? I don’t think so. This is a process we’ve gone through. 

 

But you talk about stealing, you talk about stealing, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll tell you who the thief is around here — $320 

million a year the federal Liberal government cuts out of this 

province. Every year. Every year. $250 million dollars a year in 

the safety net funding — cut. 

 

Talk about the cost recovery for inspection and grading fees. 

Cost recover for pesticide registration. Cuts to PAWBED 

(Partnership Agreement on Water Based Economic 

Development); cutting PAWBED and PARD (Partnership 

Agreement on Rural Development), Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you 

what — if you add up all the dollars, if you add up all the 

dollars that Jean Chrétien and Ralph Goodale have taken from 

this province, from the pockets of the farmers of this province, 

it would be in the area by the year 2000 of well over a billion 

dollars. Now that’s thievery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, 

The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 64, 

The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced 

and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, to request . . . or to advise that 

after consultation with the opposition party and the third party, 

that we have come to an agreement that this afternoon we 

should proceed directly to Bill 221 followed by Bill 228, and 

then go to government business. 

 

So I respectfully now request leave that we proceed to private 

members’ second readings, Bill 221 . . . pardon me, 211. I 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

 correct that to Bill 211. 

 

The Speaker:  I will ask the hon. member again. There 

doesn’t seem to be crystal clarity here as to what leave is being 

requested — order — and in order for the House to provide 

leave, it has to clearly know what leave is being requested. And 

I will recognize on that point the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I thank you for the leave, Mr. Speaker, but I 

believe that before we go to leave on that, we should be going 

through the private Bills, which I neglected to mention. So I 

would request that the leave take place after we finish the 

private Bills under Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Speaker:  Requesting then leave to go to Bills 211 and 

228 at that time? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  That’s right. 

 

The Speaker:  Okay, the question for which the Government 

Whip requests leave is that following consideration of private 

Bills, Committee of the Whole, that the House will then 

proceed directly to second readings, private members’ Bills No. 

211 and 228. Leave is required. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The Chair:  Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might 

through you request leave of the members of the Assembly to 

make two introductions. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, 

and members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s my great honour 

to introduce to the members of the House a very special guest in 

our legislature today who has just arrived. And of course I’m 

referring to Mr. Rick Hansen, whose “Man in Motion World 

Tour” touched our hearts and our spirits 10 years ago. 

 

It’s nice to see Rick here with his group. Welcome to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, Rick Hansen wheeled 

almost 25,000 miles through 34 countries to raise awareness 

about spinal cord injuries, demonstrating courage, 

determination, and vision. He also raised $20 million, creating a 

legacy which funds spinal cord research, rehabilitation, 

wheelchair sports, awareness, and education. 

You’d think in one lifetime, 25,000 miles in 34 countries and 

$20 million plus would be enough. Yet Rick Hansen’s 

commitment and selfless dedication seem to know no bounds. 

May 22 marks the 10th anniversary of the “Man in Motion 

World Tour,” and throughout those 10 years, our special guest 

has worked continuously to better the lives of survivors of 

spinal cord and brain injuries. 

 

He is currently promoting the Rick Hansen neurotrauma fund, 

an initiative which will support research, rehabilitation, and 

prevention of these catastrophic injuries. And I’ve had the 

pleasure of talking to him about this. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and members of the House, it was Helen Keller 

who once said the following, quote, “Although the world is full 

of suffering, it is full also of the overcoming of it.” 

 

Rick Hansen, we are truly honoured and inspired by your 

accomplishments. You have shown us that any problem can be 

overcome by courage, determination, and dedication to a higher 

ideal. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I know everyone in this House will join me 

today in welcoming truly, truly a great, outstanding Canadian 

citizen of the world, Mr. Rick Hansen. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I should be introducing others, but I 

have one additional introduction, Mr. Chair, if I may, while I’m 

on my feet; to introduce to you and to the House another guest. 

Patricia Harrison is the executive director of the Saskatchewan 

branch of the Canadian Paraplegic Association. 

 

Ms. Harrison also chairs the provincial Neurotrauma Initiative 

Steering Committee, which has been actively promoting 

research, rehabilitation, and prevention of spinal cord injuries 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. She’s joining Rick 

Hansen and will be present with us in an announcement in a 

short few minutes outside of the Chamber. 

 

Again, Mr. Chairman, I’d like all members of the House to join 

me today in welcoming Patricia Harrison as well to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Is the . . . 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With leave, to introduce guests as well. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The official 

opposition would like to join with the Premier and applaud Rick 

Hansen’s commitment to raise the level of public and 

government awareness about the increasing number of brain 

and spinal cord injuries which occur every year because of 

automobile accidents. 

 

Over the last 10 years Rick has made a major contribution to 

  



1404  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

 Canadian society through his efforts. And I can say with great 

conviction that it is people like Rick, with such caring hearts 

and strong determination, that make Canada such a great place 

to live. 

 

Rick wants everyone to realize that there is a definite 

connection between brain and spinal injuries and automobile 

accidents. This is a very serious problem which not only causes 

a great deal of pain but costs a great deal of money. Every year 

37,000 new brain and spinal injuries occur in Canada because 

of car accidents. Each year these injuries cost the nation $37 

billion. 

 

Fortunately for people who suffer from such injuries, Rick has 

set his goal high. He will be asking all of the provincial 

governments to dedicate a percentage of traffic fines into a fund 

to support prevention, rehabilitation, and research for spinal 

cord injuries. He has already gone a long way to reaching this 

goal and I’m very pleased to see that the Premier will be 

making an announcement very soon. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, welcome to Saskatchewan 

and thank you very much for all you’ve done for Canadians. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Is the member for Moosomin requesting leave to 

introduce quests? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Leave to welcome guests, yes please. 

 

The Chair:  Do I hear agreed? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s certainly a 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly and extend another welcome. 

I had the privilege of, almost 10 years ago . . . Actually more 

than 10 years ago, and it was February. The snow was blowing 

and the former premier and I happened to be in a caucus 

meeting in Cypress and we flew in to Moosomin to meet Mr. 

Hansen, his “Man in Motion Tour.” And the interesting thing, 

Mr. Chairman, is we flew by plane and we heard that Mr. 

Hansen was on the way by No. 1, just outside of Elkhorn. And 

we’re figuring okay, they said he should arrive at the border at 

such and such a time, and “Man in Motion” with wheelchair, 

you kind of factor that out. Well he arrived from Elkhorn ahead 

of the premier and I, and we drove from Moosomin about the 

same distance; so it just showed the determination. 

 

And I think certainly it was a real pleasure to meet Mr. Hansen 

and his entourage. And to just get to know an individual who 

didn’t give up because of circumstances, but decided to look 

ahead and to elevate himself. And as a result there’s many 

hundreds of thousands of people are going to be helped in the 

future, as a result of this. 

 

And we want to say thank you to you, Mr. Hansen, and to 

everyone else involved in . . . to Patricia Harrison as well. It’s 

certainly, I think, has elevated individuals who through no fault 

of their own have certain handicaps. It has basically said to the  

rest of us in society, we’re important individuals as well. And 

we thank you for that message you passed on to us. We 

certainly welcome you again to our province. And it’s a 

pleasure meeting you and having the privilege of getting to 

know you. Best wishes in your future endeavours. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 301 — The Lutheran Church-Canada, 

Central District Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 302 — The Bank of Nova Scotia 

Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 301  The Lutheran Church-Canada, 

Central District Act 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

301, The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District Act be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 302 – The Bank of Nova Scotia 

Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Bill No. 302, The Bank 

of Nova Scotia Trust Company Act, 1997 be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill 211 — The Gambling Addiction Accountability Act 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m very happy and pleased to have the opportunity to 

debate this particular Bill in the House today. 

 

At the present, I’d just like to start off by saying that the cost of 

providing many of the addiction services for gambling 

addiction are borne by the health districts, which are walking a 

very fine financial tightrope. And it only makes sense, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the department which benefits financially 

should also be accountable for the social costs associated with 

treating and rehabilitating the victims of its activity. 

 

Basically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re asking the 

government to do through this Bill is, finally, at long last, to 

take some responsibility for its actions. 

 

For most of the last two years, I’ve sat in this House and have 

seen the members opposite time and time again act as if they 

should not be held responsible for anything that happens in this 

province. Whether it’s municipal government, whether it’s 

health care, whether it’s youth crime, or whether it’s education 

— this government simply refuses to accept the responsibility 

for its own actions. The members see no reason that they should 

be held accountable for the actions of their government. 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan disagree. I respectfully 

submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

simply do not accept the government’s constant excuses that 

nothing that’s bad in this province is not their responsibility. 

 

Sure, a corner store opens up in a small town anywhere and the 

Minister of Economic Development will stand here and take the 

credit. But anything negative is quickly sloughed off onto the 

nearest convenient scapegoat. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that leadership? Of course it 

isn’t. Is that the type of government the people of Saskatchewan 

should expect or deserve? Of course it isn’t. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill I have brought before the House 

simply asks the government to recognize that it has some 

responsibility when it comes to gambling. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to take up the House time 

today debating the relative merits or harmful effects of 

gambling in our province. Quite frankly, that debate was settled 

when this government decided to open the floodgates to 

gambling four years ago. 

 

VLTs (video lottery terminal) and casinos are now a reality in 

Saskatchewan. And until the people of the province tell us 

otherwise, gambling will remain a reality in Saskatchewan, as it 

is in most other provinces. And for obvious reasons, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the government certainly wants it to continue. 

 

VLTs have proven to be a cash cow for this provincial treasury. 

And while we constantly hear the government cry and moan 

about the 1.5 per cent of their revenue they’ve lost through 

transfer reductions, one thing they don’t publicize is the fact 

that this loss is more than offset by the money they collect 

through gambling. 

 

That’s revenue that was non-existent before 1993, and it’s 

growing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last year this government netted 

$100 million in VLT profits. This year the Minister of Finance 

is predicting $127 million in profits. So obviously either more 

people are playing the VLTs in Saskatchewan or those who are 

playing them are spending more. 

 

(1445) 

 

Whatever the reason for this huge growth in gambling, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the government gleefully rakes in the money 

hand over fist. It’s happy to take charge of the benefits of its 

gambling expansion policy. But when it comes to the other side 

of the coin, when it comes to the dark side of gambling, we 

don’t hear a peep from that side of the House. 

 

I don’t think there’s a reasonable person in this province who 

would suggest that the mega-increase in gambling in 

Saskatchewan in the last four years has not had a negative 

impact on a portion of our population. 

 

I gambled and lost everything — a familiar refrain in this 

province; although this government appears oblivious to the 

cries for help from its residents. I’m talking about those who 

have become addicted to gambling because of VLTs, which 

many see as the most addictive of all gambling enterprises. 

 

Of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what direct impact VLTs have 

had on our citizens in Saskatchewan is not known. That’s 

because the government opposite absolutely refuses to do any 

kind of a study to find out what the impact has been. 

 

Here it sits, day after day, month after month, year after year, 

raking in huge, huge gambling profits, yet it refuses to do a 

social impact study on the issue. 

 

And why would that be, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well I have some 

ideas why that I’d like to share with you: because those 

members know that if they were to do such a study they would 

have to own up to the negative impacts that gambling has had 

on some segments of our society. 

 

It’s shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely shameful. 

However, for now and until the government finally takes some 

responsibility for its actions and conducts both a social and 

economic impact study regarding the effect of gambling, we’ll 

have the numbers provided to us from other groups. 

 

The most comprehensive study I’ve seen on this matter so far, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that put out by the National Council on 

Welfare. That study tells us something very startling. That study 

tells us that there could be 20,000 or more problem gamblers 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 20,000 

people that could lose everything they have to their addiction. 

And it’s the government’s responsibility to ensure that they are 

properly treated; that there are programs and facilities available. 

 

Currently the government funds through the health districts 

gambling addition therapy of about $1.5 million — $1.5 million 

only. Considering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this  

  



1406  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

government takes in over $125 million in VLTs, that to me 

sounds like a pitiful amount to treat addictions. 

 

But we can argue that particular issue another day. My 

argument here today is centred on which department’s budget 

the money to treat gambling addictions should come out of. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not believe this money should come 

out of existing health budgets — they are stressed enough — 

not when we have hospitals and health centres closing, nurses 

laid off and large areas of our province now going without 

primary health care. It is incumbent upon the government to 

make sure the people who develop gambling addictions receive 

treatment — proper treatment. 

 

However, let’s have the department that receives the benefit of 

gambling pay for those costs. This will ensure that the costs of 

gambling addiction will come out of the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority’s bottom line instead of the budget of the Department 

of Health — or more importantly, the budgets of health districts 

who, despite the Minister of Health’s assertions, continue to 

close beds and close facilities. 

 

And with this Bill, the true costs of treating those addicted to 

gambling will be seen in black and white instead of an 

indistinguishable expense of the health districts. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know how 

much money the government takes in through gambling. They 

should also have the right to see what that policy costs this 

province, it costs the taxpayers of this province. This Bill is 

simply one small step in that direction. It does not deal with 

several other issues that are of grave concern to us. It does not 

deal with the money that is leaving our communities by the 

truck load. At the same time this money is leaving our 

communities, they are also forced to deal with the devastating 

cut-backs thrust upon them by the Municipal Affairs minister. 

 

We debated a Bill in this House last week that would have seen 

the government forced to live up to its promise to return 10 per 

cent to the communities. And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this government opposite voted against that Bill. I fully expect 

the government will also vote against this Bill, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but I hope that for once those members opposite will 

take some responsibility for their policies and vote in favour of 

this change. 

 

It’s a small change that would mean a great deal to all the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. You can’t only enjoy the benefits of 

gambling, you also have to acknowledge its consequences. All 

the members opposite and this government has done now is 

reap the benefits and not give anything back. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after voting in favour 

of this Bill, the members opposite will finally come to their 

senses and immediately implement a full-scale study regarding 

the impact of gambling on the people and the communities of 

this great province of ours. 

 

If we are to have gambling in Saskatchewan we simply need to 

know how it has affected our province. To simply turn a blind  

eye, as this government has, is the height of irresponsibility, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m asking, I’m pleading with the 

government members today, for once to take some 

responsibility. The people of Saskatchewan elected you to be 

responsible, to be accountable. That’s the challenge I throw out 

to you today. Are you willing to accept it? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to move second reading of Bill 

211, The Gambling Addiction Accountability Act. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 

great pleasure that I enter into the discussion today on this 

government’s lack of accountability and their failure to 

acknowledge the responsibility for insufficient funding of 

gambling addictions in this province. There have been so many 

times I’ve stood in the House and listened to this government 

and been totally appalled by the decision not to take 

responsibility for anything that happens in the province. They 

hide behind school boards, they hide behind health boards, they 

hide behind municipal boards. For goodness’ sakes, you even 

hide behind the Tories. 

 

This government . . . the government members this morning 

even stooped so low as to wonder if they could use a 

jurisdictional challenge to make sure they didn’t have to be 

responsible to employees and employers in the province 

through workmen’s compensation  any excuse so they don’t 

have to take responsibility for their action or their inactions. But 

I do digress. 

 

The whole issue of gambling, and what’s more, the money that 

is brought in from this pastime, is this government’s unearned 

ticket to any perceived financial success in the province. It’s a 

form of taxation that people don’t object to because it’s a type 

of sin tax. Wrapped in the pretty package with all the bells and 

whistles, gambling revenues have been the only form of 

taxation on the people of this province that haven’t been 

complained about because it isn’t compulsory. 

 

Unlike every other method this government uses to gouge the 

last nickel out of the million of us die-hard Saskatchewanians 

who refuse to leave the province no matter how hard the 

government beats us, gambling is a personal choice. I choose 

not to partake in it so they won’t get rich from me. 

 

But, hon. members, gambling is not unlike an addiction to some 

other habits like smoking and alcohol. It’s not a habit people are 

proud to have, and it’s not a habit that’s easy to kick. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, unlike smoking and alcohol addictions, 

gambling does not cause apparent health problems. Gamblers 

don’t have an increased chance of lung cancer or liver problems 

or heart attacks. 

 

Our medical system does not refuse medical coverage to anyone 

because their health problem is a result of an addiction. That’s 

just not the Saskatchewan way, and it’s not the Canadian way 

of dealing with our citizens. And for that I’m very proud. 

 

We don’t question why people need health care. It’s recognized 

as a responsibility of society. But in this province the  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

responsibility of health care has failed to take the next logical 

step, and that is to cover mental health care to the same extent. 

 

I realize it is not just mental health care required to deal with 

gambling addictions that this government is failing to address. 

There is a long way to go if our society is to see all the mental 

health problems as major problems. Maybe we are all too 

practical or simplistic or naïve to realize that just because 

someone isn’t bleeding all over the floor, it doesn’t mean there 

isn’t a huge health problem involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this province the government is raking in 

hundreds of millions of dollars from a tax on citizens who have 

a type of health problem. The pittance of money that is thrown 

at these people with this particular health problem is first of all, 

an insult when you consider that less than one and a half per 

cent of the money they contribute to the government coffers 

actually goes back to help solve their particular problem. The 

rest of it is earmarked for the government’s own gambling 

problem. 

 

The real insult is the fact that the money comes in the Health 

department’s budget, not the Liquor and Gaming department. 

How much of the money in each health district is actually used 

for the treatment of gaming addictions, and where is that 

accountability? And where, for Heaven’s sake, is the logic in 

using health dollars when it should be gambling dollars? And a 

lot more of them, I may suggest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  I can hear the members opposite defending this 

action by saying all the money goes into one account. The 

money goes into the General Revenue Fund and it’s dispersed 

from there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I think they 

should give their head a shake. 

 

The addicted gamblers in this province have to rely on the few 

members opposite to decide during the budget process how 

important their problem is, and how much money should be 

spent to alleviate the problem, if in the first place the 

government wants to alleviate the problem. 

 

There is nothing tying the amount of money taken in with the 

amount of money that’s going out to help people with this 

health problem. And, Mr. Speaker, just as importantly, there’s 

been no effort put forward by this government to undertake any 

type of study of the effect increased gambling has on our 

society from a social or an economical aspect. And my question 

is why? Any government, especially a social government who 

supposedly stands up for the social issues of this province, the 

great white knights and the defender of people’s rights and 

freedoms — the actions are better put, their lack of actions — to 

address the social issues caused by the government’s own 

gambling addiction has added to the problems of gambling in 

this province. 

 

And this government is again not willing to take responsibility 

for their actions. They are again willing to take from citizens 

and not give the service or provide for a need that is growing 

because of a government policy. 

The hon. member from Melville has repeatedly asked this 

government to act like a man and recognize their responsibility. 

And it hasn’t done any good. So maybe, just maybe, I should 

challenge them to act like women and actually do something 

about the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  This government loves to rule by regulations. 

So I’d like to suggest that if they can’t support our member’s 

Bill, they should just write up another one of the little 

regulations and make it mandatory that the Liquor and Gaming 

fund contribute directly to each health board, and set a 

percentage of the revenues they gouge from the people who pay 

gambling tax to the province and to the district health boards. I 

won’t even suggest the percentage. It probably won’t be enough 

and it’ll be just one more thing we have to fix when we become 

government in 1999. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a distinct 

pleasure to enter into this debate today, to correct the many 

inaccuracies represented by the members opposite. 

 

I have to say, just before I get started, I am amazed at how 

inept, incompetent, and inaccurate that opposition can be. We 

have gone through this debate now for two different 

legislatures. Now I know that members opposite wouldn’t 

recognize that, because the only continuity they had they booted 

out of their caucus and is now sitting as an independent. But let 

me tell you, let me just tell you a little bit about where we came 

from. 

 

There was a time not that many years ago when this Assembly 

was debating these very issues. And the member for Greystone, 

who was Liberal leader number one at that point — and I just 

will refer to them by number because the member for Melville 

is the Liberal leader number two. I think we are on Liberal 

leader number four or five by now — but let me tell you this. 

That member would stand up and not raise a concern that 

gambling was an evil.  

 

This is a new position for the Liberal Party. This is a new 

position. And I would argue it’s an intellectually dishonest 

position because all they say is, we would do it differently. 

That’s all they say, is that we would just do it a little differently. 

 

Well let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. Before they do it 

differently they should understand what we are doing. We are 

the first government in 25 years of regulated gambling in this 

province to recognize that it causes addiction and to put the 

money in place to support those people. The first government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, when the Thatcher government 

introduced gambling into this province, they didn’t put a penny 

in. Not a cent. When the Tories were in office and radically  

  



1408  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

expanded gambling to allow 16-year-olds into the bingo 

parlours, not a penny was put in to support addictions. This 

New Democratic government recognizes its responsibilities and 

has anted up the money to make sure the people’s health and 

well-being is protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate when 

the members opposite stand up and play politics with illnesses. 

Because let’s be honest. That’s what this is. Granted it affects a 

very small number of people. Pathological addiction to 

gambling is a very, very small affliction in our population. 

 

It would make sense that we would treat addictive personality 

behaviours like this, that are a result of gambling, like alcohol, 

in the same way. Why would we not treat it as a health 

affliction? Why would we not fund it through the health 

system? Why would we not provide for these people to get 

treatment through the normal mechanisms? That’s a simple 

question. 

 

When we went through this debate a few year ago, the rationale 

was, is that this is an illness and should be treated as such. I 

want to make sure the members opposite understand this. 

Because I look at the member from North Battleford sitting in 

the back row giggling. Obviously he’s just playing politics with 

this. Obviously just playing politics; there’s no real concern 

here. 

 

We undertook a prevalency study to find out what the nature of 

addiction was in this province before we went into this. And 

what it said was, less than a tenth of a per cent of people 

became pathologically addicted to gambling. Unbelievable 

small amount. But nevertheless, our response as a government 

was to provide more money per capita, more money per capita 

than any other jurisdiction in Canada. And that is something we 

should all recognize; it’s something we should all recognize. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s also important that we take into 

account what this member opposite is recommending. He says 

that we should separately account for this. I say to you, why 

would we do that? Why we would not continue to provide all of 

the funds that we gain from alcohol, from gaming, from other 

sources, so that they can be dedicated to health and education 

and social programs. So they can make sure that families are 

supported. So they can provide for better social well-being in 

this province. 

 

Though I can understand why the Liberals would oppose that, 

because the Liberals’ platform has always been to cut funding 

to health care, to cut funding to education, to cut funding to 

social programs. And that’s what that member opposite 

supports. 

 

It’s interesting that he complains about the $125 million that 

comes from Saskatchewan people. He says it’s a huge amount, 

but he says that the 250 million that the federal Liberals have 

cut from social programs is nothing, absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on for some time on this today, but I  

figure what we should do is simply defeat this Bill and move 

along. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the member requesting to close 

debate? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Yes I am, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Then it is my duty to inform 

members of the House that the mover is about to close debate 

and if anyone wishes to speak, they will have to do it now. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have just 

heard a member opposite, the member from Regina South, that 

exemplifies — exemplifies — the utter arrogance and disdain 

that this government has for the people of Saskatchewan. One 

of their own cabinet ministers rallied against gambling 

expansion in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that 

member has the gall to get up and accuse the Liberals of 

playing politics with this very serious situation. 

 

Close to 20,000 people could be addicted to gambling in this 

province. We are asking that they support us in identifying the 

money that’s being raked in from rural Saskatchewan and 

devote it and dedicate it to help those people that these 

gambling policies of this government have contributed to. 

That’s what we’re asking, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ten per cent of the VLTs that were to be returned by this 

government was a promise that they refused to adhere to. That 

shows the utter arrogance and disdain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

this government opposite has for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

Bill No. 228 — The Saskatchewan Big Game Damage 

Compensation Fee Act 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to address this particular Bill, the big game 

damage compensation fee Act, as it’s a very important issue 

across Saskatchewan, but particularly in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, because that is where the damage is being felt, 

that is where the farmers are losing. 

 

But it’s across Saskatchewan that individual hunters are paying 

for this particular program that the government implemented 

last year as a stopgap measure to take some pressure off of 

themselves to compensate farmers for the losses they were 

suffering through deer depredations mainly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government imposed a fee of $11 per hunting 

tag on all hunters, when they bought their wildlife habitat 

certificate, to pay for this damage. It was only hunters, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that had to pay this fee. 

 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

Everyone in society has an opportunity to enjoy our wildlife 

resources. We all have an opportunity to go out walking in the 

spring and summer to look at the deer, to see the fawns; in the 

fall to look at the big bucks. But only hunters were making 

direct monetary contributions to pay for any of the damages that 

the Queen’s cows — the white-tailed deer of this province — 

were causing to farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hunters were making the direct financial 

contributions. But farmers were paying an even greater cost, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they were suffering the losses. 

They did have an opportunity to try and access this fund that the 

government had just put in place, but to start off with, they had 

to prove they had damages, they had to pay a $500 deductible, 

and then they were compensated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at a rate 

of 70 per cent of crop insurance rates. Even after paying the 

deductible, Mr. Speaker, they could not recover the full cost of 

their damages. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was only two groups in society that were 

paying for the damage caused by the Crown’s animals, the 

Queen’s cows — hunters and farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe that is totally wrong, and that’s why we have 

introduced this particular Bill. We believe that society as a 

whole should be paying for the costs of this damage, Mr. 

Speaker, not the farmers as individuals, and not hunters as 

individuals; that the compensation should be coming from the 

government general revenues; that all members of society 

should be paying for this. 

 

What happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the government 

implemented their $11 fee to collect the funds to provide for 

this compensation program? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we saw was a net reduction in the 

number of people hunting. It dropped by approximately 11,000 

hunters. So at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the government 

lost money. While they charged $11 more for hunting licences, 

because there were so many less hunters, they ended up at the 

end of the day with less money in their coffers than they had to 

start off with. 

 

But what they did do though, Mr. Speaker, is they had started 

up another dedicated fund. Now I happen to believe that there is 

some value in dedicated funds. I’d like to see that same kind of 

dedication made to our fuel taxes and highways. 

 

But the government opposite keeps saying no, we cannot have 

dedicated taxation. But in wildlife, under the big game 

compensation fees, we have dedicated taxation, Mr. Speaker. 

So it’s only dedicated taxation when the government members 

want there to be dedicated taxation, not when the general public 

believes it’s in their interest. 

 

In fact we have seen another example lately of another 

dedicated taxation. That’s the reconstruction fees within 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. So when the government believes that 

there is some value in those areas, they grab on to them. But 

when the public believes that there is some value, the 

government totally rejects them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government . . . the people have totally 

rejected this $11 fee. Some of them paid it last fall. Not all, 

because some of the collection agencies were unaware that they 

were to charge the $11 fee. Some hunters had picked up their 

licences before the fee was implemented, so not everyone . . . 

So I suggest figures of how much the government lost, which 

was 30-some thousand dollars, that’s assuming everyone paid 

the $11 fee, which did not happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

government has not yet provided us with the actual amount of 

monies they have collected, but at the end of the day, they have 

lost even more than we initially suspected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some alternatives though, to what could 

be done. And we need to look at some of the alternatives, 

because it’s just not the costs to hunters, Mr. Speaker, not just 

the cost to farmers that we’re talking about, but it’s also the cost 

to SGI. 

 

SGI suffers more than 10,000 vehicular accidents with wildlife 

every year, at an average cost of about $1,800 per accident, Mr. 

Speaker, $1,800 for over 10,000 accidents. And of those 10,000 

accidents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 2,000 of them make no 

damage claims because the damage has not exceeded the 

deductible of $500. So the individual owner, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, has to pay the first $500 worth of that damage. And 

then over and above that, SGI still averages $1,800 a claim. 

 

So we are certainly suffering a significant amount of property 

damage to vehicular traffic. We are suffering a great deal of 

damage — 2 to $3 million per year to agricultural lands — and 

those . . . that’s the damage the government admits to. There is 

significantly more damage than that out there that farmers 

simply aren’t claiming for because they realize that to go to the 

government to seek compensation is a futile effort; that the 

government will simply ignore them. 

 

And they have got tired of going to government to try and get 

them to recognize that the damage occurs, because they have 

been rejected year after year since this government has been in 

power. Most farmers have simply given up until they suffer 

severe economic losses and they try to recover some of that. 

And even then, they get only minimal response from the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

But there are other areas that could be looked at, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the alternatives that we need to look at is, rather than 

decreasing hunting, as the $11 fee has done, or decreasing 

hunting as the Liberals’ Bill C-68 has done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we need to look at some means to increase hunting so 

that that lessens the pressure on agricultural lands; it lessens the 

pressure on the animals themselves by providing them with an 

expanded base on which to forage. 

 

Because that’s why they’re on the roads, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

because they’re out there foraging because they can’t access 

forage in the areas around them, because of the pressures from 

other animals. So they go out on the road and they strike . . . 

they are struck by a vehicle. 

 

  



1410  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, one of the alternatives that could be looked at and 

should be looked at has been related to me in a letter sent by the 

Antler River Outfitters from my own constituency. They 

believe that we need to bring more hunters into the area. They 

believe that we need to provide monetary compensation to the 

landowners for the animals on their land that would encourage 

them to participate in a program to enhance that resource while 

still harvesting a greater number of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They have sent a letter to the minister — and I’m hoping the 

minister will respond today — but they have sent a letter to the 

minister requesting that and proposing a pilot project for their 

area that would increase the hunting. It would bring in more 

money for the government. It would bring in more taxes for the 

government by having visitors come in from outside, paying for 

accommodations, gasoline, all the other items that hunters do 

buy as they travel through the area, Mr. Speaker. All of these 

things would aid in providing compensation to the landowners, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so we encourage the minister to take 

a very serious look at this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe the government is wrong with the $11 

compensation fee. It needs to be withdrawn immediately. The 

government will actually net out more money by doing so. 

There’ll be a greater harvest of the resource, which in turn will 

mean less damage, both on agricultural land and to vehicles. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Bill that I have presented 

will address all of those concerns. Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move Bill No. 228, The Saskatchewan 

Big Game Damage Compensation Fee Act be read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It surprises 

me a bit that the member from Cannington didn’t withdraw the 

Bill after talking to farmers and talking to hunters and finding 

out what they really think about the compensation program that 

this government had the courage to put into place. 

 

He did say in his remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that 

I agree with him, and I have to admit to that, and that was the 

federal Liberal government’s Bill C-68, the ill-conceived gun 

control Bill which will have more effect on hunting than 

anything else that we’ve seen in this province, that’s for sure. 

So you know it would have been nice if the federal government 

would have put that money, whatever the cost of that program 

is, into a compensation program, but of course that did not 

happen. 

 

He did make a comment about dedicated taxes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I want to clarify a few things on that. He should be 

aware by now that the compensation program, the wildlife 

compensation program in Saskatchewan, is funded by the 

hunters certainly, but the provincial government is also, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, putting up $2 million in funds to get the 

program going. And we’re happy to say that the federal 

government has finally said that they are going to contribute an 

equal amount to the program as well. So you see it is not strictly 

a user-funded program, but certainly the taxpayers of the 

province of Saskatchewan are contributing as well. 

I would like to speak against the Bill and I would ask at the end 

of my few statements that the members vote against the Bill that 

was brought to the Assembly by the member from Cannington. 

 

The $11 fee on hunting licences, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

something that farmers are very grateful for this year. Because 

as you know, a lot of the crops had to stay out in the fields. We 

had a real terrible fall, lots of snow, lots of rain. And of course 

farmers were not able to get their crops off and a lot of it had to 

stay till this spring. And a lot of those crops were damaged by 

wildlife, deer and elk, and in my area, elk especially. And so 

farmers were very pleased that there was a compensation 

program available to them for this purpose. 

 

Hunters were also pleased in my area, on the most part, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because they could participate and continually 

access to big game hunting in farmers’ fields. Farmers were 

very disappointed that there was very little in the way of 

compensation. With this program now they believe that the 

hunters are participating as a full partner in preventing damage 

to their crops, in taking the adequate amount of game, and thus 

are participating as a full partner. 

 

I had mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the provincial 

government did put $2 million up front to fund the provincial 

program, and there are $600,000 approximately coming in from 

users in hunting fees. My understanding is that, as I mentioned 

earlier, the federal government also will contribute $2 million to 

the program. This will sustain it for many years to come. 

 

The department expects that about $1.5 million will be applied 

for this year. There have been several claims to this point in 

time and there’s likely more coming. 

 

Alberta has a limited program, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba has 

recently enhanced its program, and I want to tell the member 

opposite that hunting fees in Saskatchewan, Alberta, are 

virtually the same. 

 

It’s not to say that this program is absolutely perfect, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Certainly as we go along we’re going to want 

to make improvements to it. And I know that we’ve had some 

concerns stated to us in regards to the deductible of $500 on 

damage to haystack, and certainly something that our 

government will want to look at in the future. 

 

To date there have been approximately 1,800 compensation 

claims; 275 of the 1,800 claims are damages to haystacks. 

Government projects that big game damage compensation 

expenditures, as I mentioned earlier, will be about $1.5 million. 

 

The members on this side of the House believe that we have a 

good program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We don’t need another 

Tory type of program. We need a program that is efficient and 

does the job. It’s a program that basically has one real good 

aspect to it, and that’s the spot-loss coverage. 

 

It encourages farmers to take preventative action as well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And it’s protection for the farmers with the  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

fall that we had, and a fall like that could come again. As you 

know, when NDP governments are in power we get the 

adequate rains that we need for our crops, and so certainly we 

need to protect our farmers. 

 

We need to protect the hunters too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that 

hunters have access to farmers’ land. With the winters that 

we’ve had, wildlife needed food. They were able to eat the 

farmers’ crops though the farmer tried to protect them as best 

they could. But at least in the end they were compensated for 

their loss. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask that this House 

defeat the Bill that the member from Cannington has brought 

forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I must inform the Assembly that the 

mover is about to close debate on this motion and if anyone is 

wishing to speak they will do it now. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise again on this particular debate because I believe 

that the member from Carrot River’s remarks need some 

response. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know which farmers and which 

hunters the member has been talking to, if he’s been talking to 

very many of them. But I have been to a great many wildlife 

suppers and meetings across this province in the last year, 20 or 

30 of them. And, Mr. Speaker, I cannot repeat in this House the 

comments they have made to me about the $11 fee. If I were to 

repeat those comments, I would be thrown out of this House 

and fined $200. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to give this government 

$200 for doing nothing, which is exactly what they’re asking 

hunters to do for the $11 fee. The government is taking the $11 

fee and doing nothing that needs to be done to compensate 

farmers. 

 

The farmers are, Mr. Speaker — I want to find a word that 

expresses their reactions to it — I would like to be able to say 

appreciative, but they’re not appreciative. They accept the 

meagre pittance that this government hands out in 

compensation, Mr. Speaker, because they recognize that that is 

all that agriculture gets from this government, is a pittance. That 

is all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Most farmers, as I mentioned earlier, simply turn up their nose 

to this government when it comes to the pittances that they offer 

because they recognize that it is of very little value — very little 

value. Because when they do provide a compensation they also 

charge them a $500 deductible and then charge them . . . 

provide only 70 per cent. So it becomes a very meagre 

coverage. 

 

The member opposite mentioned Manitoba. At least in 

Manitoba they pay 75 per cent with no deductible. Mr. Speaker, 

at least they’re providing some compensation, where this  

particular government provides very little. 

 

Hunters, for their $11, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m sure you 

recognize this, get about three weeks worth of rifle hunting for 

that $11 compensation plus all the other costs, Mr. Speaker. The 

rest of society gets 52 weeks of the year in which they benefit 

from that resource and they pay very, very little. 

 

The member mentioned that Agriculture put $2 million into the 

compensation program. Well that’s $2 million, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that should have gone to agriculture and to farmers, 

not for wildlife compensation — not for wildlife compensation. 

The $2 million should have remained in farm programs, Mr. 

Speaker, and SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management) should have come up with the money to 

compensate for wildlife. That’s where it should have come 

from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government is the only entity in this 

province that benefits from the sale of wildlife licences. Now 

there are those who hunt without paying for those, but the 

government is the only one who monetarily benefits. They are 

the ones who should be paying the entire cost; not the farmers 

and not the hunters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would encourage everyone in this Assembly to support this 

Bill as being in the best interest of both wildlife and hunters. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I now request leave that we 

proceed toward government business, second readings, item 4, 

Bill 58, The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1530) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58  The Saskatchewan Assistance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise in the House today to move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1997. And the 

Bill that we are . . . the Act that we are amending today, Mr. 

Speaker, is The Saskatchewan Assistance Act, 1966, which is 

indicative that there has not been significant change to the 

social assistance program in the province of Saskatchewan 

since 1966. This is a major undertaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it does give me a great deal of pride to be moving 

this Act. As you will know, this government is committed to 

investing in Saskatchewan people and their future. Since 

becoming government in 1991, we have focused our efforts in 

this area, but now that we have some more limited financial 

room we are also beginning to more and more target our  

  



1412  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

investments into the people of this province. 

 

Over the last number of years we have reformed the health 

system so that it better meets the needs of communities and 

individuals. We’ve developed school-based services that meet 

the specific needs of communities. And we worked in 

partnership with communities to develop the action plan for 

children which supports Saskatchewan’s youth, children, and 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of government, members of the 

Department of Social Services, and myself as minister, have 

spent a great deal of time over the past year talking with 

individuals, meeting with groups, working on the development 

of a redesigned social assistance plan. And now I am pleased to 

be able to say that we are making today a significant step 

towards the implementation of a redesigned social assistance 

program for the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act that is being introduced, that I’m 

seconding today, lays the groundwork, as I indicated earlier, for 

the first re-crafting of social assistance in Saskatchewan in 30 

years. As you know, Mr. Speaker, both the throne and budget 

speeches outlined that the Department of Social Services will, 

within the course of the next year, be announcing the 

implementation plan for the redesigned social assistance 

programs. This redesigned plan will reduce child poverty and 

make work pay for families receiving social assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several aspects of the current social 

assistance system which can discourage people from working or 

pursuing independence. The redesigned system will eliminate 

those disincentives to work and while continuing to support the 

vulnerable, will assist families to become independent. This 

plan will provide a benefit to children of low income families 

and supports to assist low income families to remain in or to 

move into the workforce. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, we all agree the changes to the social 

assistance program are necessary. The changes are happening 

now at the federal and provincial levels. And with the support 

of this and other provinces, the federal government has 

announced the first phase of the national child benefit that they 

have announced will come into effect by July 1998. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that our Premier has taken the 

initiative about a year ago now to put forward the concept of an 

innovative, redesigned social assistance plan that includes a 

child benefit. And I’m even more proud today to be able to say 

that these concepts now are beginning to evolve into reality. 

 

We need to make these amendments to The Saskatchewan 

Assistance Act in order to implement the programs I’ve talked 

about. The amendment I have introduced will do just that. 

 

Now all that we require for the national child benefit to be 

implemented in Saskatchewan is now the federal piece, the 

Canadian child tax credit, to be introduced. The federal 

government has said that the national child benefit will come 

into effect in July 1998. 

 

We’ve been pushing and hoping for an earlier implementation 

date. However in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not 

appropriate that we should wait, in the meantime in this 

province we’ve introduced a package of initiatives that we 

believe will ensure a smooth transition to the national child 

benefit. 

 

In this regard I’m pleased to be able to tell you today that 

effective May 1, low income families across this province are 

now able to benefit from the enhancements to our Family 

Income Plan. 

 

The Family Income Plan provides a monthly income 

supplement for low income families with dependent children, to 

help with the costs of food, shelter, and other necessities. Mr. 

Speaker, in this budget — in this budget, Mr. Speaker — we’ve 

targeted an additional $3.8 million to children and families 

through the Family Income Plan. What this will mean, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the monthly benefit per child will rise from 

$105 to $120. 

 

In addition, we have raised the level at which benefits begin to 

be reduced; so that more families across our province will be 

able to qualify for the program. And very importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, we have expanded supplementary health benefits for 

children under this program to include full supplementary 

health coverage, comprising drug, dental, and optometric 

services. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of these changes and 

the amendments being made today to the social assistance Act, 

we have now positioned ourselves as a province so that we are 

ready to proceed with the national child benefit as soon as the 

federal government is ready and able to implement it. And in 

the meantime we are enhancing our existing programs to ensure 

a smooth transition into the national child benefit when it is 

introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will also bring about some other 

important and much called for changes for individuals and 

communities across the province. As part of our commitment to 

communities, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to this Act will 

remove the levy which requires municipalities to contribute 

annually to social assistance costs. 

 

That levy was put in place in 1966. Since that time provincial 

governments have ensured local governments use the property 

tax base to contribute to the cost of social assistance. 

Municipalities over the years have expressed concern about this 

and have urged the province to remove this levy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that I’m able to introduce this 

amendment today because it will simplify the financial 

arrangements between the province and municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act also introduces some housekeeping 

amendments. These amendments include removing outdated 

references to the Canada Assistance Plan now that the federal 

government has terminated cost-sharing arrangements through 

it, and eliminates references to the director of income security 

because that position no longer exists. 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

Mr. Speaker, as I review the course of events which have 

brought us to this day and the course of events that will unfold 

from this day as a result of these amendments, I am very proud 

of this Act of the legislature. And I think this is a day all 

Saskatchewan people can be proud, for we as a province again 

have shown that we are . . . and we do care about those in our 

midst who have less. I’ve always believed, Mr. Speaker, that 

the soul of a nation, the soul of a nation is gauged by the way it 

treats its most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the work that this government is 

doing to build a strong society for the future. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I will move, with pride, second reading of An Act to 

amend the Saskatchewan Assistance Act, 1966. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I mentioned 

at the first reading of this Bill, I am very pleased that all levels 

of government are taking steps to correct some of the flaws in 

the current social assistance program. The changes indeed are 

long overdue. 

 

With these changes, we are attempting primarily to tackle the 

problem of child poverty. It is, in fact, a fact that 43,000 

children in this province live in poverty, and so we must do 

something to try to alleviate the hardship and suffering that they 

experience daily. 

 

And it is my hope that these income supplement changes will 

help to dismantle the welfare trap that so many find themselves 

into. Because under the current system, people on social 

assistance are penalized when they begin earning an income, 

and their assistance levels start to drop, and they have a tough 

time making the transition from welfare to work. 

 

The federal and provincial government is helping to make this 

transition from welfare to work easier. They have increased 

payments to working families under the working income 

supplement. The federal government will increase the working 

income supplement by $195 million in July of this year. The 

Bill before us will bring provincial social assistance in line with 

federal changes to national assistance programs. 

 

The national child benefit, the increases to the family income 

supplement in conjunction with the federal working income 

supplement, these are all initiatives meant to tackle the problem 

of poverty. But as these initiatives are put in place I have to 

wonder, with some serious concern, about the people who may 

fall through the cracks. 

 

I notice, for instance, that there are 12,153 single parents on 

social assistance case-load. And I question, will they be able to 

find work in order to derive or to gain benefits from these . . . 

that are in these changes? And if they are able to find work, we 

have to be questioning whether or not they will enjoy the 

benefits, whether or not they will be able to pay for babysitting 

in order for them to go to work. Are there any provisions for 

that kind of thing in this Act? I don’t see those and so it causes 

me some concern. 

 

The changes in the Act are the amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act . . . will establish income-tested 

programs — income-tested programs. This means that those 

who are working will receive these benefits according to their 

income. But what about those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who do not 

fit into that system? What about those people who can’t find 

work, those people in rural areas, in northern areas, who do not 

qualify for the extra benefits like the supplementary health 

coverage and who are struggling to feed their families that are 

on social assistance cheques. 

 

And I question too, the fact that it is good that supplementary 

health coverage is there for children of low income families. 

However, we can never separate the needs of children from the 

needs of their parents. I see that parents are not qualified — or 

not entitled rather — to any health coverage; however their 

children are. I would ask that the minister maybe re-look at 

these kind of things in the future, in the very near future 

hopefully, and see to it that low income parents also receive 

supplementary health coverage. 

 

This government must be held accountable for all the impacts 

of their changes, and so we must really look carefully at 

everything that’s happening that will affect the lives of the 

children. 

 

I have some concerns about accountability to ensure that the 

additional money is in fact reaching the children in families that 

need it the most. And I am concerned about some measures 

being taken to ensure that proper communication to recipients, 

not only organizations, is forthcoming so that everyone will be 

aware of the new benefits, and aware without having to be 

contacting their social workers or the Department of Social 

Services. 

 

The Bill also establishes appeal procedures for people who 

receive income-tested benefits. If people are dissatisfied with 

the level of assistance, they can appeal. But the appeal process, 

to the best of my understanding, is separate from the current 

appeals process for needs-tested programs. So it seems that 

there might be some duplication there. 

 

While the Bill deals to a certain extent with eligibility and 

overpayments, it is imperative that the minister make sure that 

the benefits are not abused. The Provincial Auditor called on 

this government to prosecute people who defraud social 

assistance, and it is vital to the credibility of the system to make 

sure that there is no fraud. But we must also be aware that 

social assistance recipients do not lose their dignity when 

getting help. 

 

Before more detailed examination of this Bill will be done in 

Committee of the Whole, I would ask that the minister review 

some of the suggestions that I have put forward. And I will, in 

Committee of the Whole, be raising more questions about the 

lack of accountability of this government, and more questions 

surrounding the genuine well-being of our children in the 

province. 

 

I have some concerns with the overall outlook of what is best 

for our children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are doing . . . taking  

  



1414  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

these kind of measures in order to eradicate child poverty. That 

is the basis for changes. But I would suggest that child poverty 

must also be expressed in terms of psychological, emotional 

poverty resulting from a system that does not financially or 

otherwise support parents who choose to stay at home because 

they believe, in the best interests of their children, that they 

should be home with them. 

 

(1545) 

 

I questions whether the entire child benefit . . . will it be enough 

to encourage strong family units? Children need the stability of 

having the full and complete energy and time of their parents — 

parents who can devote themselves to nurturing in a home 

environment. 

 

It seems to me that we are taking measures to certainly try to 

get people out of the welfare trap and I applaud that. But at the 

same time I see an omission, and that omission is in the fact that 

we don’t seem to be recognizing yet the value of parenting and 

encouraging . . . making sure we have policy in place that 

encourages good parenting, and parents to be with their children 

at home. When we bring in a working income supplement, it 

presumes that people will be better off if they work. And of 

course work is vital — it’s important. 

 

But are we encouraging some of the parents to go out of the 

home to work just so that they will get these benefits? And what 

will be the long-term effects on those children? 

 

More than anything nowadays, I believe that children are 

missing the nurturing and the constant guidance and support of 

their parents on a constant basis, on a continuing basis, so that 

their security is in fact intact because they have their parents 

around them. 

 

I know that this is an omission and I know that it’s something 

that we have to look at further. But I would now refer this Bill 

to Committee of the Whole and we’ll speak to it more at that 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 35  The Victims of Crime 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes 

d’actes criminels 

 

The Chair:  I will begin by inviting the minister to introduce 

his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with me 

today from the Department of Justice, Brent Prenevost, who is 

Crown counsel; Katrine McKenzie, who’s the director of victim 

services; and behind me, Ron Kruzeniski, who is the Public 

Trustee. 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, first of all welcome to the 

officials. I’m pleased to see all of them, especially Mr. 

Kruzeniski. We were in law school together. I think it was back 

in the Plasticine era. And I’m pleased to see Mr. Kruzeniski 

again this day. 

 

There is of course one matter about this Bill which is very 

troubling to myself and my colleagues, and that is that, again, I 

think the government has just totally missed the point. And 

there’s an Alice in Wonderland atmosphere about this Bill. You 

see the problem is, Mr. Deputy Chair, we’re collecting a lot of 

money to support victims, we’re not spending it on victims, and 

now we’ve got a government that’s all in a panic about how we 

invest money for victims instead of how we support victims. 

 

I say this is Alice in Wonderland. This is looking through the 

wrong end of the telescope. This is not seeing the forest for the 

trees. This is missing the point. 

 

The solution is so simple, it is so simple, so obvious, that the 

government missed it. And it’s one of those classic examples of 

where, you know, you don’t see the elephant because it’s just so 

big and so clear and so obvious that we didn’t see the elephant 

standing there right in front of us. The solution . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I wish to draw committee 

members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th 

Edition, rule no. 336 which states: 

 

Speakers have also consistently attempted to discourage 

loud private conversations in the Chamber, and have urged 

those wishing to carry on such exchanges to do so outside 

the House. 

 

I thank all hon. members for their cooperation in this particular 

rule. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, for coming 

to my assistance. However, I want to assure you that I accept 

that there are some members opposite who feel compelled to 

make up in volume what they may lack in intellect. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, the issue is just very, very obvious and 

very, very simple. Instead of getting all worked up about where 

we’re going to invest this money, let us simply use it for the 

purpose for which it is collected — namely for the 

compensation of victims. 

 

And that is why I will be moving an amendment, which I know 

the minister has, and I encourage the minister to support it 

because it’s such a sensible, reasonable amendment, namely 

that let’s not build up a huge victims’ fund — let’s simply pay it 

over to the victims. 

 

There are a couple of other points I wish to ask the minister. I 

hear, I hear my friend . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I hear learned friends and 

colleagues opposite saying it makes absolutely no sense that  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

money we raise to support victims would actually be spent on 

victims. And there again that’s an Alice in Wonderland 

comment, isn’t it? Just absolutely Alice in Wonderland. How 

could I be so crazy, so stupid, so off the mark as to think that 

when we raise money for victims, we’d actually spend it on 

victims? 

 

Well what are the figures, Mr. Deputy Chair? The figures are 

that we’re raising 1.8 million a year, nearly 2 million a year on 

victim impact surcharge. We are spending about 90 per cent of 

that on victims’ services and we are spending a paltry $300,000 

a year on compensation of victims — virtually nothing. 

 

So we have a fund that’s collecting nearly 2 million a year, and 

I say it’s scarcely an exaggeration to say that none of it goes to 

victims, a fund for victims’ compensation. It isn’t being paid for 

victims. 

 

I say that we should pay it to victims. And I hear the member 

opposite from Swift Current say what a crazy idea that you 

would actually take victims’ funds and use it for victims. And 

he thinks that’s an insane suggestion. 

 

Well I’m also concerned. And I want to ask the minister here 

when this money is transferred to the Public Trustee, the Public 

Trustee will be able to invest it, will those investments include 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think it’s incumbent upon me to 

respond briefly to some of the comments that were made, and I 

think I may just start out by the comment made in the paper 

either yesterday or on Saturday by one of the reporters that, 

given the question that the hon. member raised on Friday, it 

may be that he should have read the Act. Well I think today the 

answer to many of his questions are in the annual report of 

victim services. 

 

What happened was, 1989 the victim services legislation was 

introduced and the surcharges were charged, but it took some 

time to plan all of the types of services that were going to be 

prepared. 

 

At the point where the program was actually established in 

September ’92, and subsequent to that, there was $5.5 million in 

this surcharge fund that had been accumulated. From ’92 to ’94 

the expenditures in this area didn’t exceed the revenues so a 

further amount was accumulated. So in ’94 and ’95 equity was 

$6.4 million. 

 

In the last two years we have taken some very good steps 

forward in setting up victim services programs throughout the 

province, and that in fact we are now spending more than the 

revenue generated. So we have approximately $4.3 million in 

the fund. 

 

These funds are there and the plan is clearly to try to set up a 

way of expending the funds as they come in each year. But as 

the prudent fiscal managers that we are here in Saskatchewan, 

we’re not going to do that in a way that leaves us short — and 

we also have Treasury Board and the Minister of Finance to 

answer to — and we’re very careful we plan this well. 

On the specific question, the funds that the Public Trustee has 

are all invested by Greystone Capital corporation. The 

investment decisions are made by Greystone Capital 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chairman, but my 

understanding is that those investment decisions may include 

the province of Saskatchewan; that the province of 

Saskatchewan may, in fact, be one of the beneficiaries of the 

investments. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That is absolutely correct. If province of 

Saskatchewan bonds are a good investment, like we think they 

are, then I hope they would think about investing. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Nothing wrong with investing in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chair. Nothing wrong with 

investing in the people for whom this money was raised, 

namely, the victims. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to tell you that a lady came to my 

office this past Saturday. And this is for the Crime 

Compensation Board, I realize, which is somewhat different. 

But anyway, when she had five children, her husband was 

killed. The person who killed him was charged with murder, 

subsequently convicted of manslaughter. This woman received 

no compensation whatsoever from the Crime Compensation 

Board. 

 

We now have admission that we’ve got the victim services 

which the Minister of Justice in this House told us is collecting 

nearly 2 million a year; it pays out 300,000 a year in 

compensation. 

 

Now I realize there are some services in place, and I 

congratulate the minister for that. But does he not realize that 

this really works against public confidence in the system when 

we are told we have in place the victim services, we’re told 

we’ve got crime compensation in place, and then, I say, we hear 

stories of a widow left with five children — she gets nothing. 

 

It seems as if we’ve got all these services and programs in 

place, but in terms of what we are paying victims, it’s virtually 

nothing. And the minister says, well don’t worry; we’ll make 

sure we’ve got enough programing to spend all the money. 

 

And I’m not sure all the programing in the world is going to 

give as much confidence to people as what paying the victims 

would. Or certainly, say, the widow with the five children I just 

mentioned, I’m not sure that anything would have done her as 

much good as simply having received some compensation 

directly to assist her with the raising and the education of her 

five children. 

 

So I’ll again ask the minister: does he see that figure of 300,000 

to victims increasing or does he see that programing is really 

the only priority here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well my response to that question is quite  

  



1416  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

simple. The amount of $300,000 is based on the applications 

received. If more applications are received, the amount that 

would be paid out under that victims’ program would increase; 

if less are received, it would be less. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Is the minister saying that 300,000 is all that’s 

required to compensate victims in this province? Is he satisfied 

that that’s an adequate number? Or is this possibly, is this 

possibly another case that we’ve . . . we’ve now gone so many 

years in this province — it was actually 10 years; it goes before 

this minister, before this government in fact — that we had this 

widow with the five children who applied for compensation and 

she got nothing. 

 

Is it possible, Minister, that the word has gotten out across 

Saskatchewan: don’t bother even applying; it’s not worth your 

while. You’ll pay more for your application and for your lawyer 

than what you’ll ever get in compensation. Is that not possibly 

why we have no applications before us as opposed to . . . The 

minister seems to take the view that, well maybe we don’t have 

any victims in Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems to me rather than having no victims in Saskatchewan, 

the fact you’ve got no applications on your desk strongly 

suggests to me that people have simply given up on the system 

and they really don’t expect anything from the system. 

 

In this regard, Mr. Deputy Chair, it seems to me it’s not too 

much different than the fact that when we had utility rate 

increases, we had a committee going around the province to get 

reaction. And they came back to Regina and they said, well 

everybody must be happy with the rate increases because 

nobody bothered to show up to complain. Well of course the 

real reason nobody bothered to show up to complain was 

because they knew they were wasting their breath. 

 

And I really ask, Mr. Minister, is the reason you have no 

applications for compensation that the people have given up on 

the system, or do you honestly believe that the problem is that 

there are no victims who need compensating out there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, I think, practically, in Saskatchewan 

we are proud of the types of services that we provide to victims. 

And we provide those services both in the form of assistance 

after a crime and also in compensation. What we have at the 

present time is, we respond to the applications that are received, 

and we pay out based on those applications and as the rules set 

out for that. 

 

But I think what I should remind the member, and I think he 

does know this but he probably has forgotten today, is that 

victim services programs throughout the province, including the 

one mentioned earlier today in Meadow Lake, have provided 

service to many, many hundreds, and I would say, thousands of 

people. 

 

That happens through police-based victims’ services programs. 

It happens through some community organizations. And it also 

happens through a couple of really important institutions that 

have been established in this province. One of them is the 

integrated child abuse unit in Regina and the other is the  

Saskatoon child centre. These are funded out of this, this 

money, and it provides services to people that need help in 

times of crisis. 

 

I don’t know if it’s possible ever to compensate people for their 

losses when they are victims of a crime, especially if it’s a 

crime where somebody loses their life. And I don’t think we 

should belittle the process or the amounts. But I’m not sure 

there’s enough dollars in the world to compensate somebody 

who loses a loved one. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I guess we all accept that 

having your husband killed, no amount of money is going to 

bring him back or really compensate for the loss. But the fact is 

the lady I was talking to was left with five under age children. 

A little bit of money may have assisted with at least the funeral, 

maybe even possibly a bit of the cost of raising the children, 

maybe helping to educate the children. 

 

Yes, there’s no such thing as perfect compensation in this 

world. And that’s why I’ve been critical of the minister for 

using the term, restorative justice, because I think a promise is 

something that the justice system virtually never delivers. We 

can’t restore — that’s the bottom line. And I accept the 

minister’s statement there.  

 

And as I say, that’s why I’ve been critical of ever even using 

the term, because we don’t restore in the justice system. We try 

and make the best of what is obviously a very bad situation. 

 

But the fact is while we can’t restore that widow who lost her 

husband and is left with five children, we could have given her 

a little bit of help and we didn’t do it. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Could have lessened the hardship. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, we could of lessened the hardship just a 

little bit and we didn’t do it. 

 

Now the minister says I’ve forgotten about the victim services 

coordinators. No I haven’t. I’m appreciative of their efforts and 

I haven’t criticized them. But does the minister not see that a 

little bit of direct assistance to our victims would go a long way 

to maybe easing the burden on them, and maybe even a long 

way to restoring some public confidence in our justice system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m having a bit of difficulty with 

the question and I’ll refer once again to the report at page 17. It 

sets out all of the headings under which payments are made, 

and that includes things like funeral expenses and concerns that 

the member has. I assume that the person that he is talking 

about has applied, but I don’t know that. 

 

I think practically, what we have in Saskatchewan is a program 

of which we can all be proud as it relates to victim services. We 

are quite willing to look at suggestions about ways that we can 

improve it. What we are doing here with this piece of 

legislation is attempting to make better use of the money that 

was accumulated and will be spent over the next number of 

years, and that’s it. Basically we want to improve the services 

that we can for victims in Saskatchewan. 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Mr. Hillson: — Again, though the minister says services to 

victims, well that’s all very well and good, I don’t criticize him 

for that. But could he consider giving a little bit of priority, 

some of this money as simply compensation to victims, just 

funnelling it to victims? Does it all have to be in the form of 

some program? Why can’t some of it go simply to victims? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m sorry if my words aren’t clear, 

but services to victims includes the compensation to victims’ 

portion. And as I said before, we respond to the applications 

received, and if in fact the application’s received, and ended up 

using more of the money, then we would end up spending more 

of the money. 

 

And practically there is no restriction on the amount that we pay 

out directly to victims. And I think that may be the simple 

answer to your question. 

 

So that if there are people that are concerned about this . . . 

And, you know, as a matter of fact, the information about this 

program is also included in all of the victim services programs. 

Victim services coordinators, all those people around the 

province know about this, and help people if they need to apply 

for these funds. 

 

So practically there is no restriction on the amount paid directly 

to victims as compensation, and I see this as a service to 

victims. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I still say that a clear 

statement from the minister today in this House that the 

department will entertain applications for compensation and 

that it will accept the amendment to hold this fund to half a 

million in any given fiscal year would go a fair distance to 

restoring a bit of confidence. 

 

I mean, he’s saying now we don’t get any applications. I know 

you don’t. Lawyers are telling their clients, don’t bother. And 

you admit that, I mean, we have lots of victims in this province 

and virtually nothing paid out. And you tell me, well you don’t 

pay out because you don’t have applications. Well if you don’t 

have applications that is the proof that people have simply 

given up. 

 

And a statement from you today in this House saying that you 

are committed to this program of compensating victims, and I 

really think that some application forms would appear on your 

desk and you would find out that in fact there are lots of people 

out there who qualify and need compensation, and not the great 

lack of victims that you appear to think there are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the report which is here says that in 

the ’95-96 year, which was the last report that we had, there 

were 239 applications for compensation. And those applications 

were dealt with in the appropriate course and will continue to be 

dealt with there. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I would like to move an amendment to 

clause 2. 

 

I would like to move an amendment to clause 2 by: 

 

deleting the words “any moneys in the fund” where they 

occur in subsection (3) and substituting the words “,not 

to exceed five-hundred thousand dollars at the end of any 

fiscal year,”. 

 

And I also have la version française. May it be taken as read, 

Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, 

Minister, and to your officials. 

 

If I may, if you would permit, I would like to just make some 

comments surrounding assistance to victims of crime. And I 

would ask at the end of the comments if you could possibly 

comment on some of the suggestions I put forward. 

 

I’ve noted that you have said that you plan more government 

programs in the future surrounding the victims’ assistance 

program, and if I could just give a preamble. It’s important to 

me because I have had a case come before me, in fact of May of 

’96, where I had to really question whether or not we’re looking 

at the victims of crime and the whole question of what is crime 

and who should receive assistance. 

 

I had a young aboriginal girl brought to my attention. She had 

been under the care of the Department of Social Services since 

she was 9 years old. She’s now 15, or she was 15 in 1996. 

 

She’d come to the city from a reserve in an attempt to escape a 

life that was riddled with sexual and emotional abuse. She 

ended up talking to a street outreach worker explaining that she 

needed social assistance so she could have some financial help 

with her basic needs of food, clothing, and shelter. 

 

She wanted to go to school, but first she needed to have her 

basic needs met. When applying for social assistance, she was 

told that she should go back to the reserve. She couldn’t get 

social assistance because she’s from a reserve. To return to the 

reserve would mean for her a life of complete devastation and 

hopelessness. 

 

It was explained to a social worker that she was now going to 

the streets to prostitute herself in order to get some money for 

her basic needs. It was suggested by an advocate for her that 

perhaps she could qualify for financial help through the victims’ 

assistance fund. And the answer she and her advocate received 

was that she was a victim of her own circumstances. This 

money was not meant to help people like her. 

 

Well perhaps we should rethink how we use money from the 

victims’ assistance and from victims of crime. Perhaps we 

should assess more carefully who are victims of crime and 

expand that definition to people such as this young aboriginal 

girl. The surplus fund at hand could certainly be better put to 

use in this way rather than placing it in general revenue. 

 

  



1418  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

So I would ask the minister if there is any consideration being 

given to an expansion of this type for victims of crime. And I 

recognize that definitions have to be put in place under these 

Acts, but I’m hoping to hear your comments on this please. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well this concern is I think a concern as it 

relates to many parts of government policy. And one of the 

difficulties for a young person like that, like you’ve identified, 

is this inability for the federal government to sort out what it’s 

going to do with young aboriginal people as they move into the 

cities. And that’s an area where we on the Social Services side 

have stepped in and basically said, well these are citizens of 

Saskatchewan and we need to provide social assistance. 

 

This particular fund, the victims’ fund, relates to people who 

have been involved in a crime. And I think from the facts that 

you relayed, this person was in, I guess, a situation where she 

was extremely vulnerable to be part victim of a crime, which is 

an area that maybe we should take a look at. 

 

I think in a lot of ways the kinds of programs that we’ve set up 

with the child centre and with the integrated child abuse unit in 

Regina, have some aspects of helping people like the person 

that you talked about. But it’s not a way of providing social 

services payment in another way. 

 

But it seems to me that there would be a way to help that kind 

of a young person in a difficult situation, but it’s not directly 

through this fund. And I guess I would say that our social 

service network that we have in the province is meant to help 

people like that, but I don’t think it’s necessarily specifically 

here. 

 

Now if in fact the person was involved in a crime, it may be 

then that the victim services coordinators could be involved and 

also then, some of the compensation funds. 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I wish to remind the committee 

that what we’re dealing with is clause 2, which deals with the 

investment of money through the Public Trustee, and the 

amendment deals with the amount of money that is to be 

invested in that manner. And comments on clause 2 of the 

printed Bill should be focused quite narrowly on that issue. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. If I 

could qualify then that the amount of money that is being used 

for assistance to victims could certainly refer to the situation at 

hand. I am asking the minister to consider the recognition that 

sexual abuse and people that have been subject to that are in 

fact victims of crime because it is a criminal act — sexual abuse 

of minors. 

 

And so I’m asking that the minister simply look at possibly 

diverting some of these funds, if there are new programs 

coming into being, to assist victims of crime in this manner. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I can answer very simply. Those crimes 

are included in this fund. And if you look under the Criminal  

Code in the appendix and the regulations, it includes a section 

227. There’s 271, sexual assault; 272, sexual assault, sexual 

interference, sexual exploitation. So I think those ones are 

included. 

 

But practically, I guess if I should speak to the amendment and 

the basic response is that we are opposed to this amendment. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 

Chair, to the minister and to his officials, welcome. 

 

I’ve listened with interest, and I stand to lend my support to the 

amendment proposed by the honourable . . . my colleague from 

North Battleford. There seems to be an accumulation of monies 

in a particular fund for a specific reason. And suddenly when 

we have that massive amount of money that’s been 

accumulated, then it’s not serving the purpose for which it’s 

meant. 

 

And I appreciate and recognize the fact that there are all kinds 

of programs, but the money is meant . . . It’s almost like an 

additional tax. There’s a surcharge that’s imposed on people for 

a variety of circumstances they become involved with. 

 

Now if this money is accumulating to this excessive amount, 

then perhaps there’s a couple things might happen. It’s not 

being properly directed and it doesn’t go to victims, or perhaps 

then it should be reduced. And the imposition that’s being 

placed on people that are contributing those funds should then 

be reduced in a certain amount. 

 

But I strongly would urge consideration be given to accepting 

this amendment, so that it’s not in fact reinvested and perhaps 

reinvested again as more money for the financial coffers of this 

government, which is nothing more than additional taxation. 

Thank you. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:22 p.m. until 4:24 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 7 

 

McLane Gantefoer Osika 

Belanger Hillson Julé 

Aldridge   

 

Nays — 17 

 

Flavel Van Mulligen Whitmore 

Upshall Kowalsky Pringle 

Lorje Renaud Nilson 

Serby Hamilton Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Langford  

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m pleased to 

thank my officials who have been with me today and all of the 

others who have looked at some of the policy issues 

surrounding this. And I also thank the members opposite for 

their questions and suggestions even though we didn’t follow 

all of the ones that they had. 

 

And I would like to move that we report this Bill without 

amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1630) 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois 

 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me this 

afternoon, beside me, Rick Hischebett, who is Crown counsel, 

civil law division, Saskatchewan Justice, with a special role in 

advising the Department of Health. Behind me, Scott Banda, 

who is general counsel and corporate secretary for the Crown 

Investments Corporation. And directly behind me, Barry Lacey, 

who is the director of finance and management services branch 

of Saskatchewan Health. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I just wish to say . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. Order. Committee members will all 

appreciate that second reading of a Bill is an opportunity for 

every member who has a question of the minister to ask said 

question. And I again very much appreciate the cooperation of 

all members. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I actually was rising to say that I didn’t have 

anything to say, Mr. Deputy Chair. I thank the minister for 

bringing his officials today. I thank them for their attendance; 

however we have reviewed these amendments and we are 

satisfied that they are sensible and we do not have any problem 

with that . . . with them. And therefore we are prepared to let 

them go through. 

 

I might also say I note that on the last Bill the opposition came 

closer to defeating the government than at any time since this 

session started. So we understand why the government is 

looking somewhat antsy and concerned. Their concern is totally 

justified. However I wish to assure the minister that this is not 

the piece of legislation that we will use to bring down the 

government, as we are content with the provisions of it. Thank 

you. 

 

The Chair:  Order. I just want to assure members that . . . 

Order. I want to assure members that the Chair had no intention 

of promoting himself when I talked of second reading as 

opposed to Committee of the Whole in my ruling moments ago. 

We are firmly in Committee of the Whole. The ruling stands. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. There is a House amendment that I 

would like to propose to the French version of the printed Bill. 

And the amendment is that I move that: 

 

. . . Clause 4(1) of the French version of the printed Bill by 

adding (the words) “de l’article 7” after “d’entrée en 

vigueur”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you very much. Before I do that, I 

would like to thank my officials. I think I may want to bring 

this team every time because it totally intimidated the 

opposition and we had no questions. So thank you very much 

for coming. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35  The Victims of Crime 

Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant 

la Loi sur les victimes d’actes criminels 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1645) 

  



1420  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  By leave of the Assembly, I move that 

Bill 33 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair:  Before I call item 1, I invite the minister to 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me, 

Stuart Kramer, my deputy minister; Les Cooke, associate 

deputy minister of policy and programs; and Ross MacLennan, 

assistant deputy minister of operations. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Just a 

couple of questions. First of all, welcome to your officials. 

 

And the one question I have, in reference to the fact that your 

department administers collections on behalf of the northern 

revenue-sharing trust account in terms of the northern lease 

fees, could you give me the figures in terms of the last two or 

three years as to what those figures were? I understand when 

people have a lease in northern Saskatchewan they go to SERM 

office and they get their lease notice and their lease fee payment 

from SERM and they go to SERM and they pay this lease. And 

if so, what’s the total amount collected, and what’s the total 

administration fee you charge for the collection of such leases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well we’re off to a good start. Thank you 

very much, member, for the question. This is a very detailed 

process, with different lessees and processes. We’d be very 

happy to get you a detailed response, a written response to that 

information. I just don’t have the figures with me today. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And if, since we do 

have opportunity to revisit the whole issue, if you can perhaps 

give me the last 10, 12 years in terms of the fluctuations of 

your, particularly your administration fee. 

 

Secondly, in the essence of the Uranium City situation with the 

underground tanks, and of course you’re aware of the problem 

that the community has. To date, it appears the community 

hasn’t had much of a response in terms of their fuel farm or 

their tank farm. Could you give me an update as to what the 

decision is in reference to this challenge, and also what course 

of action you have over the next six months to ensure that this 

community does have adequate supply of heating fuel and also 

other fuels needed for the community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you. With response to the Uranium 

City situation and the availability of having fuel, we’re well 

aware of the situation. And our department along with Northern 

Affairs are working very closely with the community in 

Uranium City as well as the oil company that’s involved. By all 

means we want to ensure one way or the other that the 

community has heating fuel and fuel available for the coming 

winter. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again bouncing all 

over the map, another area that’s of concern with reference to 

the underground storage tanks is the northern village of 

Beauval. 

 

Speaking with the town administrator several days ago, Elaine 

Malbeuf, she explains to me a portion of land which was Crown 

land in and around Beauval forest was transferred from the 

Crown, in this instance I believe it’s SERM, or it could be 

Economic Development — I’m not sure who owned the 

property — but none the less the Crown owned the property and 

transferred the property to the village a number of years ago. 

 

And lo and behold, once they began to divvy up the property, 

they found out there is some storage tanks from the old days on 

that property, and now they’re faced with the problem of having 

to fund the removal of the tanks. And would you be able to 

offer any compensation for the village or offer any support for 

the village to remove these tanks? Because it’s certainly not 

their fault that these tanks were transferred as part of the land, 

because it was never disclosed to them. 

 

So would you undertake to find out who would pay for the 

removal of such tanks? And how soon could that be done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  This is certainly a problem not only 

happening in communities like Beauval but a number of 

communities. And it’s very timely that later this week I’ll be 

receiving a report from the committee on contaminated sites 

liability, where this committee . . . who in the past year and a 

half have been dealing with the whole issue: who should pay for 

the removal of tanks and the clean-up? 

 

I can assure you that we’ll be in touch with the community of 

Beauval to offer whatever assistance we have. And depending 

on what this report comes out with — we don’t expect to  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

implement the recommendations immediately — but it may 

give us some guidance or direction as to how we can best 

resolve this problem. So we will be in touch with the 

community of Beauval. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and a few more 

questions. One question we have from the village of Green 

Lake — Marius Bouvier to be exact. He’s a retired worker with 

Sask SERM. He worked may years with you, with your 

company and with the government. 

 

And Mr. Bouvier has also been heavily involved with trapping. 

And what he has found — him and other trappers from in and 

around Green Lake area and other trappers from other 

communities — in reference to the large-scale forestry industry 

that’s happening within the region, they’re quite frankly 

becoming concerned of a number of issues. 

 

First of all there’s several of them that could not access their 

cabins because the roads that go towards their cabins are being 

blocked off by the forestry companies. And they aren’t able to 

access the cabins as a result of this road being blocked off. 

 

And the second thing is they haven’t had much discussion, nor 

have they had any direction, as to the concerns that they have 

regarding compensation for loss of their trapping privileges and 

trapping rights. 

 

So they are, quite frankly, concerned about the situation. 

They’d like to see some progress on this matter. And in fact I 

believe they’re written a letter to your colleague, Mr. Goulet, on 

the whole matter. And I was just wondering, in your discussions 

and all the negotiations of different forestry companies, be it 

NorSask or Weyerhaeuser or Mac-Blo or any other forestry 

companies, has the issue of compensation for displaced trappers 

ever received high priority? And if it is, where is this whole 

program at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  In response to the question, I’d like to say 

that first of all our new forest resources management Act, 

integrated management of forestry activities, not only looks at 

the trees and harvesting of trees, but we do look at other 

interests in the forest such as trapping. 

 

And in the Green Lake situation we do have a co-management 

board. And I would suggest to your constituent, approach the 

co-management board, raise his concerns, and we as the 

department are certainly committed to try and resolve the 

conflicts between the forestry company and, in this case, the 

local trapper. We need to make room for everybody in our 

forests and I think we’re achieving this through our 

co-management boards. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to advise you 

that the co-management board in Green Lake has been 

contacted and in fact the chairperson of the co-management 

board in Green Lake was one of the individuals that did write a 

letter to the Minister of Northern Affairs, and apparently the 

response has not been received. There’s been very little 

information back and forth. 

 

So as a result, I’m urging you as the minister responsible for 

Environment and Resource Management and ultimately the 

forestry companies, that we have continual and direct dialogue 

with the people like Mr. Bouvier and Mr. McKay of Green 

Lake, who is the chairman of the local co-management board. 

 

So co-management boards need to play a stronger role. And 

certainly the trapping industry needs to be protected and 

enhanced when it comes to co-existence between the forestry 

companies and the local, traditional resource gatherers and 

users. 

 

But just for clarification, on page 8 of your annual report for 

’95-96, am I to understand that under the value of primary 

forest products, that the primary value is 512.461 million? Is 

that the correct figure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, that figure is correct. Our forests are 

very important to the whole economy of the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’d like to also 

thank your officials for their questions . . . or their answers. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 



1422  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 1329 of Hansard No. 39A Friday, May 2, 1996, 10 

a.m., under THIRD READINGS the title Bill No. 29 — The 

Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 should read Bill 

No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 1997. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1395 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1395 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1395 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1395 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1403 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1403 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1404 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Chrétien Speaks to Regina Chamber of Commerce 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 

 Books presented to the Prime Minister 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 

 Humboldt Students in the Canada World Youth Exchange Program 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 

 Spinal Health Care Week 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 

 Recreation Volunteers Honoured 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1396 

 Polonia Dance Ensemble Performance 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1397 

 Agri-food Industry Diversification 

  Jess ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1397 

 Professorship in Petroleum Engineering 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1397 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Northern Economic Development 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1397 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1398 

 Workers’ Compensation Board 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

 No-fault Insurance 

  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1400, 1401 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1400 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

 Agricultural Credit Corporation Bills 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

 Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE BILLS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 301 — The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District Act .................................................................................... 1404 

 Bill No. 302 — The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company Act, 1997 ..................................................................................... 1404 

PRIVATE BILLS 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 301  The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District Act 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1404 

 Bill No. 302 – The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company Act, 1997 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1404 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill 211 — The Gambling Addiction Accountability Act 

  Osika .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1405, 1408 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1406 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1407 

 Bill No. 228 — The Saskatchewan Big Game Damage Compensation Fee Act 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1408 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1410 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1411 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 58  The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1411 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1413 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 35  The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes d’actes criminels 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1414 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1414 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1417 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1418 

 Recorded division ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1418 

 Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 

 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à certaines lois 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 

 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statues Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 35  The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes d’actes criminels 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 

 Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 

 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant modifications 

corrélatives à certaines lois 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1420 

 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1420 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management — Vote 26 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1420 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1420 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1422 

 


