



















































Hansard: April 11, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 773 

 April 11, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the construction of a 

new hospital in La Loche that will provide adequate health 

care for northern residents. 

 

We have 25 people sign this petition, Mr. Speaker. To name a 

few, Ralph Lemaigre, Christine Janvier, Kenneth Roth, Martha 

Morin. And I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to bring forward petitions for people throughout the province 

that have been plagued by big game damage problems. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides a 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

from Coronach and Shaunavon. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the government to commission an 

independent study to review the social impact of gambling. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move the first reading of a Bill, the 

municipalities VLT commitment Act. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following 

question: 

Minister of Environment and Resource Management: (1) 

how many white-tail deer licences were purchased in 1994; 

(2) how many wildlife habitat certificates were purchased 

in 1994? 

 

I’ll ask similar questions related to 1995 and 1996, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this morning 

to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly a group of 

individuals who are here representing the Saskatchewan 

Applied Science Technologists and Technicians. Seated in your 

west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Brian Cobbledick. Mr. 

Cobbledick is accompanied by Jaime Briltz, who’s the 

executive director of SASTT (Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians), Jim Brandt and Moe 

Zimmerman, who are past presidents of SASTT. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SASTT is a growing professional group with more 

than 1,800 members throughout our province. I would like this 

morning to have all members of the Assembly join with me in 

welcoming the individuals that I introduced and all the rest of 

the folks that are there who are employees and members of the 

association. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming them to the Assembly for the second reading speech 

later this day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you, a group of students 

from my constituency. We have with us today in your gallery 

41 grade 8 students, 20 of them from Bruno and 21 from 

Cudworth. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Jake 

Jmaeff from Bruno and Mr. Scott Linton from Cudworth; 

parents Lorraine Hoffman, Wendy Hoppe, Noreen Bremner, 

Barbara Demong, and Margaret Jungwirth. 

 

I look forward to meeting with these students, their teachers, 

and their parents after question period and I’d like to ask all the 

members to join with me in welcoming the students to the 

legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, several guests which are here for the second reading 

speech here later today. 

 

We have Tim Thiele, Saskatchewan manager of Ducks 

Unlimited — if these individuals could stand and be recognized 

— Bernie Bolen, president of the Pheasants Forever chapter of 

Saskatchewan; Sinclair Harrison, president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities; Alan Appleby, 

Saskatchewan coordinator of Endangered Spaces Saskatchewan   



774  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

with the World Wildlife Fund; and Jim Kroshus, project 

coordinator with the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 

 

And I would ask that all members join in welcoming these 

guests here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also take 

this opportunity to welcome members of the SASTT on behalf 

of the Liberal caucus. Welcome and thank you once again for 

coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

take this opportunity to welcome to the legislature and to 

Regina the students from Cudworth and Bruno. Having spent 

quite a number of good years in that area, I have some great 

memories of them and I hope you enjoy your time in the 

legislature and in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll get 

it right yet — I would also like to introduce Pam Mitchell, 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association, and ask that all members welcome her here as 

well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Student Conference Held at Fort San 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I’d 

just like to share with you and my colleagues in the Assembly 

an interesting event that the Scenic Valley students will be 

attending today. As a matter of fact, it’s probably ongoing now. 

About 500 grade 7 to 12 students will be spending most of the 

day learning to pass some of life’s biggest tests. 

 

In a first ever student conference to be held at Fort San 

conference centre, the students will listen to a motivational 

speech from Alvin Law titled, “There’s no such word as can’t.” 

After the speech the students will break apart to attend two 

sessions of his or her choices. The title of the four sessions 

offered are: “Enduring life in the fast lane;” “All I ever wanted 

to be is somebody special;” “Sexual harassment: recognize 

what it is, deal with it;” and, “Preventing sexually transmitted 

diseases and AIDS awareness.” 

 

The topics of this conference came to light from the results of a 

student survey taken last year, and I would just like to 

commend the innovative efforts of this school division for 

acting on these issues and taking steps to provide our youth 

with these life lessons. I’m sure the students will greatly benefit 

from this exercise. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

National Wildlife Week 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A little later this 

morning we will have second reading of The Wildlife Act, 

amendments that will aid in protecting endangered species here 

in Saskatchewan, a Bill which by the way, Mr. Speaker, that 

was to be a companion piece to federal legislation that now 

appears lost in pre-election shuffle. The federal Liberals got 

their publicity and then they buried their Bill — typical, I say. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, however, this Bill is introduced 

because we are in National Wildlife Week, and during this 

week the Canadian Wildlife Federation joins hands with 

federal, provincial, and territorial wildlife agencies to celebrate 

the rich and irreplaceable diversity of wildlife in our country. 

And during this week these agencies and concerned individuals 

across the country engage in a variety of projects and even 

antics, to raise public awareness to the importance of wildlife 

and conservation. 

 

This year’s theme is, “We’re Part of a World Wide Web of 

Life,” and to help focus on the interconnectedness of living 

things and the importance of biodiversity conservation, the 

Canadian Wildlife Federation distributes educational kits to 

schools and youth groups and so does SERM (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management). 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Wildlife Week reminds us that 

endangered species and spaces are a resource we cannot 

squander, and all members will join in celebrating this week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Native Minor Hockey Championships 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to inform the Assembly of a very important event which is 

occurring in the aboriginal community this weekend. 

 

This weekend in Saskatoon, 60 aboriginal minor hockey teams 

from all over western Canada will compete in the 9th Annual 

Western Canada Native Minor Hockey Championships. The 

tournament often attracts as many as 100 teams ranging from 9 

to 17 years of age from as far away as Prince George to The 

Pas, Manitoba. I am told, Mr. Speaker, that the interest has been 

expressed by aboriginal teams in Quebec and Ontario. 

 

Tournaments such as these are excellent opportunities for 

aboriginal youth to come out together, not only to play hockey, 

but to develop valuable life skills. This tournament is a good 

stepping stone for young aboriginal athletes to advance in the 

sport and share experiences with their peers from across 

Western Canada. 

 

These events are very important, Mr. Speaker, but they do not 

happen without a lot of hard work, dedication and financial 

support. The continued success of this tournament can be 

attributed in a large part to individuals such as Claude Petite, 

who donate much of their time and their money. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask the Assembly to join with me in applauding the efforts of 

the organizers and the athletes involved in this tournament. It is   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

very important for the members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

as representatives for all Saskatchewan people, to support 

events such as this tournament which have such a positive 

impact on our youth. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Redwings Win Saskatchewan 

Junior Hockey League Title 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Wednesday night in North Battleford the Saskatchewan Junior 

Hockey League title was decided, and I am extremely happy to 

say that it was the Weyburn Redwings that won it. And I must 

also add that they had a relatively easy time of disposing of 

their opponents, the North Battleford North Stars. Matter of 

fact, Mr. Speaker, it was in four straight wins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League is 

recognized as one of the finest Junior A leagues in Canada with 

many talented players and numerous devoted coaches. So to be 

top of this league is a real credit to the Weyburn Redwing 

organization. The Weyburn Redwings have captured the SJHL 

(Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) title three times in the 

last four years — twice in North Battleford — and represented 

our province in the Royal Bank Cup national championships in 

’93-94. 

 

With continued hard work and effort I hope that this team will 

represent our province this year in Summerside, Prince Edward 

Island. I want to wish the team all the best in their next step to 

the national championship as they play the St. James Canadians, 

winners of the Manitoba Junior Hockey League, for the Anavet 

Cup. 

 

The players, coaches, trainers, the numerous volunteers, and the 

endless community support have helped the team become one 

of the finest in Saskatchewan, and hopefully in Canada, at this 

level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be cheering the provincial champions, the 

Weyburn Redwings, on in the next round, and I invite all 

members to join with me in congratulating the Weyburn 

Redwings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grenfell Hosts The Keystone Cup 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

weekend Grenfell, the community of Grenfell, is hosting the 

Keystone Cup. The Keystone Cup is a competition that brings 

together teams from across western Canada at the AAA midget 

level to compete for this cup, and it’s a prestigious event. And I 

think the community of Grenfell needs to be commended for all 

the work — hard work — and the number of volunteers. It takes 

a lot of work, a lot of effort, a number of people to put on such 

a prestigious event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are teams from north-western Ontario, 

Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and B.C. (British Columbia) 

competing in this cup. I had the pleasure of taking in the 

opening ceremonies last night and watching some of the hockey 

that was going on. I know that people in that area are going to 

be treated to some excellent hockey. 

 

I also know that the people of Grenfell are going to look for 

their team, the Grenfell Play-It-Again Storm, to put together the 

effort that’s needed not only as they showed last weekend, to 

win the provincial championship, but to win the Keystone Cup 

and represent . . . I know they’re going to represent the 

community well. 

 

So congratulations to each and every one involved for their hard 

work and effort. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

In Good Taste Catering Services 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan jobs are being created every day. They come 

about because of bright, innovative Saskatchewan people who 

see a need and then proceed to meet that need. These 

small-business people deserve our thanks and they deserve our 

recognition. 

 

I want to mention one such business, a new business run by 

three enterprising women in the village of Togo who have put 

together a business called In Good Taste Food Services. Cheryl 

Digby, Gaye Lendenbeck, and Gail Ruf began a frozen dessert 

and catering business a few years ago. Their products were so 

appetizing and the demand grew so rapidly that they decided to 

expand the business to include speciality desserts. 

 

With the assistance of PAWBED (Partnership Agreement on 

Water Based Economic Development), which assisted their 

expansion, they began production just over a year ago. At first 

their market was local, but fairly quickly restaurants and hotels 

began picking up their products because they were unique, 

because no one else was making them, and of course, Mr. 

Speaker, because they tasted good. 

 

Now, a year later, the original three have hired three more 

full-time workers and go through 800 eggs, 200 kilograms of 

flour, 250 kilograms of canola oil and 200 kilograms of sugar a 

week, all but the last being Saskatchewan products. Mr. 

Speaker, this is not IPSCO, but Good Taste Food Service is one 

more example of how Saskatchewan is thriving. 

 

I applaud the three young entrepreneurs, Cheryl, Gail, and 

Gaye, and wish them all the best as they make the best. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

“Faded Beauty” Exhibit at Ukrainian Museum 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize two people from my constituency, from the 

community of Wakaw: David Venne and Natasha Hnidy. 

 

David, a photographer, and Natasha, a young poet, will have   



776  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

their works on display at the Ukrainian Museum of Canada in 

Saskatoon until May 25. 

 

The exhibit, entitled “Faded Beauty,” is a combination of old 

and new photographs, poetry, and historical notes. David and 

Natasha are preserving what is left of old homesteads, 

farmyards, and history of the pioneers in the Wakaw area. In 

Natasha’s words, this exhibit takes you to a “place you’ve never 

been.” 

 

David is a freelance photographer in Wakaw. He also collects 

old photographs from the community and has become interested 

in the stories of the people who settled in this area. 

 

Natasha is a grade 12 student in Wakaw, who says of her work, 

when I write I can go anywhere, do anything, and be anyone. 

She has had her poetry published by the National Library of 

Poetry in the United States. 

 

Congratulations to David and Natasha. I look forward to 

viewing your exhibit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battlefords Exhibition Family Farm Awards Recipient 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have many capable 

and very successful farmers in our area. One such farmer was 

honoured recently at a function in North Battleford when he and 

his family received the Battlefords Exhibition Family Farm 

Award. 

 

Mr. Nestor Kowalsky of Richard would be the first to 

acknowledge that such success is not a solo effort and that all 

family members have played a significant role in such an 

accomplishment. 

 

I am pleased to congratulate my neighbour, Nestor, and his 

family on their great success. They have a beautiful farmstead 

and an extremely well-managed mixed farm. The Kowalsky 

family was awarded this prize after their name was placed in 

nomination by a neighbour and was selected by a totally 

independent committee. 

 

This award to the Kowalsky family, I am convinced, is in no 

small way due to Nestor’s brother’s extensive knowledge of 

agriculture. His brother is of course our own caucus’s honorary 

agriculture adviser, none other than the hon. member from 

Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Please join me in congratulating the entire Kowalsky family, 

now in their fourth generation of Saskatchewan farming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Timely Tabling of Annual Reports 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this government makes much 

about being an open and accountable government, and yet, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a lot of talk and very little action. They must 

realize that the release of annual reports from various 

government departments and Crown corporations are essential 

documents that are necessary to hold a government accountable. 

 

For this reason one has to ask why it’s taken more than a year to 

receive reports that cover the past fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, it 

seems odd that this lack of openness and accountability comes 

from a New Democratic government that indicated in a 1991 

document, Democratic Reforms for the 1990’s, and I quote: 

 

. . . all annual reports of Government of Saskatchewan 

departments, agencies, commissions, and Crown(s) . . . be 

made public no later than six months following the close of 

(the) . . . year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why this government has 

failed to live up to the commitment to table annual reports in a 

timely way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it is the intent and has 

been the style of this government to release reports from 

Crowns in a timely fashion, and they will be. And when the 

member receives them, I think what he will see is that the 

Crowns in Saskatchewan are in very healthy financial position. 

 

As with any portfolio — many of the members opposite would 

have mutual fund portfolios — and at the end of the day what 

you will see with our Crowns is that they are very healthy and 

doing very well, which is a tremendous change from the way 

they were under the management of some of the members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House the 

minister in charge of SaskTel confirmed that an internal 

investigation will take place into the NST fiasco. However, she 

also indicated that any such investigation will not be made 

public. 

 

The taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the shareholders of SaskTel, 

deserve to know how and why this government botched this 

investment so badly. They need to know the real truth behind 

this mess. If this is such an open and accountable government, 

will the minister send a signal to the people of Saskatchewan 

and make a commitment in this House today to make the results 

of this investigation public? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

members opposite get their facts straight first. There’s a 

statutory requirement for tabling the financial statements of 

Crown corporations, which will be adhered to. The year end is 

December 31, 1996. 

 

As you know very well, the Crown Corporations Committee, an 

all-party committee on which members of your party are 

represented, has done their deliberations based on the year 

under review, 1996, and in due course the Crown Corporations 

Committee report will come to this House. 

 

In terms of the review that I referred to yesterday, we always   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

have an internal review. There’s an internal review going on in 

NST. The details of that will be released in the annual report in 

due course. 

 

I also made mention of an independent review by the audit 

committee of the board and asked that they report within 30 

days. I did not say that it will not be made public. I said that 

once I see the report . . . I’ll be patiently waiting for the report, 

and I urge the members opposite to be patient as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prosecutions Review Report 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well we’ve just had some examples of the 

government’s idea of open and accountable government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the trail doesn’t stop there. We’ve just had a 

review of our Justice department and I think the minister’s 

handling of that review tells us a lot about their commitment to 

open and accountable government, which doesn’t sound a 

whole bunch different than the Tory commitment previously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Justice minister sat on this report for six 

weeks. Is this his idea of openness and accountability? No one 

has been able to figure out why it took him six weeks to reveal 

a report whose most startling recommendation is to provide 

personal computers to prosecutors — to be matched with, of 

course, another recommendation that media and opposition 

politicians should be very careful when they ask questions. 

 

Will the minister explain why the report was hidden for so 

long? What’s so sensitive about it that it couldn’t have been 

revealed earlier? And what does his handling show about open 

and accountable government that the Deputy Premier says will 

lead the whole of Canada to elect an NDP (New Democratic 

Party) federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 

interesting to have the comments from the hon. member. I 

advised him that when the report came, I would be releasing it 

to the public. It took a couple of weeks longer than I anticipated 

to put together all of the responses that we had. In that time we 

released what I would say was a very good budget, which has 

caused all of the people of Saskatchewan to recognize that we 

have a fair, open, reasonable government that provides for all of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that I think the hon. member should realize is 

that any time one does an operational review within a particular 

department of government, that it does take some time to 

respond. And we took that time and I think it was a very 

reasonable time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, with all respect to the Hon. 

Minister of Justice, we have not had an operational review of 

the department. We’ve had an administrative review. There is 

absolutely nothing in this report, nothing in anything that’s been 

done in the court cases, which gives us any idea at all of how it 

happened that the Martensville investigation became so terribly 

derailed to the point that innocent lives were ruined by 

scandalous and baseless investigations. 

 

The ongoing court cases will not answer the question of how we 

can avoid future investigations becoming witch-hunts. 

 

What can the minister tell us that will reassure the people of 

Saskatchewan that safeguards are being implemented that will 

prevent a repetition of this sad and disturbing chapter in our 

province’s history? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, without a doubt the 

Martensville matter has been one of the most troubling criminal 

cases in Saskatchewan in recent history. It dealt with allegations 

of sexual abuse by multiple accused of the most vulnerable 

members of our society. The outcome of that case was neither 

definitive nor satisfying to either the accused or the families or 

the victims. And the victims . . . the accused, who are deeply 

concerned with the outcome, have now launched civil suits. 

And that’s their right under the justice system. 

 

Crown prosecutors who are the subject of those suits have filed 

statements of defence. Our courts will be making a 

determination with respect to those proceedings. As I have said 

many, many times, this restricts my ability to comment on a 

number of these matters, and it’s highly inappropriate for me or 

for anyone to compromise the proceeding of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. 

 

As I said yesterday, there’s a situation where we’re having to 

deal with the facts, and every time that the hon. member uses 

some of these words that he does use to describe this case, he 

further adds to some of the problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t invent the problem, and I 

don’t think the minister’s shoot-the-messenger solution is really 

going to work. I wasn’t asking for him to go into the past of 

what’s happened. I recognize that’s before the courts and that 

will be handled in due course. 

 

What I’m trying to ask the minister to focus in on, and have 

several times, is what can he tell us about the future? What have 

we learned? What can we do to ensure this doesn’t happen 

again? What can we do to prevent a repetition? 

 

Yes, the past is over and done with, and yes, the courts will 

have to now deal with it. I’m not asking about the past. I’m 

asking about what we have learned and put in place for the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you. I finally have a question that’s 

reasonable and makes sense. What this government does, what   



778  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

this government has done, is recognize, as with all the 

jurisdictions across North America, that we did not know how 

to do the proper things with children’s evidence. 

 

And that’s one of the big issues in this whole case, is how do 

you interview children. Well this government has spent much 

time and effort, through the victims’ fund, through Social 

Services, through Health, to look at how do you deal with 

children and the evidence that they present to the court. 

 

We have an integrated child abuse unit in Regina that’s been 

operating for awhile. I just recently was in Saskatoon to open 

the Saskatoon Child Centre, which deals with exactly the issue 

that the member is asking about. And I would encourage him 

and all the members there and all of the public of Saskatchewan 

to be fully aware of the kinds of changes that we have made to 

deal with children and how they present evidence to the court. 

 

And I thank the member very much for that question that I can 

finally answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Corporation Annual Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is becoming totally 

littered by promises which are tossed aside by this government. 

The NDP indicated in a 1991 document, and I’ll quote: 

 

The timely release of these reports (the annual reports) 

would prevent the government from slow-walking their 

public review by the Crown Corporations and Public 

Accounts Committee of the legislature. 

 

This is something that I hope the government is going to pay 

attention to because we really do need an answer. 

 

What’s the government doing? An example, Mr. Speaker, the 

1995-96 annual report for Gaming Corporation, only just now 

released. In the case of Casino Regina there are more than $37 

million of taxpayers’ dollars at stake. The general public and 

the media deserve to know in a timely fashion the true state of 

this investment — whether it’s living up to its profit projections 

and how much foreign partners are receiving, to name a couple 

of examples. 

 

We keep asking through freedom of information for 

information. We get denied, denied, and denied. The opposite 

of open and accountable is closed and inscrutable. Will the 

Premier explain why his government is hiding the facts from 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

understand why the former leader of the Liberal Party is so 

grumpy this morning. I don’t understand what he’s so excited 

about. I really want to tell him that this is the most up to date 

the Crown Corporations Committee has been in the last 20 

years. Right now. And why the member is getting up today in a 

grumpy way and saying that we’re way behind on Crown 

corporations and the reports aren’t tabled, where the heck are 

you coming from? Did you have a bad sleep last night or what’s 

wrong? 

 

The fact of the matter is we’re right up to date, we’re right up to 

date. It might be that the federal polling isn’t good enough, that 

Chrétien isn’t doing well on some big issues, but don’t take it 

out on the Crown Corporations Committee. They’re doing their 

work. There’s an invitation on your desk to the 50th anniversary 

of the Crown Corporations working committee. Be a little more 

positive. It’s not that bad. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Successor Rights 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, your 

new Highways Act is nothing less than a joke — 15 years to 

twin No. 1 and the Yellowhead highways. You could promise 

anything 15 years from now. You certainly aren’t going to be in 

charge at that point. In fact at the rate you’re going you won’t 

be the minister 15 months from now. And your plan to deal 

with short-line railways is to refer it to another committee. 

 

Mr. Minister, there already is a committee. It’s called the 

Southwest Saskatchewan Transportation Committee, and they 

say the solution is get rid of successor rights. Will you do that 

today, Mr. Minister, or are we going to have to wait 15 years to 

see short-line rail development in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, the member is a few 

months behind with respect to his understanding of the 

situation. The fact is that everyone in the industry, everyone 

concerned with short-line railways, understands that the 

Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board has a lot of discretion 

with respect to whether or not successor rights apply. There’s 

nothing automatic about it. It will depend upon the facts of a 

particular case. 

 

Assuming that successor rights do apply — and that is not a 

certainty by any means — then the railways and a number of 

short-line operators have indicated that they don’t anticipate 

any problems at all, that they’ll be able to make collective 

bargaining work on the short-lines as it does in every other part 

of our society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday something in this 

legislature was very remarkable that happened — your 

government actually admitted there were flaws in The Trade 

Union Act and you waived provisions within that Act, allowing 

IPSCO to sign a five-year deal with its union. We supported 

that legislation; it passed in less than an hour. 

 

Mr. Minister, getting rid of successor rights is just as simple. In 

fact we have a Bill that we could already pass here today that 

would do exactly that. We could pass it this morning and clear 

the track for short-rail line development here in Saskatchewan. 

 

  



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

Mr. Minister, will you show the same spirit of cooperation that 

you did on Tuesday? What everyone says needs to happen is to 

eliminate successor rights to develop short-line rails in 

Saskatchewan. Will you move on that today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, no we will not. The fact of 

the matter is that people involved in short-line railways, 

including short-line railway operators, acknowledge that the 

successor right question is not a problem. 

 

There are lots of problems around short-line railways. But this 

is old news, Mr. Speaker. These members of the Conservative 

opposition are just out of date on the question. The fact of the 

matter is that collective bargaining can work if indeed it applies. 

The fundamental question is whether or not successor rights 

applies . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. All hon. members will 

come to order. I’m having a great deal of difficulty being able 

to hear the minister’s response because members are shouting 

from their chairs on both sides of the House. And I’ll ask all 

hon. members to allow the minister’s response to be heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the reality is that everyone 

interested in the short-line railway question understands . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Does SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities)? They’re right up there. Does SARM 

think that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Will the member listen, Mr. Speaker? 

I’m going to try and give him an answer. 

 

The fact of the matter is that everyone involved with the 

short-line question understands that the Labour Relations Board 

has jurisdiction to determine the question; it is not automatic. It 

is a question of whether or not they’re going to . . . They will 

decide that successor rights apply or doesn’t apply. 

 

Now in the worst-case scenario, it is clear as between the 

number of short-line potential operators and the unions 

involved, that they will be able to bargain collectively in a way 

that is short-line friendly. Now that should be enough even for 

the members opposite with their anti-union bias. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Young Offenders Act 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question’s to the Minister of Justice. And, Mr. Speaker, and, 

Mr. Minister, people across not only this province but across 

Canada, are quite concerned with the Young Offenders Act. In 

fact it’s a question that has been raised time and time again. 

 

Just recently a group of students at Miller High School here in 

city of Regina put their heads together and came up with some 

suggestions and some proposals, some ideas. Mr. Minister, 

these students are going to Ottawa tomorrow, and what I would 

like to know, Mr. Minister, what you have done to show 

support. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, did you sign their petition to show 

support for the ideas they have brought forward? And, Mr. 

Minister, are you in favour of toughening the Young Offenders 

Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to report, 

as I did previously, that I met with these young people for 

almost two hours and we had a very fruitful discussion. One of 

the things that I did yesterday in fact was wish the chaperon 

who’s going along with them, who is Chief Murray Langgard of 

the Regina city police, I wished him well and it’s my 

understand that they’re leaving tomorrow and that they’re 

working together and hope to meet with Mr. Rock Monday 

afternoon. 

 

Now one of the things that comes out of this discussion is that 

my sense of optimism about the youth of Saskatchewan has 

been renewed. And it’s very important, I think, that all of us 

recognize that these young people have done a very good job of 

identifying and working with a number of the issues. And what 

we have done as a government is continually work with the 

various young offender issues. These young people are part of 

that discussion and we very much thank them for their work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Echo Valley Construction Site Accident 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the minister responsible for the New 

Careers Corporation. Now, Mr. Minister, in November, New 

Careers was fined $75,000 for violating the occupational health 

and safety regulations. Just recently, SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) was also fined $20,000 for 

this very same incident. 

 

Now New Careers and SPMC failed to provide a safe working 

environment at a project at the Echo Valley centre in Fort 

Qu’Appelle. We understand that this resulted in one employee 

being killed in a fall. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, how could this happen? Have you 

determined who is responsible for this tragic accident, and what 

actions have been taken against these individuals who may have 

been responsible for the accident. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The incident 

that the member refers to is of course a very serious one, and 

the departments made appropriate responses when they were 

brought before the courts with respect to the matter. They have 

pleaded to it and the courts have imposed fines that were 

commensurate with the gravity of the situation. 

 

I am not able to tell the member what specific actions with 

respect to individuals have followed from that. But I want to 

say to the member that it is indeed a serious situation and it 

must not be repeated. I think we can take it that both SPMC and 

the New Careers people have learned an important lesson from   



780  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

this, and the lives and safety and health of the people who are 

working on projects like that are paramount and must be 

protected at all costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

supplemental question to the same minister. Mr. Minister, 

simply fining New Careers and SPMC seems to be totally 

pointless. After all, those are government agencies, and the fine 

money collected is collected by the government from itself 

basically. So your government is not really penalized at all. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, in addition to this fine, is any further 

compensation going to be paid to the families of the worker 

who was killed? What further action are you taking to amend 

the negligence of your department and the people involved? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well of course the people who were 

unfortunate victims of the situation are, like all other working 

people in the province, covered by The Workers’ Compensation 

Act and they will receive compensation pursuant to that Act. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I’m not able as I stand here today 

to tell the member what specific actions were taken against 

employees. That’s a management question within the 

administration of those organizations, and not of course 

something for the minister to decide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Poverty 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

government likes to sell itself to the rest of the country as one 

which leads the way in the war against child poverty and other 

social issues. But the fact is that while the Premier accepts 

accolades, there is a great deal of evidence to prove that too 

many children in this province are being neglected by a 

government that makes these very claims. 

 

The Premier pledged to end child poverty in his first term. 

When asked to explain why this has not happened, his only 

explanation is that sometimes you reach for the stars and get 

caught in the branches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the second-highest level of 

child poverty in the country. It is incumbent that the Premier 

recognize that child poverty will never be alleviated if he does 

not make the connection between the litany of social ills that 

contribute to this problem. 

 

Yesterday in this House I called on this government to strike an 

all-party committee so that any issues surrounding children at 

risk can be referred to the Children’s Advocate for review and 

investigation and subsequent report to this Assembly. 

 

Will the Premier or his designate explain why he does not take 

a lead role and adopt these suggestions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member, if she 

were reading newspapers, including national newspapers, 

would know that our Premier has taken a very active role on 

child poverty and has been receiving — and I think in a very 

proper way — accolades from child poverty groups right across 

the country. 

 

Now what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the only time you 

hear Liberals talking about child poverty is when there’s an 

imminent election, which is sad. Mr. Paul Martin, who spent the 

last three and a half years hacking and slashing social programs 

for children right across Canada, when the election is imminent, 

now comes forward with a budget that talks about — and I say 

talks about — doing something about child poverty, not today, 

not this budget, but if they’re re-elected down the road. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, if you’re sincere in this, I 

would urge you to talk to your federal counterparts. Get on the 

phone to Chrétien and say, don’t wait till after the federal 

election, do something now. Stop talking and do some action 

that would help the children of Canada who find themself in 

this unfortunate predicament. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier has indicated that he 

supports federal legislation which would ensure the prosecution 

of Canadians who are involved in child sex trades in foreign 

countries. Yet in this province, the child sex trade is one which 

is growing at a disturbing and rapid pace. 

 

Mr. Premier, it is admirable that you were speaking out on this 

issue as it affects children in other countries. However, the 

children of this province are the ones that need and should 

expect your help and are not getting it. 

 

During this session I introduced a Bill, The Measures to 

Combat Child Prostitution Act, which would be a first step to 

assist children who are victims of the child sex trade. 

 

Will the Premier or his designate take the lead in this province 

— put politics aside and adopt this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I say again to the member opposite, 

who raises an important issue, and I couldn’t agree more with 

the principle of the question that she asks. One really has to 

wonder though, when she raises it here, when in large part the 

issue is not being dealt with properly at the federal level as it 

would apply to the issues that she raises, that she has provided 

no opportunity in this House by speaking to the federal 

government either in written form or in her speeches about 

lobbying them to get the projects done and completed in 

harmony and cooperation with the federal government. 

 

  



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

But she will have a chance. Next Tuesday, there will be a 

motion put on the order paper and debated here in the House 

where we will be watching closely — not to what you’re 

saying, but how you vote on this motion that deals with this 

most important issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 217 — The Trade Union Amendment Act 

(Repealing Successor Rights) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 

of a Bill No. 217, The Trade Union Amendment Act. I so move. 

 

The Speaker:  When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  By leave, later this day. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of The Psychologists Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you. It’s my pleasure today, Mr. 

Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to all colleagues 

in the Assembly on behalf of the minister responsible for Indian 

and Metis Secretariat and a member from Lake Centre, seated 

in the east gallery, Raul Macias Bravo, who is a representative 

from the Canadian Institute for Friendship with People. He’s 

visiting with individuals and groups across Canada to promote 

relationships of friendship between Canada and Cuba. Cuba is 

hoping to establish exchanges of trade, culture, and tourism. He 

is most pleased to visit Regina and take part in the ceremonies 

of the Government of Saskatchewan today. 

 

He’s accompanied by someone I recognize as well, Ms. Mona 

Acker. Mona and I have the privilege to work together on a task 

force for community and women’s issues in Regina. And I’d 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, while I’m also on my feet, if I 

may also join in from my colleague’s introduction and say hello 

to a constituent of mine, Jamie Briltz, who I know has been 

working for years to see the accomplishment that will be 

presented to the House shortly. And I ask members to again 

welcome Jamie to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  To request leave, Mr. Speaker, to move 

some motions substituting committee members from our 

caucus. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 

by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Ms. June Draude be substituted for that 

of Mr. Rod Gantefoer on the list of members comprising 

the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be substituted for that of 

Mr. Gerard Aldridge on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Municipal Law 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be substituted for that of 

Mr. Harvey McLane on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Rod Gantefoer be substituted for that 

of Mr. Gerard Aldridge on the list of members composing 

the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

  



782  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Special Committee on Regulations 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Gerard Aldridge be substituted for 

that of Ms. June Draude on the list of members composing 

the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on the Environment 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Ms. Arlene Julé be substituted for that of 

Mr. Bob Bjornerud on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on the Environment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, gratefully, lastly, I move, 

seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be substituted for that of 

Mr. Ken Krawetz on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18  The Saskatchewan Applied 

Science Technologists and Technicians Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Applied 

Science Technologists and Technicians Act. Over the last 18 

months our department has been working very closely with this 

association. I’m very pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to be moving 

this Bill. 

 

The purpose of this Act is to protect the health, the safety, and 

welfare of the public by establishing professional standards of 

expertise and conduct and by identifying competent and 

qualified applied science technologists and technicians. 

 

The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 

Technicians Act reflects general government policy regarding 

professional legislation using guidelines provided by the 

Department of Justice. The majority of the sections of this Bill 

are standard sections that appear in all professional legislation. 

The association of Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians — as we better know it, Mr. 

Speaker, as SASTT — is a growing professional group with 

more than 1,800 members across our province. SASTT is a 

non-profit, self-governing organization of men and women who 

have been certified by their peers to have a recognized level of 

specialized post-secondary academic and practical training in 

the applied science and technology field. SASTT has four 

chapters across the province, in Lloydminster, in Prince Albert, 

in Regina, and one in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of SASTT are highly trained specialists 

who apply fundamental principles, methods, knowledge, and 

training to solve technical problems. They work in our oil 

patches, in our mines, in our hospitals, and in our agricultural 

sector, just to name a few of the employment areas. They have 

worked in northern Saskatchewan with SaskTel to provide 

technical protection and assist in replacing ageing switching 

and trunking equipment with digital fibre-optics cable. 

 

Other duties and responsibilities undertaken by the applied 

science technologists include environmental monitoring and 

analysis, quality control and analysis of construction sites, 

geo-technical investigations of proposed sites, corrective 

maintenance and safety inspections of clinical and medical 

equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1995 Mr. Howard Derksen of Saskatoon, a 

member of SASTT, contributed to our agricultural economy by 

designing and marketing the Freedom Lift. The Freedom Lift is 

an innovative wheelchair lift system that enables hundreds of 

farmers and other mobility-impaired individuals across Canada 

and around the world to enter and exit farm equipment or 

aircraft unassisted from their wheelchairs. 

 

Mr. Derksen is just one example of an applied science 

technologist who has made a significant contribution to our 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, for a number of years now 

SASTT members have played a significant role in 

Saskatchewans growing economy. They have been pursuing 

self-regulating legislation since 1980s . . . since the early 1980s 

similar to title protection legislation for applied science 

technologists and technicians currently exists in the provinces 

of Ontario, Quebec, and that of British Columbia. SASTT has 

conducted . . . has consulted with and received positive support 

from its members as well as other provincial technologists and 

technicians from across Canada. 

 

SASTT, in its bid for title protection legislation, has also 

received support from the city of Regina, from the city of 

Saskatoon, from the city of Yorkton, the towns of Creighton 

and Shaunavon, Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union, 

the Canadian Union of Public Employees. 

 

Key provisions to The Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians Act will include: continue the 

association as a corporation; they will establish a board of   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

directors to manage and regulate the affairs and business of the 

association; they will provide for public representation on the 

board; they will provide a board of directors with the authority 

to make new bylaws; require the board of directors to keep a 

register of all of their members; and will provide title protection 

for the terms “applied science technologist” and “certified 

technician”; will establish a professional conduct committee 

and a discipline committee; and will require the board of 

directors to provide an annual report to the minister. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, to protect the health, safety, and 

welfare of the public, it is necessary to establish professional 

standards of expertise and conduct and to identify competent 

and qualified applied science technologists and certified 

technicians to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists 

and Technicians Act will clarify and manage the regulations of 

all of these professionals. I am pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to 

move second reading of The Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

have this opportunity to speak to The Saskatchewan Applied 

Science Technologists and Technicians Act. I am speaking on 

behalf of the opposition leader, Ken Krawetz, who 

unfortunately could not . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member will I think 

immediately recognize that he’s not permitted to use proper 

names of members here — refer to them only by positions. And 

I’ll ask that he’ll follow the rules of the House in providing his 

debate. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I apologize. I’m speaking on behalf of the 

opposition leader from Canora-Pelly who unfortunately could 

not be here today. 

 

As the minister mentioned, Bill 18 would establish a legal 

authority for Saskatchewan applied science technologists and 

technicians to create their own professional association. It 

seems the SASTT association has put a tremendous amount of 

work into accomplishing this goal, and I would like to 

commend them on their efforts. 

 

The package supplied by the association to provide background 

on the purpose and structure of this legislation was extremely 

informative. And dozens of letters of support from city 

commissioners throughout Saskatchewan provide this Bill with 

impeccable recommendations. 

 

Upon reviewing Bill 18, we found that most of the clauses it 

contained followed the general pattern that is used in legislation 

creating similar professional bodies. Because the safety of 

Saskatchewan people is a priority for all members of this 

House, I do believe that anything that can be done to set and 

maintain a high standard of safety guidelines must be done. 

In accordance with establishing a legally recognized, 

professional association, Bill 18 proposes the establishment of 

an association board comprised of elected members and two 

appointments by the government. The association board is 

extremely necessary in order to manage the body and 

administer the bylaws and guidelines. 

 

The main concern that we have with this section of the Act is 

that while it’s not unusual for the government to appoint a few 

members to the association board, unlike The Legal Profession 

Act, this Bill does not require the government to consult with 

the association on its board member choices. 

 

The lack of this requirement could potentially cause future 

conflicts between board members on the direction that the 

SASTT association would take. This Act also creates 

investigative and disciplinary bodies within the association to 

deal with any allegations of professional misconduct on the part 

of its members. 

 

Once again, we support any measure that must be taken in order 

to ensure that a high standard of safety is established in order to 

protect Saskatchewan people. If the investigation committee 

determines that a complaint against a member has merit, the 

member will be subject to a formal hearing during which he or 

she will have a chance to defend their actions but could also 

face the repercussions for unprofessional behaviour in the 

workplace. 

 

The discipline committee can administer expulsion, suspension, 

or other professional restrictions as a course of action. If 

Saskatchewan residents are somehow put at risk because a 

member’s actions show a lack of knowledge, skill, or 

judgement concerning the safety of the public, then discipline is 

certainly necessary. 

 

However I do find that section 40 of this Bill is a bit unusual. 

Section 40 basically says that an employer who fires a member 

of the SASTT association with cause must report it to the 

association. This would be applied in cases where the employer 

feels the member has shown professional incompetence or 

professional misconduct. We are concerned that this 

requirement on behalf of the employers may, in some cases, 

lead to further problems. For example, the prospect of reporting 

to the association could potentially begin to show up as a 

bargaining chip in negotiations with members who have been 

fired. 

 

But on a whole, I believe that Bill 18 will provide SASTT 

members with long-overdue professional recognition. Allowing 

members to become certified members of the association will 

hopefully create more confidence in applied engineering 

technologists and technician graduates in Saskatchewan. This 

new certification may even create new employment 

opportunities for some. 

 

We were particularly encouraged by a letter of support for this 

legislation written by Dr. Art Knight, president of the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. I 

quote: 

 

  



784  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

Legislative changes which would recognize the rights of 

our graduates to practise the work for which they have 

been academically trained would remove some of the 

artificial barriers that are now preventing some technical 

personnel from achieving their full potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the passage of this legislation would enable 

Saskatchewan members of the SASTT association to join 

professional certification ranks that are already offered in 

British Columbia, Quebec, Ontario, and New Brunswick. 

 

Overall I welcome the general intent of Bill 18 as it pertains to 

maintaining a high level of academic qualifications and practise 

of Saskatchewan applied science technologists and technicians. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

address some of the issues brought forward in this piece of 

legislation. We’re particularly happy with the new features 

dealing with safety. That is very, very important in both our 

society and in industry generally, Mr. Speaker. Anything that 

can be done more safely should and must be done. 

 

We’re particularly pleased to see the recognition that SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is 

making a very positive contribution both on the educational 

area in this province and again, in providing technologists and 

trained people for industry. Without industry, without jobs in 

this province, this economy will certainly falter. We’re pleased 

with their hard work, Mr. Speaker, and we would like to 

commend them for that. 

 

Technologists and technicians have been quite involved in my 

life, Mr. Speaker, in various industries that I have worked in, 

particularly in the oil field. It’s just not in education or in the 

medical fields that we find technologists, but it’s across 

industry, Mr. Speaker, and they play a very vital role in that 

industry. 

 

We have had however, Mr. Speaker, some groups with some 

concerns about this particular piece of legislation, and before 

this legislation moves too far ahead, Mr. Speaker, we would 

like to confirm our contacts with those groups to ensure that 

their concerns have been addressed. 

 

In general, Mr. Speaker, we like the thrust of this legislation. 

We’re pleased where it’s going to but there are some people in 

society who do have some concerns and we would like to 

ensure that their concerns have been addressed to this particular 

piece of legislation before it moves forward. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 

on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my remarks 

I will be moving the second reading of The Wildlife Act, 1997. 

 

Saskatchewan contains one of the most diverse and unique 

ecosystems in the world. Our lush prairie grasslands, productive 

wetlands, diverse aspen parklands, and the wilderness forests 

and lakes in the North are renowned for their beauty and 

abundance of wildlife. 

 

Like most parts of the world, human impact has resulted in 

significant changes to our natural landscape. Consequently, 

many species of mammals, birds, plants, and other life forms 

have declined in numbers. Some of the most well-known 

endangered species in Saskatchewan include the whooping 

crane, the burrowing owl, and the piping plover. The presence 

of animals and plants in their natural habitat adds to our 

appreciation and enjoyment of this province. 

 

How well we sustain native species indicates how well we are 

managing the province’s ecosystems. Soil, air, and water 

quality, along with habitat, biological diversity, and human 

activities are all interrelated. When species decline or are at 

risk, it likely means that the rest of the ecosystem, including 

ourselves, are also at risk. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I will highlight the Act’s major features 

including a section on species at risk. Mr. Speaker, this Act 

incorporates the species at risk legislation which will help to 

focus activities and actions on endangered and threatened and 

vulnerable species. The department is moving towards focusing 

on an ecosystem approach to land management which in the 

future will help to ensure that all species are sustained. 

 

However, ecosystem management is a long-term approach and 

this legislation is needed to ensure the survival of species 

currently at risk. The proposed amendments will establish 

legislative authority to designate, protect, and recover plant and 

animal species at risk. A new definition of wild species is added 

to include all wild organisms. This will provide the mandate for 

the protection of plants, animals, and invertebrates. 

 

The proposed amendments protect endangered species in a 

number of ways. The Act will facilitate a cooperative approach 

with landowners through organizations such as the 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, and conservation 

organizations such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited, Pheasants Forever, 

World Wildlife Fund. 

 

It will also increase educational awareness and support for 

species at risk programs. The provisions allow for the 

preparation and implementation of recovery plans to protect and 

conserve wild species at risk. The Act makes it illegal to kill, 

capture, harvest, traffic in, or export wild species at risk. 

 

This amendment also establishes penalties for corporate as well 

as individual violators of the species at risk legislation. These 

amendments are a result of the Saskatchewan government’s 

commitment to the national accord for the protection of species 

at risk which was signed with the federal government in 

November 1996. Saskatchewan is committed to the principles 

of the accord and has worked cooperatively with other 

provinces, territories, and the federal government over the past   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

two years to develop a national approach to endangered species 

conservation in Canada. 

 

The agreement requires all jurisdictions to establish 

complementary legislation and programs that provide for 

effective protection of wildlife at risk throughout Canada. Four 

provinces currently have legislation in place and two provinces 

recently introduced legislation. Saskatchewan is now ready to 

join them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Passage of this Act will show Canada and 

the world that the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 

meeting its responsibilities in endangered species protection. 

 

The Saskatchewan legislation will not be a conflicting, 

heavy-handed enforcement approach to protecting endangered 

species. Rather, cooperation and consultation will be used in 

working with landowners, conservation organizations, and the 

public to manage and protect species at risk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, we commend landowners in 

southern Saskatchewan who have maintained natural habitat on 

their land. Our native flora and fauna remains here because of 

the good stewardship provided by generations of farmers and 

ranchers. 

 

The future of wildlife is dependent upon the continued 

cooperation and support offered by landowners. That is why 

Saskatchewan’s endangered species legislation is designed to 

work with the agriculture community. This will be done 

through cooperative programs that will complement the 

landowners’ efforts to maintain habitat and wildlife on their 

land. 

 

Another area this legislation will add to in The Wildlife Act is 

the big game damage compensation program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall the government implemented the big 

game crop damage compensation program. Given the severe 

winter conditions we experienced this year, big game crop 

damage is expected to be even higher than it was in 1995-96. 

Over 1,350 claims have been filed by approximately 800 

producers under this new program and the values of the claims 

is expected to approach one-and-a-half million dollars. 

 

The Act’s amendments provide the necessary legal framework 

to enable financial administration of the program by, number 

one, the establishment of a separate fund to hold all revenue 

from the sale of the $11 big game damage fund licence; number 

two, designating the revenue from the sale of this licence to go 

into this fund; and number three, providing authority to direct 

revenue from this fund to the Saskatchewan crop insurance 

program to be delivered through the agriculture stabilization 

fund. 

 

Farmers and conservation organizations have been pressuring 

government for a number of years to implement a program to 

provide compensation for crop damage caused by big game 

animals. The government is responding to the needs and 

concerns expressed by landowners who have suffered financial 

losses from crop damage caused by big game animals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that this program provides 

viable long-term compensation to the farmers of Saskatchewan, 

the provincial government has recently contributed $2 million 

to the big game damage compensation program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  This money, along with the approximately 

$600,000 collected from hunters in 1996, will ensure that the 

program will be able to meet . . . be able to cover the estimated 

one-and-a-half million dollars in claims expected during this 

particularly severe winter and provide seed money for future 

years. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are having discussions with the 

federal government for a matching federal contribution to the 

big game damage compensation program 

 

Mr. Speaker, landowners cannot be expected to absorb all of the 

costs associated with wildlife depredation, nor should only one 

user group — in this case, hunters — be the only ones 

contributing dollars to the compensation fund. The $2 million 

contributed from general revenue recognizes that wildlife is a 

public resource and everyone should contribute to the 

management and conservation of this valuable resource. 

 

The big game damage compensation program along with the 

publicly funded big game damage prevention program and 

waterfowl damage and prevention programs clearly shows this 

government recognizes the significant contribution landowners 

make towards wildlife management in Saskatchewan. We will 

continue to work with landowners to resolve conflicts between 

landowners and wildlife . 

 

We also have a number of administrative housekeeping 

amendments we will be introducing, Mr. Speaker. The proposed 

amendments deal with the administrative housekeeping. The 

Act continues existing interpretation and administrative 

provisions currently provided for in The Wildlife Act, continues 

existing licensing requirements and prohibitions related to 

hunting and trapping, and continues existing provisions related 

to investigations and search and seizure penalties and offences, 

forfeiture of property, and regulation-making powers. 

 

Also a number of sections have been updated to conform to 

current drafting practices or have been redrafted for clarity. The 

majority of the regulation-making powers remain unchanged; 

some are amended to include wild species and wild species at 

risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many public meetings and workshops have been 

held to get input from the people of Saskatchewan on the 

various aspects of this Act. The Act will support the continued   



786  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

development of pro-management and partnership initiatives. 

And this will respect the work which those have already been 

established with. 

 

This government recognizes the importance of wildlife to 

Saskatchewan people and in turn recognizes the economic and 

social benefits and the environmental responsibilities for 

managing provincial wildlife resources. 

 

This is just a brief overview of some of the many new features 

of The Wildlife Act, 1997. If our wildlife resource is 

maintained in a healthy state, it will continue to provide a wide 

variety of benefits for a long time to come. 

 

The new Act acknowledges that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has a responsibility for protecting, conserving, 

and enhancing the wildlife resource for the public benefit. It 

also recognizes the importance of a strong partnership between 

provincial and local governments, landowners, first nations, and 

stakeholders in working together to manage our wildlife 

resource. The Act will ensure Saskatchewan’s unique and 

valuable wildlife resource will be managed and protected for 

the people of Saskatchewan today and tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is now my great pleasure to move second 

reading of The Wildlife Act, 1997. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to be able to speak on the second reading of Bill No. 42, The 

Wildlife Act, 1997. It’s a major piece of legislation that will 

require detailed scrutiny by our caucus. We want to make sure 

through analysis and consultation with stakeholders that Bill 

No. 42 has all the necessary provisions to manage and protect 

our precious wildlife resource — a renewable resource, but only 

if it’s managed in a sustainable manner through conservation 

integrated with resource management. 

 

We’ve seen far too many examples of where presumable 

renewable resources have been brought to the brink of 

extinction for the lack of political courage to implement 

sustainable management and harvesting practices. The near 

destruction of the Atlantic cod stocks and the Pacific salmon 

stocks is a glaring example of man’s mismanagement and 

exploitation of nature’s otherwise potentially unlimited bounty. 

Let’s make sure that this doesn’t happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll have much more to say about the prudent 

stewardship of our resources during detailed examination of the 

Act. 

 

Wildlife, be it fish, fowl, fur, or plants, brings pleasure to all of 

us in many different ways — there are the hunters who enjoy 

the hunt on crisp autumn days; there are the fishermen on 

sun-kissed Saskatchewan lakes hoping for the big one; there is 

the photographer who seeks that once-in-a-lifetime picture at 

sunrise and sunset; and there are the tourists that seek that 

unique Saskatchewan experience in the Big Muddy, in The 

Great Sand Hills, the Grasslands National Park, or in our 

national forests. 

It is a way of life that’s to be treasured and preserved. Wildlife, 

if properly husbanded, is a resource that will continue to 

provide revenue long after our non-renewable resources are 

depleted. 

 

Tourism, and in particular eco-tourism, are among the world’s 

fastest growing industries and Saskatchewan is no exemption. 

Saskatchewan, like many industries, needs a variety of 

resources for its viability. These include natural resources such 

as forests, water, animals, fish and birds, beautiful scenery, and 

clean air. 

 

Tourism is primarily a service industry. A successful tourism 

business does not just sell products such as a hotel room or a 

meal, but rather an experience, whether it is a high-class urban 

experience involving museums, galleries, theatres, and heritage 

sites, or a wilderness experience involving bird-watching, 

photography, hiking, or fishing. 

 

The healthy state of tourism is dependent on resource 

protection. The tourism sector must be very careful that it 

doesn’t through exploitation destroy the very wilderness upon 

which its livelihood is based. Careful planning, monitoring, and 

cooperation between users will be essential to any development 

in these areas. 

 

Shrinking fish catches, disappearing natural habitat, declining 

bird populations, and the depletion of fresh water supplies are 

now affecting every corner of the world. Saskatchewan is not 

immune to these developments, all of them are happening here. 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, during detailed discussion on Bill 42, 

we will want the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management to explain what kind of integrated approach he 

and his department are taking with respect to agriculture, 

tourism, oil and gas exploration and extraction, and the 

exploration and mining of minerals and metals. All of these 

activities, Mr. Speaker, have a tremendous impact on our 

wildlife and wildlife habitat. 

 

Does the new wildlife Act provide sufficient protection and the 

means to sustain and perpetuate these resources is the question. 

If in our judgement it does, then we’ll support it. If it does not, 

then we’ll move amendments to sure that it does. Conservation 

and sustainability go hand in hand. 

 

The 1992 conservation strategy for sustainable development in 

Saskatchewan set out eight principles for sustainable 

development and seven conservation objectives. These were the 

result of intensive and province-wide grass roots consultations 

with stakeholders and the general public. 

 

The preface to the conservation strategy put The Wildlife Act in 

context. Saskatchewan has been blessed with an abundance of 

natural resources, however in a hundred years of settlement, our 

natural resources have been degraded. We are borrowing 

natural resources from our children and we must pass resources 

on to them in the best possible condition. 

 

To do so, we must recognize that our environment, economy, 

and social systems are interdependent. A healthy economy can 

last only in a healthy environment. If our economy is healthy,   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

we can afford to make wise environmental choices. Our social 

system also relies on the economy to support our health, 

education, and social services, and we need a healthy 

environment for our physical and spiritual well-being. 

 

The purpose of the conservation strategy was to focus efforts by 

government, industry, interest groups, and individuals to 

achieve sustainable development. A conservation strategy was 

intended to provide a framework to help Saskatchewan 

residents meet their needs without sacrificing the ability of 

future generations to meet theirs. 

 

We will want to explore with the minister and his department 

what it has done to implement the strategy since 1992 when it 

was received by and tabled in this Chamber by the Premier. 

What has he and the department done to implement those 

recommendations directed at it; and what has it done to lead by 

example and to coordinate and integrate its activities with other 

departments, stakeholders, and the industry? 

 

Sustainable development policies and practice are the 

responsibility of everyone, but Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management, if for no other reason than by virtue of 

its name, has the responsibility to drive the conservation 

strategy implementation. The department’s failure or success in 

doing so will no doubt be reflected in the grade it gets from the 

World Wildlife Fund this year. 

 

Our land, compared with what it was, is like the skeleton of a 

body wasted with disease. The soft parts have vanished and all 

that remains is the bare carcass. This lament, which could have 

been quoted from a contemporary ecologist, was actually 

sounded in the fourth century BC (before Christ) by the Greek 

philosopher Plato who was mourning the destruction and 

erosion of his Attica. 

 

Environmentally related problems have contributed to the 

demise of entire civilizations. The decline of Mesopotamia, 

present day Iraq, has been associated with the salinization of 

soils attributed to unsound irrigation practices. Saskatchewan’s 

aboriginal people have long recognized their stewardship 

obligations as reflected in the earlier quoted saying of a native 

elder that, quote, “We are borrowing natural resources from our 

children and we must pass them on in the best possible 

condition.” 

 

This has been an article of faith with aboriginal peoples 

centuries before the 1987 release of Our Common Future by the 

World Commission on Environment and Development, which 

defines sustainable development as, and I quote, “development 

that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 

ability of future generations to meet their own.” 

 

A native elder stated it even more simply and eloquently. Prior 

to the arrival of the settlers, aboriginal people had inhabited 

Saskatchewan for 10,000 years living in harmony with nature 

not exploiting their environment or resources, but hunting and 

fishing and trapping to sustain themselves. Not until the settlers 

arrived was the buffalo senselessly slaughtered to near 

extinction and millions of passenger-pigeons were hunted into 

extinction. 

Had the settlers and their descendants shown the same respect 

and reverence for wildlife and the wildlife habitat as the 

aboriginal people, we would not have lost 40 per cent of our 

wetlands, 80 per cent of our aspen parkland, and 75 per cent of 

our native grassland. 

 

There’s a lesson to be learned here somewhere. Across Canada, 

in Saskatchewan, conflicts escalate when more and more people 

want to use limited resources for a greater number of purposes. 

Conflicts challenge traditional decision making, and many 

decisions are protested, appealed, or ignored. 

 

Misgivings are growing about the ability of governments to 

mediate adequately between competing interests. Appeals, court 

cases, and civil disobedience create costs, a psychological drain, 

and additional uncertainty. A case in point is the dispute 

between our aboriginal people and the governments about 

hunting and fishing rights. 

 

In court, cases are the inevitable winners and losers. A better 

way is consensus building, Mr. Speaker. It requires separation 

of needs from once a willingness to acknowledge the needs of 

others and the development of trust where none existed before. 

Decisions by consensus usually inspire commitment, 

contributing to sustainable development. 

 

A consensus decision can be time-consuming, costly, and 

sometimes frustrating. However, unilateral decisions such as the 

imposition of the $11 surcharge on hunters for big game crop 

damage always result in anger and frustration and the risk of 

non-compliance. 

 

Consensus building should be our first approach to decision 

making to make environmental and economic integration and 

sustainable development successful. We’ll explore these issues 

further, Mr. Speaker, with stakeholders who we are contacting. 

 

So at this time, I would like to move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1130) 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders’ Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this morning I am very pleased to rise today and move second 

reading of The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s become increasingly evident that the 

formal court-centred system of dealing with young people who 

break the law has for at least some individuals met with very 

limited success both in terms of accountability to victims and in 

terms of reducing the likelihood that the youth will re-offend. 

Mr. Speaker, we believe there must be more effective ways and 

alternate ways to deal with youth in our communities who break 

the law. 

 

There are, Mr. Speaker, alternate methods commonly being   



788  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

referred to now as restorative justice, who hold the young 

people directly accountable to the victim and to the community. 

At the same time, these restorative justice initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker, seek to restore harmony between the young person and 

his or her victim, and within the larger community. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, rather than isolating the young 

person because of the offending behaviour, he or she is given 

the opportunity to make up for the offence and become again a 

contributing member of the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s often an unfortunate reality that victims of 

crime in our communities often say that they feel ignored and 

uninformed by our formal criminal justice system. Many will 

describe how they feel victimized not only once as a result of 

the crime, but twice — the second time by the formal process 

itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our experience now, when a restorative justice 

approach is used the victim and the offender play key roles in 

resolving the situation. Rather than being ignored, Mr. Speaker, 

the restorative justice approach affords victims the opportunity 

to describe to the offender in person how they and their families 

have been affected by his or her unlawful behaviour. In that 

context, where they desire, Mr. Speaker, they can freely express 

their thoughts and opinions as well on how the young person 

should be held accountable for that behaviour. Family and 

friends of both the victim and the offender also have the 

opportunity to participate, and in many cases, interested 

members of the community may also take part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having witnessed some of these restorative justice 

groups, I can tell you this: it is not by any means — by any 

means — the easy way out for the young person. Young people 

who have experienced it commonly remark that facing their 

victim — face to face — and having to listen as the victim 

expresses, sometimes with a great deal of emotion, their 

feelings about the offence, was for that person one of the most 

difficult, if not the most difficult, thing they have ever done in 

their lives. 

 

And they have said to me, Mr. Speaker, that it’s much, much 

easier to go to a court where they can remain silent, represented 

by professional legal counsel, and sheltered always from any 

contact with the individual, the victim that they have hurt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have had for some time 

now, a variety of restorative justice programs operating in our 

province in communities small and large. For example, a 

victim-offender mediation program has been available 

province-wide now for seven years. This program has enjoyed a 

high level of success, both in terms of youth accountability and 

victim satisfaction. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, a victims’ compensation project 

has been under way here in the city of Regina. The Atoskata 

project, delivered by the Regina Friendship Centre, was 

developed in partnership with aboriginal organizations, 

community agencies, and government, and deals with youth 

who have been convicted of property offences. In several 

instances, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this program, youth have 

had to work and have had to pay restitution to their victims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to report that a majority of 

victims who choose to participate in this program report now 

feeling a high level of satisfaction with the both the process and 

its outcome. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Aboriginal Human Services 

Cooperative began last year to provide a family group 

conferencing as an alternate measure to young offenders . . . as 

a alternate measure for young offenders, their parents, and the 

victims of the crime. This program too is now reporting a very 

high degree of success. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, some of the victims who have taken part in 

the process have now actually volunteered to work in the 

program because they now believe so strongly that it is a more 

realistic, meaningful, and effective way of dealing with some 

youth in our communities than is the formal court system. 

 

I’ve had the experience, Mr. Speaker, to join with the 

restorative justice committee or the family justice committee in 

the community of Shaunavon, where parents and social workers 

and the Mounted Police has come together to form this in 

Shaunavon and they report very satisfactory results, as do the 

young people of that community. 

 

And so I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that in light of the 

success that we’re beginning to see with this restorative justice 

approach, we will in this budget year ’97-98 provide an 

additional $500,000 to support other communities who may 

wish to develop alternate approaches in dealing with youth who 

break the law. The partnership approach will be expanded, Mr. 

Speaker, in direct response to requests from local communities. 

 

By its very nature this approach to youth justice relies on the 

contribution — the voluntary contribution — of individuals in 

our communities. And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that our public 

has a great deal to offer. 

 

Section 69 of the Young Offenders Act provides that the 

attorney general of a province may appoint one or more 

committees of citizens, to be known as youth justice 

committees, to voluntarily assist in administering or delivering 

programs or services for young offenders. Currently section 12 

of The Young Offenders’ Services Act grants statutory 

protection against liability to various individuals and groups of 

individuals, including employees or agents of the department 

over which the minister presides. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, section 12 protects them against liability 

while they are acting in good faith in the performance of any 

individual or collective function or duty imposed by the Act or 

its accompanying regulations. However presently, Mr. Speaker, 

this provision does not cover youth justice committees and 

people in our communities who will volunteer to be part of a 

youth justice committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we truly believe in the involvement of the 

community and individuals and citizens of that community in 

dealing with young people who break the law. We believe as   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

members of the community, they are better aware of the 

problems and issues within their own community, and problems 

and issues, Mr. Speaker, which may in some situations have 

played a role in the young person’s unlawful behaviour. 

 

But perhaps most importantly, as members of their community, 

they may have some very unique and very innovative ideas to 

deal with the offending young people that come before them. 

The individuals who have given of their lives to serve in these 

contexts, Mr. Speaker, are people who genuinely do care about 

their community and genuinely do care about youth, including 

youth who break the law. 

 

These are individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are willing to 

volunteer their time, to volunteer their energy, to make their 

communities a better place and a safer place and improve the 

lives of their young people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that the Act now 

before us, The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 

1997, will extend the statutory protection against liability to 

youth justice committees appointed by the Attorney General of 

the province and to individual members of those youth justice 

committees. It will do this, Mr. Speaker, by including them as 

“agents of the department” over which the minister presides. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to move second reading 

of The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

pleasure to join in debate on Bill 34 because it does in fact deal 

with a subject matter that’s been much on the minds of the 

people of Saskatchewan, particularly over the last number of 

weeks and months. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly there’s a problem with how we’ve 

been dealing with young offenders in Saskatchewan. And I’m 

somewhat encouraged to hear that the government is finally 

admitting to that. 

 

Once again however, we’ve seen so many times that the buck 

has been passed. We’ve heard the Premier state here in this 

House that the legislature has simply too much on its plate to 

deal with these concerns raised by the public. What made this 

statement particularly galling, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier 

said it in front of a group of young people who had come to the 

legislature to ask the government to do something about the 

escalation of youth crime in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over and over again we hear this government try 

to divorce itself from any responsibility with regards to youth 

crime, and in particular the Young Offenders Act. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, the Young Offenders Act is a federal statute. In fact 

what the government proposes to do with this Bill that is before 

us is to use a provision of that federal law, section 69, a 

provision, by the way, Mr. Speaker, which has been in place 

since 1984. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice stated in this House just the 

other day in estimates that so far there have been no formal 

youth justice committees appointed under section 69. Rather, 

there are a number of informal committees throughout the 

province put together really as a result of the desire of local 

people to try and help certain youths, to set them on the right 

path away from a life of crime. And I applaud the work of the 

citizens who start and volunteer for these types of committees 

throughout the province. 

 

As the Minister of Social Services alluded to a few days ago 

and has mentioned again in his presentation of this Bill, the 

example of a citizen-backed youth justice committee in 

Shaunavon located in the constituency from whence comes the 

member of Wood River. The youth justice committee was 

established about three years ago to deal with first time young 

offenders in that community. They are to be applauded for 

taking that initiative. 

 

It takes the form of youth mediation circle and has as its goal to 

try to keep these kids from becoming adult offenders which, as 

you know, Mr. Speaker, ends up costing our society greatly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as has been pointed out, Saskatchewan has the 

highest incarceration rate in North America. Simplistic 

approaches to youth crime, such as stating we can deal with it 

by just locking up all our youth, are clearly not the answer. 

That’s the approach of the third party. Just lock them up. That 

makes for a good sound bite, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly 

doesn’t get us any closer to a solution to this problem that we 

have. Like most of that party’s suggestions, however, they must 

be taken with a very large grain of salt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Shaunavon’s youth mediation circle was a 

community initiative. Citizens of the community approached 

the Crown prosecutor with the idea, and that’s how the process 

got into motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, community initiatives such as this one are 

important. And this Bill will serve to protect members of the 

committee from coming under any legal action in the future, as 

it will make them agents of the Crown as outlined in section 12 

of the young offenders’ Act that the minister had introduced 

while speaking about the Bill. So it is positive that the 

government has at least seen fit to use the provisions set out in 

the Young Offenders Act to protect these committees which are 

citizen initiatives. 

 

However, there is still a large question that remains hanging 

over us. What is this government prepared to do in regards to 

young offenders? When is it actually going to own up to its 

responsibility under the Act? 

 

I state once again, while the third party’s suggestions get us no 

closer to an answer, the government opposite, which continues 

to bury its head in the sand when it comes to young offenders, 

is not much better. We hear nothing from the government. 

Clearly there is a bit of a problem here. 

 

The people are telling us that, on almost a daily basis — and we 

have presented petitions on their behalf — that there is a need 

for a youth justice committee. Such committees have been used   



790  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

by the government in the past for The Highway Traffic Act and 

drinking- and driving-related matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This youth justice committee could be comprised of 

representatives of the police, community leaders, youth 

outreach programs, and other organizations committed to fight 

against youth crime. This committee would be a special task 

force to take a broad overview of all the programs we currently 

have in place for young people in trouble with the law. 

 

It’s clear to us on this side of the House, and it’s clear to the 

people of Saskatchewan, that such a task force is needed to 

figure out what we can do better when it comes to 

implementation of young offender rehabilitation programs in 

the larger sense. The people of this province deserve no less, 

Mr. Speaker, and neither do our young people. 

 

Is it so much to ask that we have citizens of this province, along 

with the police and others, simply give the government some 

suggestions on what it could be doing better, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

happened in other areas of legislation, and it’s been proposed, 

it’s been accepted, and it’s put into effect, and it works. The 

input from a lot of people helped come to some decisions. But 

apparently for the members of the government, that is a little bit 

too far to go and a little bit too much. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is an idea that doesn’t just come from our 

caucus, but comes from every one of the residents that have 

signed the petitions — petitions that will continue to come into 

this Assembly and beyond. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have greeted, so far, this 

proposal from the people of Saskatchewan with outright 

derision. Oh, we don’t have to study the problem, they say, yet 

they have nothing to suggest as an alternative. Instead we get 

the same old song from that crew — let’s point the finger 

elsewhere; let’s find someone else to blame, because heaven 

help us if we actually had to take responsibility that actually 

happens . . . for anything that actually happens in this province. 

 

The lack of leadership we’ve seen from that side, and from this 

Minister of Justice, and the Minister of Social Services, is 

nothing short of appalling, nothing short of appalling, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

At a time when many, many cars were being stolen within a few 

hours, and during a time when police officers’ lives were put in 

danger, this government had nothing to say on the matter. 

Absolutely nothing. All we heard was that most kids aren’t out 

stealing cars so it can’t be that bad of a problem. 

 

Well I think it’s hardly a coincidence that the other day we 

heard that same minister assert that there certainly can’t be 

anything wrong with his department because most prosecutions 

don’t turn into outright embarrassments for this province. No, 

only some. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this attitude denies the reality of what’s happening 

in Saskatchewan today. And it shows an outright disregard for 

what the people of this province are saying to us — to all of us 

as legislators. They want something done when it comes to 

young offenders. And yes, they’re asking the same thing of the 

federal government. 

 

But let’s just take a minute to see what has happened federally. 

First off, the federal government has brought in extensive 

amendments to the Young Offenders Act. They have increased 

the maximum sentence for youth who commit murders to 10 

years. They have made it easier to transfer to adult court, 

16- and 17-year-olds charged with violent offences such as 

murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, and aggravated sexual 

assaults. 

 

They have made the sharing of information regarding these 

youths easier for police, schools, and child welfare agencies. 

They have given the provinces some alternatives to 

incarcerations for non-violent offenders. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

federal government has conducted a comprehensive review of 

other aspects of this Act to see what can be done better and 

what must be done better. That’s what the federal government 

has done so far. So is it really too much to ask that the 

government opposite live up to its responsibility and review its 

own policies? Youth programs are the responsibility of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more has to be done in Saskatchewan to 

complement the good work of local people who serve on youth 

justice committees. A comprehensive review is needed to look 

over the way we do things in Saskatchewan. The people of 

Regina, or anywhere in Saskatchewan for that matter, deserve 

to know that their government really gives two hoots about their 

concerns, but so far we haven’t seen that. And really to be 

honest, we hardly expect to. 

 

This is a government that has shown itself to be completely out 

of touch when it comes to this issue as well as so many others. 

But let me serve those members notice that we’re going to keep 

up the fight for the people of Saskatchewan. We’re going to 

keep speaking out for them. We’re going to keep listening to 

them. After all, at least one of the three political parties has got 

to have a realistic view of this problem. The third party 

obviously doesn’t, and the government most certainly doesn’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that my hon. colleagues will want to have 

an opportunity, from the Liberal caucus, to speak to this issue 

and this Bill at another time, so at this time I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Residential Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am 

again pleased to rise and on this occasion to be moving second 

reading of The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997. Mr. 

Speaker, as members will well know, the Department of Social 

Services regularly purchases a wide range of programs and 

services from community organizations and from private 

individuals in order to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

  



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

Historically, in almost all situations where the department 

requires a service which is available from a community-based 

agency, community organization, or private individual, we in 

that circumstance enter into a contractual arrangement to 

purchase the service. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, the department contracts with 

non-government agencies to provide sheltered workshops and 

early childhood intervention programs. It enters into contractual 

arrangements for the delivery of community-based initiatives 

for young offenders and for group homes for children. 

 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it is necessary to make similar 

arrangements with community organizations or individuals to 

provide residential support or care to persons with disabilities or 

to families in crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these arrangements would be made in order to 

provide operating monies to such programs as group homes for 

disabled adults, transition houses, and safe shelters for victims 

of domestic violence, and independent living programs for 

adults with some type of disability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because The Residential Services Act does not 

presently contain provisions which permit the department to 

enter into contracts for the purchase of these services, any 

payments that may be made for these purposes are subject to 

approval by Lieutenant Governor in Council on an individual 

and an ongoing basis. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is the only 

major program within the Department of Social Services where 

operating payments can be made only through an order in 

council. 

 

Because payments made in this manner are of necessity 

dependent upon and directly affected by the budget approval 

process, third parties in our communities may from time to time 

experience uncertainty and cash flow problems as a result, and 

we had an example of that only in this past week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 

addresses these problems by authorizing the minister to enter 

into contractual arrangements and agreements with third parties 

to provide for any services or facilities required by persons who 

are unable to fully care for themselves and by those who are in 

need of safe shelter and counselling services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amending The Residential Services Act to 

facilitate contractual arrangements with third parties will make 

it consistent with other Acts administered by the Department of 

Social Services. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, The Residential Services Amendment 

Act, 1997, clearly separates the minister’s authorization to 

make grants from the minister’s capacity to exercise the power 

of the Act through contractual arrangements between the 

department and third parties, particularly community-based 

organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of The 

Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

basically a housekeeping amendment that will hopefully make 

the Social Services administration a bit more efficient. The 

amendment proposed will apparently allow Social Services to 

arrange contractual agreements for the delivery of services such 

as sheltered workshops, children’s group homes, and early 

childhood intervention programs. 

 

The vast volume of Social Services clients and the variety of 

services that are needed make this legislation necessary. By 

passing this legislation, the minister will enable his department 

to approve such contract agreements for services without 

having to pass an order in council. And it is my understanding 

that these types of contracts for service agreements already 

exist, but that this legislation will simply reduce the paperwork 

and hopefully speed up the administrative process. 

 

I would certainly not want to unnecessarily delay any 

legislation that could cut red tape and speed up the process of 

providing extremely necessary services to disabled adults, and 

transition homes for victims of domestic abuse, or for 

independent living programs. However I do have further 

questions regarding some of the reasoning here, and I am 

optimistic though that any more specific questions I have 

surrounding Bill No. 40 can be answered in Committee of the 

Whole. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again, this time to 

move second reading of Bill No. 44, which is to amend The 

Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill implements the budget decision to again 

maintain the 1997-98 statutory funding for the Wakamow 

Valley Authority at the same level as last year. This will permit 

the Authority to continue an excellent level of service in 

developing, conserving, and enhancing the river valley in the 

community of Moose Jaw and in the district of Moose Jaw. 

 

This Bill implements a decision to replace the assessment-based 

funding formula with a fixed statutory funding level and 

provides for a five-year review of this funding. The share of 

funding between the parties will remain the same. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I simply want to take this opportunity to commend 

the Wakamow Valley Authority for its leadership in the 

development of our river valley park system that is, as you well 

know, of much benefit to Moose Jaw, to our district, and indeed 

to the province itself. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to   



792  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

stand on behalf of my colleagues and the constituents of 

Thunder Creek and speak on the Wakamow Valley Authority 

Bill No. 44. Anyone who has been through Moose Jaw knows 

how beautiful the Wakamow Valley Park is. It’s one of the 

most natural urban parks on the prairies and a key tourist 

feature for the city. 

 

Travellers and Moose Jaw residents walk and cycle along the 

paved trail and go canoeing and rowing off the launch at 

Connor Park. It’s a site of recreation and relaxation which is so 

valued by our residents that it attracts dedicated volunteers who 

organize and promote park activities. Because it is such a 

valuable tourist attraction and a relaxing place for the people of 

Moose Jaw, it’s a shame that recent flooding has destroyed the 

Assiniboine bridge, a major thoroughfare to the park, and I 

might add one that’s owned by the city of Moose Jaw in the 

case of the Assiniboine bridge. 

 

The damage in Wakamow Valley highlights a greater concern, 

and that is the high level of deductible under provincial disaster 

assistance which will have to be absorbed by local 

governments. This in the aftermath of not only flooding, but the 

reductions in municipal grants as well. 

 

When I called on the government member from Prince Albert 

Northcote 10 days ago to respond with respect to disaster relief, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve yet to see a follow-through on the 

commitment. And I’m told at this time that the damage to the 

one Assiniboine bridge alone could be in excess of $750,000. 

And now the member did say that the government would work 

with local governments to minimize the impact on these areas. 

And I certainly hope the NDP government makes good on this 

commitment by waiving the 3 mill deductible and the municipal 

grant reductions in these extreme circumstances. 

 

Now getting back to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the main reason the 

government is making changes to The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act is to attach a dollar figure to the amount each 

level of government contributes. Existing legislation calculates 

the amount of government contributions as a percentage of the 

mill rate. With the reassessment this calculation is no longer 

possible, so this is basically another piece of legislation to try 

and clear up some more of the confusion that has been caused 

by reassessment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, despite this, it is the intention that The 

Wakamow Valley Authority Act maintains spending levels 

consistent with past years. It’s hoped that the citizens of Moose 

Jaw and tourists passing through will be able to enjoy the park 

for years to come. 

Stable funding could mean secure long-term planning and could 

lead to this end. 

 

But in the best interests of those people who use the parks, we 

need some more time to further consult on the implications of 

the Bill, and so I would at this time move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 11—The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise on this Bill as it affects all members of the 

public, and in particular though, the members of the Legislative 

Assembly and those who wish to be members of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

In general, Mr. Speaker, we support this Bill. We’re encouraged 

by the changes to redraw the boundaries every ten years rather 

than every five. Every five years, Mr. Speaker, was simply 

going to be an unnecessary imposition on the voters of this 

province. Too often we have elections, federal and provincial, 

almost back to back. Every two years it seems we’re having an 

election and never, Mr. Speaker, are the boundaries the same or 

the polling boundaries the same. 

 

So a person never knows, where am I suppose to vote? They are 

always asking, well I went to Redvers last year to vote; I must 

vote in Redvers. So they drive over to Redvers, only to find out 

they should be voting in Antler because the boundaries have 

changed. And that happens not only in my constituency, but it 

happens in the Agriculture minister’s constituency also, 

although there aren’t that many people that actually vote for 

him there that have to worry about moving, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it’s 10 years before boundary changes, before 

redistribution, people will at least have two elections in which 

to know where they vote. So that the first time they learn it, the 

second time will be where they go to vote. They don’t have to 

start figuring out, where do I go to now. 

 

Every 10 years, Mr. Speaker, is a good time frame, because 

every five years means virtually that every election, the 

constituency boundary changes. Now if you live in the centre of 

the constituency, it’s not a great imposition perhaps, because 

while the boundaries on the edges shift back and forth, yours 

stays the same. But in my constituency, after the last 

redistribution, Mr. Speaker, I picked up a community of . . . 

Corning is now part of my constituency. Previously it had been 

in the constituency of the member who is responsible for 

wildlife, the member from Indian Head-Milestone, when it 

wasn’t even called Indian Head-Milestone; it was something 

else then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So people in that community have shifted, virtually every 

election, into a different constituency. Where do they vote? 

Who do they vote for? It’s a major problem, Mr. Speaker. And 

going away from 5 years to 10 years will help alleviate that 

particular problem and it makes it easier for the person who will 

be the representative for that area, because they have an 

opportunity to deal with the same voters for at least two 

elections. It’s easier for the voters because they will be dealing 

with the same candidates virtually every election. So everyone   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

comes to recognize each other and can judge accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker. And hopefully they will judge on the Conservative 

side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also makes it very difficult for an elected 

member to represent the constituents. If the boundaries are 

going to change every time, a member has to pay attention to 

representing not only the people who elected him, but moving 

outside of that, to represent those communities near his 

constituency boundaries because he may very well be looking 

for their support in the next election. So he steps on the toes of 

the member next to him in representing the issues, the interests 

of the members next door . . . of the voters next door. It takes 

time away from representing his own constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

when you run into a situation where every election you’ve 

changed the boundaries. 

 

The member opposite says that he’s changed constituencies — 

the member from Humboldt changed constituencies three times 

in a row. Well, Mr. Speaker, if he would stay at home and work 

in one constituency, he wouldn’t have to keep moving like that. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Now he’s Watrous. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Oh, he was Humboldt; now he’s 

Watrous. See nobody knows where he’s from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill though does have some 

other serious problems. Fixing the time frame to 10 years is 

good; there are some problems though, Mr. Speaker. One of 

those is that when you change the wording from voter 

population to simple population, Mr. Speaker, that’s a major 

concern. That is a very big concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because what happens is . . . The members opposite while in 

opposition, had some of their friends take the government to 

court and say that if you have too big a spread between 

constituency voter populations, you are abridging each one of 

the citizen’s rights to one person, one vote. That was the 

argument that was presented. The courts threw it out, and said 

that a certain difference is fine. 

 

The government members opposite have recognized that a 

difference in constituencies is acceptable, because they have 

legislated that the two northern ridings may have a major 

variance from the other parts of the province; that there are 

geographic reasons for having this difference. And I agree that 

there are, Mr. Speaker. And the fact is, I have to ask, how can 

one member represent 25 per cent of the geographic region of 

this province? 

 

Because that’s what we’re asking the northern members to do. 

They are being asked to represent 25 per cent of the entire 

geography of this province. There may not be a lot of people 

living in that area, Mr. Speaker, but they are certainly spread 

very far apart. While you may not have a large number of 

communities, it’s easily a hundred miles between communities 

and a member simply has not got the ability to quickly move 

around those areas to meet the people, to talk to them, and to 

represent them. 

 

But in the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite, while in opposition, believed that there should be no 

variances in that area between constituencies. And they hooted 

and hollered and howled loudly, Mr. Speaker, when they 

believed that there was and that it worked, that it worked to 

their disadvantage. But some of those with loud voices, Mr. 

Member from Cypress Hills, were the most vociferous in their 

arguments. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so the government opposite, when elected, 

did change the rules to say every constituency had to have the 

same number of people in it. But it didn’t say, Mr. Speaker, the 

same number of voters. And where there may have been a 

problem with some of the rural constituencies, while they didn’t 

represent 25 per cent of the geography of Saskatchewan, 

represented very large areas of the province. 

 

The member from Cypress Hills constituency stretches well 

over a hundred miles north to south. My own constituency 

stretches 120 miles corner to corner. The member from Wood 

River has a very huge constituency, Mr. Speaker. But there’s no 

variation allowed in the number of people that reside in those 

constituencies. 

 

But what’ s happened, Mr. Speaker, is while the numbers of 

people are close, roughly 17,200, 17,300, the number of voters 

has a great discrepancy — a very great discrepancy. 

 

When you look at a riding, and I’m not sure what the name of it 

is now — it used to be called Regina North West — in that 

particular constituency, Mr. Speaker, 20 per cent of the 

population are under the age of 6. But each and every one of 

those people, even though they be young, are counted in terms 

of numbers of voters in each constituency. 

 

So you run into a situation, Mr. Speaker — because of the 

ageing population in rural Saskatchewan, because of the lack of 

job creation by the government opposite, the younger people, 

the young voters have left the province or have moved into the 

city with their young families — you now end up with a 

situation where you will have 11,500 on average, roughly, in 

the rural constituencies; and in the urban constituencies, Mr. 

Speaker, you’re down to 10,000. You now have a 15 per cent 

discrepancy, Mr. Speaker, in favour of urban over rural seats. 

 

Now there used to be a term that was used, Mr. Speaker, when 

governments manipulated seats. There was rotten boroughs in 

England, Mr. Speaker, rotten boroughs, where members would 

row out in a boat with three people in it and would elect their 

member to parliament. Because the entire land had sunk out of 

sight, but they were still entitled to a member in parliament. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t had that happen here, but what 

we have is gerrymandering going on here, Mr. Speaker, 

gerrymandering to gain a political advantage while seemingly 

— seemingly — playing fair. 

 

When you have an equal number of people in the 

constituencies, who can argue, Mr. Speaker, that it isn’t being 

fair. If we all have 17,000-plus people in every constituency, on 

the surface it has to be fair. But when you look at the number of   



794  Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1997 

voters, Mr. Speaker, they have been raped. They have been 

gerrymandered to give certain regions an advantage over others. 

 

If the members opposite had said, we are going to have within 

plus or minus 5 per cent — which is what the current rules say 

— of voters in each constituency then there would be less 

opportunities to argue. But they didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker, 

they said people. And so we have up to 15 per cent 

discrepancies between the numbers of voters in one 

constituency to the next. 

 

And that is not fair, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and my 

apologies and thanks to my friend, the colleague from 

Souris-Cannington. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is a special guest I would 

like to introduce to my colleagues; it is Rabbi Paul Golomb. He 

is a native of Long Island, New York and currently makes his 

home in Toronto. He’s the regional director of the Canadian 

region of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, the 

Canadian Council for Reform Judaism. 

 

Rabbi Golomb is here in Regina for this weekend, visiting with 

members of Temple Beth Tikvah, Saskatchewan’s only reform 

Jewish congregation and a member for the Canadian Council 

for Reform Judaism. 

 

Members will recognize that accompanying the rabbi is Dave 

Abbey, a constituent of mine and president of Temple Beth 

Tikvah. I would ask all members to join me in extending a 

warm welcome to Rabbi Golomb. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 

also introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also 

like to join with my colleague opposite in welcoming the rabbi 

to our Assembly and to Saskatchewan. I hope he enjoys the 

visit and we have done our best to try and warm the weather up 

here. 

 

I would also like to welcome Dave Abbey, who was on our safe 

driving committee and toured the province with us. So Dave has 

had an opportunity to see what snow was like around 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, I would ask all members to welcome our guests to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 

(continued) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

thank the member opposite for giving me the opportunity to 

review my notes and find out that I was in error in one 

particular area. We have a difference here of 17 per cent in 

some cases, Mr. Speaker, 17 per cent. 

 

My constituency, Mr. Speaker, has 11,491 voters. The member 

from Moosomin’s constituency has 11,407 voters. The member 

from Cypress Hills has 11, 014 voters. 

 

Now let’s look at some of the members opposite, the people 

who drew up the rule changes, Mr. Speaker: Regina Dewdney, 

10,158; Regina Elphinstone, 10,764; Regina Qu’Appelle, 

10,417; — and this one, Mr. Speaker, I find particularly 

interesting as this was the member who brought in this 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and who seems to 

have had the most to gain by it — 9,376 voters in Saskatoon 

Fairview, Mr. Speaker, 9,376. 

 

Over 2,000 voters difference, Mr. Speaker, 2,000 voters out of 

11,000. That is a major, major difference, Mr. Speaker, and 

should not be allowed to happen in this province. 

 

(1215) 

 

Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, 9,820, again almost 2,000 

voters less. So what this means, Mr. Speaker, is that 2,000 less 

people voted for the Premier than for the rest of the members of 

this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a 17 per cent difference between rural and urban 

seats — 17 per cent. Mr. Speaker, according to the members 

opposite while they were in opposition that is too large a 

discrepancy, should not be allowed. Their friends even went to 

court to try and change that, Mr. Speaker, to stop that from 

happening, and yet they are the members who made these rules 

and brought this in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, only one word comes to mind — this was 

jerrymandered to the benefit of the government who drew up 

the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other problems also in this 

particular piece of legislation. But at this particular time, Mr. 

Speaker, we believe that we need to give the government some 

more opportunity to reconsider this particular piece of 

legislation, to come to their senses, to realize that this type of 

jerrymandering is not acceptable in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Therefore I would move that this Bill be   



April 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

adjourned at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  I wish all hon. members an eventful weekend 

in your constituencies with your families. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:17 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 773 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 773 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 773 

  Scott ................................................................................................................................................................................... 773, 774 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 794 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Student Conference Held at Fort San 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 

 National Wildlife Week 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 

 Native Minor Hockey Championships 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 

 Weyburn Redwings Win Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Title 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 775 

 Grenfell Hosts The Keystone Cup 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 775 

 In Good Taste Catering Services 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 775 

  “Faded Beauty” Exhibit at Ukrainian Museum 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 775 

 Battlefords Exhibition Family Farm Awards Recipient 

  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 776 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Timely Tabling of Annual Reports 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 776 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 776 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 776 

 Prosecutions Review Report 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 777 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 777 

 Gaming Corporation Annual Report 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

 Successor Rights 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

 Young Offenders Act 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 779 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 779 

 Echo Valley Construction Site Accident 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 779 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 779 

 Child Poverty 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 780 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 780 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 217 — The Trade Union Amendment Act (Repealing Successor Rights) 



 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

MOTIONS 

 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

 Standing Committee on Municipal Law 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

 Standing Committee on Estimates 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

 Special Committee on Regulations 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 782 

 Standing Committee on the Environment 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 782 

 Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 782 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 18  The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians Act 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 782 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 784 

 Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 786 

 Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 789 

 Bill No. 40 — The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 791 

 Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 791 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 791 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 11—The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 792 

 


