



















































Hansard: March 19, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 283 

 March 19, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present petitions on behalf of teachers, students, and 

parents right across the province regarding the external music 

credit that is currently under review. I will read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

allow that the special credit policy effective September 

1997 does not eliminate the present policy of 

Saskatchewan Education which awards credits earned to a 

maximum of three for external programs where time, 

effort, and achievement warrant. The examples are the 

Royal Conservatory of Music and Western Board. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, come from Swift Current, Regina, 

Lucky Lake, Beechy, Gull Lake, Kyle, numerous locations. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions on behalf of citizens concerned with the changes or 

proposed changes to the external music credits in the province 

and the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

allow that the special credit policy effective September 

1997 does not eliminate the present policy of 

Saskatchewan Education which awards credits earned to a 

maximum of three for external programs where time, 

effort, and achievement warrant. And as example, the 

Royal Conservatory of Music and Western Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition are from 

communities, some of them being in my own riding, 

communities such as Pambrun, Herbert, and a number of other 

communities in south-west Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

my pleasure again to present petitions on behalf of those 

concerned about the organization Working for Women in 

Saskatoon. I shall read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to continue the services of 

Working for Women, Saskatoon, who have a 16-year 

history of successfully providing cost-effective, accessible 

services to women in poverty by reducing their barriers to 

training and employment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition represents many people, as it did 

yesterday. City councillors, those who are curators of galleries, 

counsellors, students, farmers, massage therapists, just about 

everything. And I do so with great pleasure, table this today on 

their behalf. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

this afternoon as well. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 budget, and table a long-term plan 

for further reductions in the PST in years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present petitions with respect to the 

people on these papers. They are from Saskatoon, Regina, and 

many other rural communities And I’m pleased to present on 

their behalf. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions to present: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in years 

ahead. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come from the North Battleford, Saskatoon, Regina 

areas. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege as 

well for me to present more petitions regarding the PST 

(provincial sales tax), and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from 

the communities of Scott, Wilkie, Birch Hills, Fox Valley, 

and other communities. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 

present a petition on behalf of the PST from the people of this 

province and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 



284  Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1997 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are signed by people from Saskatoon, Regina, 

Preeceville, Hepburn, Waldheim, Hague, Duck Lake, and 

Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

present petitions on behalf of the Saskatchewan people: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the communities of Martensville, Rosthern, Saskatoon, 

Warman, and that general area of Davidson and south as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

present petitions as well today along with the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone for Working for Women in Saskatoon. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to continue the services for 

Working for Women in Saskatoon who have a 16-year 

history of successfully providing cost-effective, accessible 

services to women in poverty by reducing their barriers to 

training and employment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Saskatoon 

and from Watrous. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of citizens who are concerned about the increasing youth 

crimes. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The citizens that signed this petition are from Regina and 

Lumsden. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present  

petitions signed by citizens of Regina. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crimes; such task force to be comprised of representatives 

of the RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

assist women in poverty by continuing the services of 

Working for Women in Saskatoon; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reform provincial legislation to help children who are 

being exploited for sexual purposes; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reduce the PST by 

two points in the 1997 budget; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to make an exemption 

under The Labour Standards Act respecting agreements 

between Saskatchewan families and their care-givers; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day 15 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Justice: what was the average food 

service budget per inmate per day for inmates in custody in 

Saskatchewan provincial correctional institutions in 1996? 

And a similar question for the year 1991. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

With the indulgence of the Assembly, I want to make an 

introduction which is not quite in the normal form. I think all 

members will recognize today that we are honoured to have in 

our midst quite a number of guests. As I look around the room 

it would be impossible to introduce them because I think I’d 

have to introduce practically everyone in the room. 

 



March 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

What is assembled here today are many of the people who 

provide leadership to our communities and to organizations in 

Saskatchewan. They’re here today to help us celebrate 

Volunteer Day, and that’s probably appropriate because it is 

from the volunteer section that Saskatchewan’s leadership has 

traditionally arose. So I think all members will want to join in 

giving to our guests today a particularly hearty welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the Liberal caucus I too would like to extend greetings 

and a warm welcome to our guests. I know it’s a very special 

day for seven individuals, but I think what makes it also very 

special is the fact that we have guests and friends and family 

here to help celebrate in this very significant day for them. So 

on behalf of the caucus we welcome you. 

 

I would like to at this time, in order to save some time, indicate 

. . . on behalf of the member for North Battleford, I’d like to 

mention two individuals and they are Len Quiring, the recipient 

of the Governor General’s concerned citizens’ award, and Jack 

Amos, who is a dedicated volunteer in North Battleford in the 

area of the sheltered workshops. I’d like the Assembly to 

recognize those two gentlemen if you would, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the PC caucus we would like to as well welcome all of the 

very special guests here this afternoon for the recipients of the 

volunteer medals as well as all other special guests. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are five other very 

special guests this afternoon. They are here today to bring 

attention to a very important petition that they have brought to 

the Assembly. The guests are as follows. They are four students 

from Miller High School in Regina: David Nameth, Mike 

Farmer, Davina Exner, Lindsay Williamson, and their adviser, 

Joan Rink. And we ask all members to please welcome them 

here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

privilege to introduce a group of young people who are here 

with us this afternoon, a group of students from the Grenfell 

elementary high. I believe we have 27 students here today. 

Unfortunately I understand a couple of students weren’t well 

and weren’t able to accompany the group, and they’re probably 

feeling bad about that. But I’d like to welcome these students, 

their teacher Ms. Betty Parley. 

 

The students represent grades 1 to 4 and are part of the 

UNICEF (United Nations Children's Fund) choral group in the 

elementary school, and they’re going to favour us with a 

number a little later on. We’re looking forward to that. 

 

Also a number of people from the community of Grenfell. I 

won’t try to name them all other than a special welcome to His 

Worship Mayor Magnus Puffalt and his wife. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask everyone to join me in welcoming these 

guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, a group of students that are visiting today from 

Weyburn Junior High School that are seated in the west gallery. 

 

These students are grades 7, 8, and 9 students who are part of 

the Weyburn Junior High Red Cross youth group, and they’re 

here . . . (inaudible) . . . to see government, but they’re also here 

because a very, very special day today on the volunteer 

presentations of an important person that’s helped direct them 

in some of their activities. 

 

I want to also welcome the principal that’s accompanied them 

today, Mr. Warren Betker, and the parent, Ms. June Fletcher. 

And I just want to extend a warm welcome on behalf of 

everyone, and have everyone join me in a warm welcome to the 

students from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I too have a group of 

young people to welcome to the Assembly today. They are, Mr. 

Speaker, as you well know, friends of ours from Moose Jaw. 

They are a group of folks who are now in their senior years for 

the most part, but very, very young in spirit. Thirty of them, Mr. 

Speaker, are seated in your gallery, and one of their members is 

seated on the floor with us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these friends of ours from Moose Jaw meet 

regularly at the Salvation Army. They share food, fellowship, 

and faith. Once in a while they invite their local MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly), which is deeply 

appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to all members this 

afternoon the Salvation Army Keenagers from Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Lakeland Citizens of the Year 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, last Saturday the RM (rural 

municipality) of Lakeland in the constituency of Saskatchewan 

Rivers had a pot luck supper to honour the Citizen of the Year. 

 

Because this is Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one of the winners 

pitched in beforehand and helped decorate the hall because she 

helps every year. This is Margaret Hay. The other winner is her 

husband, the mayor of the village of Christopher Lake, Vic 

Hay. 

 

Margaret and Vic Hay are two outstanding citizens who have 

chosen to live in Christopher Lake. Also, they moved from B.C. 

(British Columbia), Kerrobert, Kyle, Saskatoon, and Prince  



286  Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1997 

Albert — a wise choice for them and for their many friends 

they have made in their 14 years in Lakeland. 

 

The Hays are very active in their community. They are active in 

the Legion, they sing in the St. Christopher church choir and in 

the Traveller’s music group, and they belong to the Pine Tree 

Heritage Club. Vic and his wife both belong to the local 

snowmobile club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn’t as many people in Lakeland as there 

might be in other places, but they are all a quality group. It was 

hard to select two people for Citizen of the Year, but Margaret 

and Vic Hay were good choices. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High School Elective Credits 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 

the past few months a serious lobbying effort on behalf of 

Saskatchewan high school students and Saskatchewan music 

teachers has been under way. They have been gravely 

concerned with this government’s proposal to reduce the 

number of high school elective credits to which Royal 

Conservatory courses could be applied. The parents, students, 

and music teachers across the province began a letter-writing 

campaign. They circulated petitions and they phoned their local 

MLAs. I myself received hundreds of these letters and phone 

calls, and I am sure the minister received even more. 

 

These people strongly believe that the government proposal to 

change the elective credit structure would not offer the 

recognition that these hard-working, dedicated music students 

deserve. It is my understanding that a compromise has now 

been reached on this issue with the minister agreeing to alter her 

proposal. 

 

It is with great pleasure that I’m able to stand in this House 

today and congratulate the music students, teachers, and parents 

on their persistent efforts. I would also like to offer my sincere 

thanks to the Minister of Education for listening to the concerns 

of these groups and for acting accordingly. This is one great 

example of how a democratic government should function. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Bromhead Couple, Farmers of the Year 

 

Mr. Ward:  Mr. Speaker. It is with great pleasure that I stand 

here today and honour two outstanding people from the 

community of Bromhead. Daryl and Judy Muirhead were 

selected by the Estevan Chamber of Commerce as the district’s 

Farmers of the Year for 1997 at the annual Estevan Farmers’ 

Day. 

 

The award, Mr. Speaker, is given to the farmer or farm couple 

that demonstrates their skills as farmers, makes contributions to 

local agriculture, and participates in community events. 

 

The Muirheads have excelled in all three areas, Mr. Speaker.  

Their family farm is just that — a family operation with their 

entire family contributing to its success. 

 

Daryl and Judy have continuously diversified their operation to 

meet the new challenges in agriculture. Taking advantage of 

new methods and new ideas have helped enable the Muirheads 

to succeed. 

 

In addition, the farming . . . to the farming operation, Daryl and 

Judy have established and maintained a fabrication business, 

Muirhead Manufacturing Limited. Since 1973, the business 

contributes to the local economy by offering employment 

opportunities for local residents as well as supplying a wide 

range of agricultural-related items such as harrow-packer 

drawbars, trailers, and bins. 

 

Daryl and Judy are truly deserving of the award bestowed upon 

them. They exemplify the hard work and determination required 

to succeed in the ever-revolving ag and food industry as well as 

the community spirit that our rural areas depend upon. 

 

I ask all the members of this Assembly to congratulate the 

Muirheads on their achievements — achievements that for so 

many others go unrecognized. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Donovan Bailey in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Donovan 

Bailey, a renowned athlete, world and Olympic record holder in 

the 100 metre race, is in Regina for the next few days. He is 

here primarily because he cares about our youth and is showing 

his dedication by assisting them in choosing healthy lifestyles. 

 

He has volunteered his time to speak at the fast track 

fund-raising luncheon at Queensbury Centre here in Regina. He 

will also be participating in the production of a video that will 

spell out the detriments of drug usage, and promote enhanced 

awareness of how to maintain a good sports body image 

without the use of drugs. The proceeds of Mr. Bailey’s efforts 

will go to the Sport Medicine Council of Saskatchewan and 

KidSport Saskatchewan. 

 

Welcome to Regina, Donovan Bailey, and thank you for doing 

your part in assisting our youth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial High School Debating Championships 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure this past weekend to attend the provincial debating 

championships. Participants were grade 9 to 12 students 

representing many cultures from all over Saskatchewan. And 

they represented themselves with passion and a very high 

quality, Mr. Speaker. They demonstrated their ability to work in 

teams, to research, to organize, to think critically, and to present 

their ideas and their views very persuasively. 

 



March 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

I was proud of all participants. I know that Saskatchewan’s 

young people will channel this passion into all that they do in 

their future lives. 

 

Our future depends on the dreams and the vigour and the 

vitality of our young people. As my seat mate, the Minister of 

Social Services, said last week, our future is in very good 

hands. 

 

I want to commend the SEDA (Saskatchewan Elocution and 

Debate Association) board, president Carol Jensen, executive 

director Doug Chase, all board members, all the judges, all the 

volunteers, and the parents who invested time and effort to help 

our young people with these great learning opportunities — 

these form our great leadership experiences. 

 

I know I speak for you, Mr. Speaker, and all members in 

wishing the Saskatchewan winners well at the national 

championships. I have no doubt that our youth will do 

themselves and our province proud. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Connie Wilson 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this day when 

we’re here to recognize a number of distinguished volunteers in 

the province and across the province, I’d like to take an 

opportunity to make mention of an individual whose volunteer 

efforts in life went relatively unnoticed, an individual from my 

constituency. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the political life in this province recently 

experienced a great loss with the passing of Connie Wilson of 

Morse. Connie’s voice was well-known to many members and 

listeners to phone-in shows across the province. Connie 

described herself, Mr. Speaker, as a true socialist rather than a 

supporter of a particular party. She often phoned up talk shows 

and wrote politicians to voice her opinions and fight for rural 

Saskatchewan, proper health care, and the poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Connie Wilson was an average citizen who deeply 

understood the importance of democratic freedoms. She used 

those freedoms to fight for what she believed was right, and by 

doing so forced people to listen. Above all, she cared for the 

public good. Without people like Connie, democracy would 

surely fall victim to apathy and this is certainly by far its worse 

enemy. 

 

In her own way, Mr. Speaker, Connie showed us that one 

person can make a difference. In closing, I’m sure other 

members join me in offering condolences to her husband Harry 

and the rest of the Wilson family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Week in Weyburn 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise today and bring to the Assembly’s attention, during 

Education Week, the many ambitious and worthwhile activities  

occurring throughout Weyburn and Weyburn area. 

 

Many events have been meticulously planned by teachers, 

students, and of course parents. These events include science 

and book fairs, guest speakers, music festivals, drama 

presentations, open house, and the geography challenge. Each 

school has an agenda of planned activities in order to celebrate 

this truly important week. 

 

Commitment to education must come from everyone, Mr. 

Speaker. The activities planned for the many Weyburn schools 

illustrates that there is commitment from teachers, from parents, 

and from students. Committed, dedicated, and enthusiastic 

people like the many who have tirelessly planned and prepared 

projects and activities in order to celebrate Education Week are 

vital to the long-term health and viability of our world-class 

education system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of this Assembly will 

join with me and acknowledge the many hard-working, 

committed individuals — the teachers, the parents, and the 

students — who help make our education system the best in the 

world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Programs for the Learning Disabled 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

members of this House are aware, this is Education Week and 

the theme this government is using to promote the event is 

world-class education. 

 

Well children with learning disabilities in the Prince Albert 

region are certainly not receiving a world-class education. In 

fact the board will soon be forced to discontinue an intervention 

program because of a lack of funding from the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all children are entitled to an education that meets 

their needs, particularly those with special needs. This program 

is one which addresses the specific needs of these children and 

one which allows many to become independent students. 

 

Will the minister explain why her government has forced 

parents of these children to take legal action in order to 

maintain such a valuable program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I would love to be able to 

respond to the member’s question but as he indicated in the 

question, in his question to me, the Minister of Education is 

being sued. Therefore, I have received legal advice that I cannot 

respond or comment on this case. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

rephrase the question to maybe allow the minister to make a 

comment. 

 



288  Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1997 

School boards across the province are finding it more and more 

difficult to run valuable programs because of this government’s 

cuts to education funding. It has now reached a point where 

these cuts are affecting essential programs, like the one that I 

just mentioned in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problems Saskatchewan people are now seeing 

in education bear a strong resemblance to those we have seen in 

health care. The government ties the hands of local boards by 

not providing them with sufficient funding, and the boards are 

then left to answer for and clean up the mess. 

 

Will the minister explain what commitment she is willing to 

make to ensure education is properly funded so special needs 

children, and in fact all children in the province, receive a 

quality education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, we have been hearing 

the last few days, from the Leader of the Opposition, a repeated 

but, if I may say so, totally inaccurate attack on the education 

system in the province of Saskatchewan. And a totally 

unwarranted attack on all those many teachers and trustees and 

volunteers who are involved in the provision of the best quality 

public education that the province of Saskatchewan can 

possibly afford. 

 

Our students are graduates of K to 12, they’re graduates of 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology), they’re graduates of the University of 

Saskatchewan, and they take their places in jobs in this 

province, outside of this province, outside of the country, in as 

good a qualified position as any student anywhere. And by any 

yardstick, by national standards or other standards, the children 

in this province, challenged or otherwise, get the very best of 

educational opportunities. 

 

Should we be doing more? The answer is yes. Are we 

committed to doing more? The answer is yes, because we’re 

committed to investing in the people of Saskatchewan. That is 

our agenda for the 21st century. And for the life of me, I wish 

the Liberal Party would stop this attack on education and the 

educators of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Youth Crime 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

students of Miller High School in Regina appear to recognize a 

problem that this government does not. Students are circulating 

petitions in hope that this government will be pressured to do 

what it can to address the growing problems associated with 

young offenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has minimized this issue. 

He has not yet indicated whether he would support our call and 

the call of the people of this province for the establishment of a 

special task force on youth crime. 

 

Will the minister explain what he is prepared to do, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for that question. 

 

We in the government and all of the people in Saskatchewan are 

extremely concerned about those of our youth who are involved 

in crime. But we also want to emphasize that there are many, 

many youth in Saskatchewan, including some who are here 

today, who are very good examples of what democracy is all 

about and what community responsibility is all about. 

 

And I think that one of the roles that we have in government 

and in opposition and in this legislature is to hold up all of our 

young people who are volunteers and who work really hard for 

many significant issues and encourage them and help them 

assist us in dealing with these problems. 

 

We have many things that we are doing within the government 

to address a number of the issues relating to young people who 

are involved in various criminal activities and we seek the 

support of all members of the community to resolve this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for his 

response, and I wonder if the House would indulge me in 

quoting from 1996 Hansard, the Speech from the Throne. I 

quote: 

 

Our province’s families have the right to live in safe 

communities. My government will propose reforms to the 

justice system designed to: 

 

make offenders, including young offenders, more 

accountable for the impact of their actions on their 

victims and their community. 

 

Not one mention — not one mention, Mr. Speaker — in this 

year’s Speech from the Throne with respect to this serious 

problem. 

 

And yes, we recognize that the Young Offenders Act is a 

federal Act, but it’s the province that’s responsible for the 

programs and administration of that Act to make sure that it 

teaches our young people right from wrong and to help them to 

become productive. Will the minister in this House today admit 

that he will in fact support the call of the citizens to employ a 

task force to review this entire situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to answer this 

question on behalf of the government. I’m interested that, on 

this question, the Liberal Party solution to a very serious 

problem is to set up yet another task force; I guess adopting the 

old motto, that no problem’s so great that can’t be referred to 

another committee or another task force. 



March 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

Now the person who asked the question is the former leader of 

the opposition, the Liberal Party, who acknowledged in the 

question himself that one of the biggest difficulties was federal 

Liberal legislation called the Young Offenders Act. That’s your 

party — that is your government in Ottawa that implemented 

the Young Offenders Act. 

 

I want you to tell . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, don’t 

answer from your seated position. You get up and ask the 

question; and in asking the question, tell me and table the 

documents that your caucus has done in protest and in 

opposition to the Young Offenders Act. What have you done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Nations Taxation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know aboriginal peoples 

are paying many taxes. However, there is confusion in this 

province as to exactly what the tax obligations of first nation 

peoples are. Mr. Speaker, the Premier says he would prefer to 

handle these issues by negotiation, and I agree with him, even if 

his government has tried to use threats by the Minister of 

Finance to resolve it. 

 

Negotiations have little chance of success until both sides have 

a similar understanding of their respective rights and 

obligations. This can only be known, Mr. Speaker, through a 

constitutional reference to our Court of Appeal. A reference 

would then give us a framework within which negotiations 

could proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is, why won’t the government agree 

to move this difficult issue along by a reference to our 

province’s highest court? Or does the government believe that 

stalled negotiations and threats are a preferred course of action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, well here we go again. 

Here’s the same old Liberal solution: no problem so great that 

can’t be referred to either a task force . . . no problem so great 

that can’t either be referred to the Court of Appeal or the 

Supreme Court of Canada. There is no problem that you dare 

touch and make any decision yourselves. You won’t tell us 

where you stand on this issue. Oh, no. Set up a task force, refer 

it to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

We say our position is to negotiate and to discuss. We say our 

solution is the democratic process of coming to a common 

resolution of issues. It may not be yours. You may want to 

adopt a confrontation approach, which is what a reference 

situation implies. That is not our approach. 

 

I remind the hon. member opposite that if you refer to the Court 

of Appeal or the Supreme Court a constitutional reference, 

somebody has to frame the question. Who’s going to frame the 

question? Do you want the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations to frame the question? Do you want the Government of 

Saskatchewan to frame the question? 

 

And the Liberal member nods his head yes to both of those 

questions — typical Liberal. Like a Liberal, like every Liberal 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, he’s sitting on the fence with 

one ear to the ground and only the Liberals can do that 

anatomically. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Hon. Premier. We do 

indeed have our ear to the ground. However, might I say that 

unlike the Minister of Finance, we happen to think that the 

issues of on-reserve taxation are a slight bit more complicated 

than simply a tax dispute with any corner store. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that a reference would 

delay the issue. In fact it would avoid pointless negotiations and 

lengthy litigation. My question then is, at what point will the 

government concede that its negotiations are going nowhere, 

that there is a stalemate, and obtain a constitutional opinion 

from our highest court in order to facilitate an amicable 

resolution? And, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier knows, it is the 

duty of the provincial cabinet to frame that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Of course, that’s exactly my point — 

it’s the duty of the provincial cabinet to frame the question. But 

the preface of your question is that there’s an irreconcilable 

difference between the provincial government’s position and 

those of status treaty Indians. 

 

And then he would have us believe that if we framed the 

question based on our particular point of view, somehow this is 

going to be a fairly put question to a court of reference. The 

very premiss of his question is that there are diametrically 

opposed positions which require some other solution. 

 

Surely this is not the solution. There needs to be found a 

common ground. That is what I’m saying. That’s what the 

Minister of Finance is saying. That’s what the Minister of 

Justice is saying. And so far as I know, that is what the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations are saying. 

 

They want to talk this out. They don’t believe that judges, no 

matter how well-intentioned, how well educated, how 

well-meaning, are the body best suited to solve this very 

complicated social, economic and cultural and historic and 

constitutional issue. You must surely agree with that. 

 

Therefore what we’ve got to do — all of us in society — is not 

to inflame this issue. We must pursue enforcement. Everybody 

in this province must follow the laws of the land. Everybody 

does. That’s enforcement. 

 

Finding subsequent solutions to taxation later, that is a question 

of dialogue, compromise, and democratic decision. And for 

once I wish you would tell us where the Liberal Party stands on 

that issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



290  Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1997 

Young Offenders Act 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the last 

few weeks we have heard a lot about young offenders getting in 

trouble with the law. And I think it’s important to remember 

that the vast majority of young citizens of this province are 

good, law-abiding citizens and they are just as outraged and 

disgusted as everyone else at those who choose to steal cars or 

break laws in other ways. 

 

Four students at Miller High have decided to do something 

about it. They are circulating a petition calling for major 

changes to the Young Offenders Act. The changes include 

stricter sentences, mandatory restitution, community service 

work for young criminals, and trying 16-year-olds in adult 

court. They want to get at least 10,000 names on their petition 

and take it to Ottawa to present to the House of Commons later 

this spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the PC caucus strongly supports these changes and 

that petition drive. My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 

will you support these young people and their petition drive? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice I 

believe has made an offer, perhaps even has had a meeting . . . 

Have you had a meeting with them? In any event, the Minister 

of Justice is prepared to meet with the students — who, by the 

way, I compliment on a democratic exercise — to take a look 

exactly at what the petition says. 

 

There may be aspects of the petition that we support. There may 

be aspects of the petition that we don’t support. We need to 

discuss this with the students and take a look at it. We know 

one thing — that we’ve laid our concerns about the Young 

Offenders Act before the Minister of Justice of Canada and we 

continue to do so. 

 

So the answer is, at some appropriate time the minister . . . The 

answer is yes, maybe. We’ll see what the petition says. And 

we’ll meet with them, discuss, and then decide whether or not 

the government is going to lend its complete support or partial 

support or some other support to this particular initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the current Young 

Offenders Act assumes that a person under 18 years of age 

cannot be held responsible for his or her actions. These young 

people say that a 16-year-old can quit school, they can drive a 

car, they can leave home without permission of their parents, 

they can get a job and go to work; so why shouldn’t a 

16-year-old be considered an adult when they steal a car or 

commit a violent act? And I think that’s a very good question, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, would you support a change to the Young 

Offenders Act to have a 16-year-old tried in adult court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Third 

Party’s question, first question, I think was a much more 

accurate, and if I may say so, a much more fair representation of 

the issue and the complexity of the issue. Because in the preface 

to that first question he identified a number of concerns, of 

which age is one. It is not a simple solution based on age or any 

of the other preceding aspects in that first question. It needs to 

be taken a look at as a total package. 

 

But I say to the Leader of the Conservative Party, the Leader of 

the Third Party, this is not an issue for the provincial 

government. We did not draft, nor did this Legislative 

Assembly pass, the Young Offenders Act. That issue should be 

taken up directly with the Minister of Justice Canada, the Prime 

Minister of Canada, and if you will, your next-door neighbour 

cousins, the provincial Liberal Party, who’s supported 

purportedly to have some influence on the Liberals in Ottawa 

— not with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

immediately after question period the students from Miller High 

will be sitting at a table just outside the Assembly and asking 

MLAs to sign their petition. Every member of the PC caucus 

will be signing. I would like to invite every member of the NDP 

and every member of the Liberals and the independent member 

to do the same. This would send a strong message to Ottawa 

that the parties here in Saskatchewan support changes and a 

tougher Young Offenders Act. 

 

Mr. Premier, the question is to you. The students of Miller High 

are asking for your help and your support. Will you and other 

members of your government sign this petition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  My answer to the Leader of the 

Conservative Party is the one that I gave one or two questions 

back. The Minister of Justice will meet with this group to take a 

look at what the petition requests, examine it, and at some 

appropriate time advise the government and individual 

members as to what they should or shouldn’t do. 

 

I’m not going to commit myself or any other MLAs — other 

MLAs are free to do whatever they want to do — but I’m not 

going to commit myself to signing a petition that I have not 

seen, on an issue which is complex, which requires care and 

sensitivity in dealing with a very serious problem, and on an 

issue which is not the domain of this Legislative Assembly. We 

have enough on our plate in this Legislative Assembly in this 

province of Saskatchewan without taking on the responsibility 

and the chore of the federal Liberals in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

another matter, my final two questions are for the Minister of 

Finance. Madam Minister, it’s just one more sleep — in your  



March 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

own words — until budget day. Then we finally get to find out 

whether it’s you that’s been sleeping or not, or whether you’ve 

been listening to the thousands of Saskatchewan people who are 

calling for tax relief. 

 

Today we learned that the Department of Finance has 

completed its review of the taxation system and they came to 

this conclusion: a general lowering of taxes would be extremely 

positive for creating a stronger provincial economy. Where 

have we heard that before, Madam Minister? I think we’ve been 

saying that for some time. 

 

Madam Minister, is it going to happen tomorrow? Are you 

going to cut the PST or have you been sleeping for the last few 

months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I know the Leader of the 

Conservative Party can hardly contain himself until tomorrow, 

but I ask him, just hold on now with all the might and strength 

that you can muster in yourself — about 24 hours from now we 

and you’ll be all the wiser. 

 

But I do want to tell the Conservative Party and I want to tell all 

the people of Saskatchewan and this Legislative Assembly, this 

government’s agenda is clear — we believe in investing in 

people. 

 

That means creating jobs, providing the best possible public 

quality education, child poverty and welfare reform, health 

renewal, infrastructure and highways in particular, and 

maintaining fiscal responsibility all the while — investing in 

people, building for the 21st century. 

 

And I can tell the Leader of the Conservative Party and all the 

people of Saskatchewan, thanks to their hard work — I mean 

the people of Saskatchewan — we have now turned the corner 

to be able to really start putting some meat and bones on that 

agenda of investing for the people of Saskatchewan. Wait till 

tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, your own 

Finance department is saying a general lowering of taxes would 

be extremely positive for creating a stronger economy here in 

Saskatchewan — not targeted tax relief, Mr. Premier, a general 

lowering of taxes. That means cutting the PST. 

 

Mr. Premier, I know that budget has already been printed, but I 

don’t think it’s too late for Saskatchewan people; I don’t think 

it’s too late for you to make a change. 

 

Mr. Premier, will we see a general lowering of the PST in your 

budget tomorrow, as your own Department of Finance is 

recommending, and the people of Saskatchewan are so 

desperately needing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I say to the Leader 

of the Conservative Party, who just confirms my earlier 

comment, he’s just not able to contain himself about 

tomorrow’s budget. And you know I’m pretty excited about it  

myself too. I’m anxiously awaiting to see what’s in it. So just 

hang on for 24 hours and we’ll all be the wiser for it, as I’ve 

said to you before. 

 

But I want to say to the Leader of the Conservative Party that I 

think in almost every budget, despite some onerous fiscal 

circumstances which we inherited — thanks to your 

administration — there have been tax reductions. There have 

been tax reductions in almost every budget since 1992, that we 

introduced. 

 

We have a debt of about $14 billion. We pay $850 million a 

year of tax dollars on interest charges on that debt. And that 

debt was created by you and your administration. That’s what 

the people of Saskatchewan have faced. 

 

So of course we think taxes should be lowered. We’ve said that 

right from day one, 1991. In fact the very first tax that we 

lowered when we got elected is we did away with your 

harmonization. Remember that tax increase that you and Mr. 

Devine had? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  That was the first tax that we lowered. 

Since 1991-92 we’ve been lowering taxes. Just hang on, please, 

for 24 hours. You’ll . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Services for Victims of Abuse 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday in this House, I presented a private members’ Bill in 

the hopes of combating the horrendous child prostitution 

problem in our province. But the issue doesn’t end with 

legislation; it is just the beginning. 

 

We need to look beyond dealing with the offenders, and we 

need to take a hard look at the support services we are 

providing for the victims of abuse. We need to look at our 

priorities and recognize the desperate need for more funding to 

help the many women and children break the cycle of abuse and 

victimization. 

 

In Saskatoon, the family support service centre is struggling 

because of government cut-backs — this government’s 

cut-backs. Over the last two years, this government has slashed 

its funding by over $300,000. In fact as of April 1, it may have 

to drop its crisis intervention program, which will put more of a 

burden onto its mobile service. 

 

So my question is, what kind of a message does this 

government think it’s sending to the people of this province 

when its actions clearly show that the well-being of victims is 

not considered a high priority? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that the  



292  Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1997 

member in her question didn’t entirely present all of the facts 

related to the situation in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the member 

will know, or should know, that in addition to the family 

support centre, new monies — new monies, Mr. Speaker — 

were provided to the Saskatoon Tribal Council and the native 

community in Saskatoon to provide services to the people of 

Saskatoon. 

 

She also knows full well that I have been in long discussion 

with the family support centre and have established a group of 

people who’ve been working over the past few months to look 

at the whole issue of family and child programing in the city of 

Saskatoon. They have reported to me, Mr. Speaker, and we 

continue in discussion. 

 

The member may want to assist the people of Saskatoon this 

day by contacting her federal friends and ask the question of her 

colleagues in Ottawa — why it is that the federal government 

now is withdrawing significant funding from the Saskatoon 

Mobile Crisis centre in Saskatoon. That’s the question that 

should be asked today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister has alluded to, there is another study going on to 

determine whether the support centre services are really needed. 

I believe it’s about $10,000 that he’s spending on a study that 

has already been determined — for the need of the centre. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, it’s time for this government to stop 

offloading all of its problems onto the shoulders of the federal 

government. No one at the federal level made the decision to 

cut the funding for that centre. That decision was made by the 

minister’s office. You made the decision, Mr. Minister. 

 

The family support service centre is crucial to the survival of 

victims, as it offers a wide range of programs including 

counselling victims of domestic violence. The government has 

spent so much money on this study that simply reconfirms and 

reconfirms the demand for services that are there. 

 

I ask today, Mr. Minister, if you will make a financial 

commitment to the family support centre; reinstate the centre’s 

funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, today in the House the 

member again points out the contradiction of the Liberal 

position. Hundreds of millions of dollars have been taken from 

social programing from the provinces of Canada — billions of 

dollars. From this province, $200 million taken by Liberal 

government. Then they come to the House and ask for more 

funding for social programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is even perhaps more tragic is the attempted 

politicization by that caucus of these very serious and 

significant issues that face the families and children of our 

province. Mr. Speaker, this is not truly an assist. I think we 

should be working together to find joint solutions — one of 

them being, let’s get together and talk to Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Music Credits for High School Students 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased this afternoon to announce that the 

Government of Saskatchewan has reviewed the whole issue of 

music credits for our high school students. And as was stated 

during the member’s statement, all of us have received literally 

hundreds of letters and phone calls from music educators, 

parents, and students across the problem, expressing the 

concern that the Department of Education was no longer going 

to recognize three music credits towards a high school 

matriculation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the history of the situation is this. In 1994, the 

Government of Saskatchewan underwent a review of all of the 

high school curriculum in the province. We had stakeholders 

involved in that curriculum review process and they made a 

recommendation to the minister, and in that recommendation 

from the High School Review Advisory Committee came the 

recommendation students should be allowed a special, 

out-of-school credit of 100 hours. 

 

Historically, only the Royal Conservatory of Music and cadets 

had had access to out-of-school activity towards a high school 

credit or matriculation. We reviewed the recommendation and 

determined that only 2 students out of 255 music students in the 

province had actually used their three credits towards their 

24-credit high school matriculation. So we supported the high 

school review’s recommendation to the government. 

 

Now I met with the Registered Music Teachers’ Association. I 

read all of the letters, as I’m sure you have, and we decided to 

reconsider our decision based on this. The Royal Conservatory 

of Music is a highly academic and rigorous exercise on the part 

of students and we determined that given that it not . . . that the 

activity not only included learning to play the piano, but it also 

included rigour and evaluation on music theory, that a good 

argument could be made that these students should be eligible 

for not only the special subject policy, i.e., 100 hours of 

out-of-school activity, but also the two additional credits. 

 

So given that we were . . . we reconsidered our decision, given 

the rigorousness of the Royal Conservatory of Music and the 

activity of the students. We determined that it was important 

that these students continue to receive up to three credits for 

their high school matriculation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

already indicated, I think, in the comments that I made this 

morning . . . or this afternoon earlier on, I’m very pleased that 

indeed the minister has taken into account some of the concerns 

raised by the parents, and indeed Royal Conservatory of Music 

fits into that special category. 

 

I would like to hear from the minister very soon as far as how  



March 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

she sees the actual credit policy fitting in. And I know that we 

have received, and schools have received, a new direction, new 

guidelines last fall that will be implemented and effective for 

the grade 10 students coming into the school system this fall. 

 

And I believe that I’ve heard her say that the special credit 

policy, which is still there, that will be allowing students to take 

other programs under that special credit — that will still be 

there. But I’m now understanding that the recognition for up to 

three credits through the Royal Conservatory music program 

will also be included under electives. And I would like to 

compliment the minister and the department for recognizing 

those things, and I look forward to some discussion with her as 

far as the actual conditions that have been outlined this 

morning. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As one of 58 MLAs 

that has received innumerable phone calls and letters on that 

issue, I think the change in the policy to allow that other credit 

there was valid. And I would like to commend the minister and 

her department for listening to all the concerns that came from 

the province and to reinstate that policy of three credits for that 

music area. It’s good to see that democracy still actually does 

work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 207 — The Saskatchewan Government 

Post-employment Code 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 207, The 

Saskatchewan Government Post-employment Code now be 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Gas Licensing 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 

The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 now be introduced 

and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, 

The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be  

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 

Amendment Act, 1977 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, 

The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28, The 

Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 29, The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the spirit of 

open and honest government, I hereby table a response to 

question 18; it’s item 1. And by leave of the Assembly, I would 

also like to table a response for item 2 and question 19. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  The answers to questions 18 and 19 are 

tabled. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Distinguished Volunteer Medal Recipients 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 

move, and seconded by the member for Regina Northeast: 

 

That this Assembly do now adjourn to honour the 

distinguished volunteer recipients. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 2:33 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 283 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 283 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 283 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 283 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 283 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 283 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 283 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 284 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 284 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 284 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 285 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 285 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 285 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 285 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 285 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Lakeland Citizens of the Year 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 285 

 High School Elective Credits 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 286 

 Bromhead Couple, Farmers of the Year 

  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 286 

 Donovan Bailey in Saskatchewan 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 286 

 Provincial High School Debating Championships 

  Pringle ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 286 

 Passing of Connie Wilson 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 287 

 Education Week in Weyburn 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 287 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Programs for the Learning Disabled 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 287 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 287 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 288 

 Youth Crime 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 288 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 288 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 288 

 First Nations Taxation 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 289 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 289 

 Young Offenders Act 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

 Provincial Sales Tax 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 291 

 Services for Victims of Abuse 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 291 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 291 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Music Credits for High School Students 



 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 207 — The Saskatchewan Government Post-employment Code 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

 Bill No. 25 — The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

 Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

 Bill No. 27 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 1977 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

 Bill No. 28 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

 Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

MOTIONS 

 Distinguished Volunteer Medal Recipients 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

VOLUNTEER MEDAL PRESENTATION.............................................................................................................. Back of Hansard 

 


