



















































Hansard: May 15, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1689 

 May 15, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on behalf 

of citizens of the communities of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about the effects of youth crime in our great 

province. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on this petition are from Balgonie, Kamsack, 

Theodore, Grayson, Melville, Killaly, and Pense. I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too would 

like to present a petition today on behalf of citizens from 

Melville and Regina regarding increase in youth crime. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 

would like to present petitions to do with the problem of youth 

crime. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a  

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations; other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are all from the town of 

Kamsack. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

That the conditions of some highways connecting 

communities in northern Saskatchewan are at times 

impassable . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order, order. I will advise the 

members presenting petitions that members are only permitted 

to read the prayer and in some cases the names from the places 

where they come from, and no preamble. So I would ask the 

member to proceed to the prayer. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the rebuilding of 

Highway No. 155, thereby ensuring adequate access for 

residents of the communities linked by this road, including 

Dillon, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, Pinehouse, and an access 

road to Garson Lake. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have signed this 

petition are . . . there are hundreds of names from Beauval and 

also from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the rising cost of farm inputs 

to unjustifiable levels in the province. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to stop 

contributing to rising farm input costs and begin using its 

influence to hold farm input manufacturers accountable for 

their decisions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those who have signed the petitions 

are from south-west Saskatchewan predominately, communities 

such as Eastend, Shaunavon. I so present. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, on the petitions. Thank you, you 

were a little quick off the draw there; we didn’t realize that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have petitions to present on behalf of the people  



1690  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

of Saskatchewan as well. And I read the petition . . . the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is served; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning stripping in establishments where 

alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come primarily from my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, areas like Eatonia, Kindersley, Kerrobert, and other 

places within my constituency. I’m pleased to present on their 

behalf. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to read 

the prayer of the petition I present as well: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I’m handing in are by signed 

individuals from the Eatonia, Kindersley areas of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existent law banning stripping and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And these are signed by people from Kindersley, from Eatonia, 

Alsask, and that area of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read 

and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to enact 

legislation banning all stripping in establishments where 

alcohol is served; 

Of petitions pleased to establish a task force to aid the fight 

against youth crime in Saskatchewan; 

 

Pleased to support the creation of regional telephone 

exchanges; 

 

Pleased to reform provincial legislation to help children 

who are being exploited for sexual purposes; 

 

Pleased to urge the government to commission an 

independent study to review the social impact of gambling; 

 

Pleased to cause the rebuilding of Highway No. 155; and 

finally 

 

Pleased to protect the Dore, Smoothstone lake area by 

declaring it an accessible, protected wilderness area. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Education: how many students are in 

grade 4 age in Saskatchewan’s K to 12 public education 

system? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill 

called the new, organized and rigorous transportation, housing, 

and economic renewal of the North, known as the northern Act. 

I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

distinct pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you and through 

you to everybody assembled here this afternoon, a distinguished 

person sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, front row on the east 

side. Loraine Braham is a Member of the Legislative Assembly 

of the Northern Territory of Australia. 

 

Earlier this morning I had the privilege of meeting with her and 

we discussed topics of mutual interest as chairpersons for our 

respective Public Accounts Committees — her of the Northern 

Territory’s and me of the province — along with my colleague, 

the Vice-Chair, the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

We enjoyed very much our conversation, and I would just like 

everybody here this afternoon to welcome her as she drops in to 

view the proceedings during what is a very hectic schedule 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

On behalf of my colleagues on the government side, and 

certainly as the Vice-Chair, I’d like to join with the hon. 

member opposite in welcoming Mrs. Braham today. 

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

We certainly enjoyed our visit this morning and, as the member 

said, we discussed a number of issues relating to public 

accounts and other issues and it was most interesting to note the 

similarities and differences. 

 

So I again would like members to join in welcoming Mrs. 

Braham to the legislature today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my honour and 

privilege today to introduce to the Assembly, 79 of the brightest 

students that you will probably ever have the privilege of 

welcoming to this legislature. I realize that there are many other 

Lakeview schools in this province, but this is the best Lakeview 

School in my opinion: the Lakeview School in Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

There are 79 students here today accompanied by their teachers, 

Mrs. Widenmaier, Mrs. Block, Mrs. Cummings, and Ms. Eva; 

and chaperons — not that they need chaperons — Mr. Sterling 

and Mr. Folkenson. And I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to make them feel welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the 

students from Lakeview School are very bright, but no brighter 

than my constituents, who are 24 students from St. Gerard 

School in Saskatoon. They’re in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re 

in grade 4 and 5. 

 

They’re accompanied by their teacher, M. Léon Bezaire, and 

chaperons, Ed Ripley, Brent Northey, Bev Bertrand, and Sharon 

Philips, who when I was the age of the students, was a 

classmate of mine at Estey School down the street. 

 

And the students are going to have a tour, Mr. Speaker. Then I 

will meeting them. We will have drinks and Dixie Cups. We’re 

then going to get our picture taken, and I want all members to 

join with me in welcoming the students from St. Gerard School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Farm Units in Saskatchewan Declining 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday 

the last Canadian agricultural census of the century was 

released. It revealed that farmers are working hard to try and 

diversify in many ways, but it also revealed one major, 

disturbing trend. 

 

Since 1991, not coincidentally the year this government came to 

office, the number of farm units in Saskatchewan dropped by a 

whopping 6.3 per cent. That’s the second worst decline of any 

province in Canada. More than three times higher than the 

national decline in the number of farms of 1.8 per cent. By 

comparison, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provinces of 

Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, Alberta, and British Columbia all  

experienced a net increase in the number of farm units. 

 

While the number of farms dropped in Saskatchewan, those 

remaining continue to try and diversify. Many, however, depend 

upon off-farm jobs which, in the regions like the south-west, 

are not easy to find. Farmers’ efforts to preserve and expand 

their businesses are hampered by rising input costs. 

 

Given the terrible loss of farms in Saskatchewan, it’s my 

sincere hope that this government will get quickly to work and 

find ways to address the issue of rising farm input costs. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Macklin’s Population Increase 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week my 

colleague from Lloydminster conveyed to the members of this 

Assembly some very encouraging statistics regarding the 

positive population growth in our province. I agree with the 

member that this positive growth is a result of the increased 

economic activity occurring throughout our province that is 

creating thousands of jobs. 

 

Since this government assumed office in 1991, we have been 

working hard to build new partnerships with private and 

cooperative businesses that encourage new economic activity 

that creates jobs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the evidence that we are fulfilling our 

commitment to renew Saskatchewan is everywhere. New 

businesses, expanded businesses, and diversified businesses are 

creating jobs and they are attracting people to our province. I 

see the evidence throughout my own constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For example, the community of Macklin is having difficulty 

dealing with the influx of people into the town who are arriving 

to fill job openings. This influx of people has increased 

Macklin’s population by over 17 per cent. This makes Macklin 

the fastest growing community in the entire province, with a 

population of over 1,000 people. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the 

optimism has been restored in our province and the evidence 

can be seen in Macklin. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cameco Walk for MS 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you. Many of the members of this 

Assembly know that walking hasn’t exactly been my forte 

throughout my life. But on June 1 in Saskatoon, I am going to 

do my very best to complete the 12-kilometre Cameco Walk for 

Multiple Sclerosis. All of the money raised by this event comes 

from sponsorship dollars, and I’m on my feet today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to tell my colleagues how proud I would be if they 

would make a pledge on my behalf. 

 

I’ll be circulating pledge booklets in an envelope and hope that 

everyone will support this very worthwhile cause. Now just tick  



1692  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

off your name when you’ve received the envelope, and I’ll 

know that you’ve had an opportunity to participate. I want to 

thank everyone in advance. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Syttende Mai 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, Saturday is Syttende Mai — 

the 17th of May. And the first few lines of the Norwegian 

national anthem go this way: 

 

Ja, vi elsker dette landet, 

som det stiger frem 

furet, værbitt over vannet 

med de tusen hjem. 

 

On May 17, or 1814 at Eidsvoll, Norway, the constituent 

assembly approved the new constitution of Norway. This 

constitution is still in use in Norway, making it the second 

oldest constitution in the world after the United States 

Constitution. 

 

In 1942, Axel Sandemose, writer . . . Norwegian writer who 

lived in Saskatchewan in the ’20s, and wrote a book about 

Saskatchewan called Ross Dane in 1928, described the 

Norwegian national holiday this way: 

 

It’s a day for all Norwegians, who are held together by a 

general impression of Norwegian nature, the forest, the 

mountains, the deep fjords; and spring in the bountiful 

splendour we’ll all still remember the bitter winter that 

bound up rivers and water, and sent its cold clouds over 

the weather-beaten land. 

 

Sounds very similar to a description of Saskatchewan. 

 

Today we join people all over Saskatchewan — Saskatoon, 

Birch Hills, Weldon — and over the next few days as they 

celebrate this day. So I ask all members to join with the 

Norwegian descendants in the Assembly, the members from 

Saskatoon . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Birthday Congratulations to Liberal House Leader 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s always an honour for 

me to rise to pay tribute to our seniors, to show respect to those 

elders who have built Saskatchewan, and made this province 

what it is for us today. 

 

It is in that spirit that I rise today to ask other members to join 

with me in paying tribute to our House Leader, who turns 50 

this date. Congratulations, Rod. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Terry Fox Foundation Fund-raising in 

Northern Communities 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday I 

mentioned an award won by a student from Pierceland. Today I 

want to congratulate the school and community of Pierceland, 

and as well as the communities of Paradise Hill and Frenchman 

Butte also in my constituency. 

 

The theme of my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 

further north you go in Saskatchewan the more generous the 

people become. Next Tuesday Betty Fox, mother of Terry Fox, 

will be the guest at a dinner in Frenchman Butte sponsored by 

the Frenchman Butte-Paradise Hill Terry Fox Run Committee. 

 

Mrs. Fox is coming because this small community, in 1996, 

raised the third largest amount in the province — after Regina 

and Saskatoon only, both of which have somewhat larger 

populations. Fewer than a thousand people in the two villages 

and vicinity raised nearly $10,000. Mr. Bob Hougham himself 

raised 4,000. He will be treating Mrs. Fox to a ride with his 

miniature white mules. 

 

The next day Betty Fox will be at the Pierceland School, which 

is hosting the annual Terry Fox Run. It is one of the top 

fund-raising schools in Saskatchewan. In 1996, 115 schools in 

Saskatchewan raised 88,000; of that, the Pierceland School 

raised over 3,000. All this money goes to cancer research to 

someday find a cure for the disease that took Terry Fox and so 

many others. 

 

I am proud that these communities are being recognized and I 

am pleased that their charitable efforts are being recognized by 

Betty Fox, a most welcome guest to our province. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grand Opening of Human Resources Centre for Students 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Youth 

unemployment is a concern in our society. The youth 

unemployment rate is over twice the national average, both of 

which are unacceptably high. Solving this problem is a 

challenge of this age of the new global economy when greater 

economic insecurity seems to be the norm. 

 

While every member of this legislature and our federal 

counterparts must recommit ourselves to addressing this serious 

problem, we should also take a moment to acknowledge 

programs in both industry and government that seem to be 

making a difference in dealing with this issue. 

 

This noon hour I was pleased to attend the grand opening of the 

Human Resources Centre for Students held at Queen Elizabeth 

II Court in front of City Hall here in Regina. The grand opening 

was an opportunity for students and employers to learn more 

about the centre and its services. Students dropped off their 

résumés and registered with the Odd Job Squad. Employers left 

job orders with staff. A lunch was held as part of the grand 

opening, with Ryan Purchase and friends from the University of  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

Regina, and McGill providing strains of wonderful, jazzy 

music. 

 

Barbecued hamburgers were donated courtesy of M & M Meat 

Shops, and all the proceeds raised from that were donated to 

Youth Unlimited to promote youth development within the city. 

 

Hire a Student is not the only summer employment program. 

Each year the provincial government sets aside money for 

summer employment for young people through the Partnerships 

program. In an era of cut-backs from our federal government, 

the provincial government must do more. We must priorize jobs 

and call on our governments in Ottawa to make good on their 

job creation promises. 

 

For now I ask all employers, please hire a student. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Palliative Care Week 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This week 

has been proclaimed Palliative Care Week in Saskatchewan, the 

week in which we honour all palliative care-givers. 

 

The Saskatchewan Palliative Care Association has helped make 

Saskatchewan a leader in this kind of compassionate care for 

the terminally ill. 

 

And as part of its commitment has drafted a bill of rights for 

palliative care workers. 

 

In honour of these workers, I’d like to read that bill of rights 

into the record. 

 

I have the right to have pity for the afraid and the 

unfulfilled, and to be in awe of the courageous. 

 

I have the right to feel relief when someone’s death means 

the end of their pain, and to be angry when someone is 

taken too soon, while they still have much to give to the 

world. 

 

I have the right to be mystified by the miracle and wonder 

of life, and to be resigned to the finality and reality of 

death. 

 

I have the right to my own religious beliefs and a faith that 

whoever the true God is, they would approve of my work. 

 

I have the right to be realistic about my own mortality. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the bill of rights says, I am in awe of 

the courage and dedication of palliative care workers. And I 

know that all members will offer their respect and gratitude for 

their contributions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Protection Services 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Gove 

report was an extensive investigation into child death in B.C. 

(British Columbia). British Columbia’s government launched 

the inquiry after the tragic death of five-year-old Matthew 

Vaudreil. 

 

The Gove report made sweeping recommendations to tighten up 

the family service system in British Columbia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately information we have received from 

Saskatchewan Social Services through the freedom of 

information, shows that some children are tragically falling 

through the cracks in Saskatchewan’s system. 

 

Can the Minister of Social Services tell me if Saskatchewan has 

any plans to adopt recommendations contained in the Gove 

report? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we have reviewed that 

report. We have, as the member opposite knows, increased our 

funding for the child action plan to almost $25 million this year. 

We’ve announced some new initiatives that will make use of 

part of that money. And we will continue to try to analyse what 

is the best way to direct energy and funding towards these 

serious problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, information provided by the 

department shows that 55 Saskatchewan children under 16 

years of age who were receiving some intervention from Social 

Services between April of 1991 and March 31, 1996, have died. 

They are classified by natural causes, accidents, murders, and 

suicides, but there is no mention of abuse and neglect. 

 

I find these statistics to be extremely alarming. Yet in the letter 

in which we received this information, Social Services 

explained that these 55 children who have died while receiving 

family service care represent a very small proportion of all the 

children who received care during that time. Can the minister or 

his designate explain why his officials are downplaying this 

problem? Fifty-five children have died. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, there is no attempt to 

downplay the seriousness of this situation, and it’s always a 

tragedy when a child dies. As you know some of these cases 

were . . . some of these incidents were natural deaths and not 

the violent type that you place emphasis on. And we continue to 

monitor the situation and do the very best that we can to prevent 

such incidents where they’re preventable and to act in the best 

interests of children in care at all times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we all 

place high value on the life of every Saskatchewan child. But 

the minister can and he must do more to prevent further 

tragedies from happening within Social Services. Sweeping 

public reviews have taken place in British Columbia, Manitoba,  



1694  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

Newfoundland, and now Ontario. These extensive public 

inquiries were sparked by child tragedies which received much 

media attention. 

 

While their deaths have gone largely unannounced, 

Saskatchewan children have names and there are tremendously 

important lessons to be learned from their stories too. 

 

Will the minister commit to opening up the internal review on 

the full scope of child deaths in Saskatchewan to the public? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, media headlines and 

highlighting these issues will not aid prevention a single bit. So 

as I said, we continue to monitor the situation. It’s always a 

tragedy to lose the life of a child, and whether in care or not. 

And we do our very best to make sure that foster parents, for 

example, are carefully screened and that everything possible is 

done to prevent such incidents to the children of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I thank the minister for her attitude and her 

response. And I’m in agreement with it and I’m also in 

agreement that I know from personal experience, that our social 

workers in this province are dedicated professionals committed 

to their work. Nonetheless even the death by natural causes 

appears to be abnormally high and more than what would be 

expected in the general population, and that too raises 

questions. 

 

We haven’t had a review of the system since the mid-80s. We 

know there have been a lot of changes since the 1980s. A lot of 

new challenges are out there and a lot of new developments. 

And other provinces have had this review. 

 

Is it not time that we undertake a review to see why some of our 

children are falling through the cracks and why some of our 

programs are simply not, not doing the work we want them to 

do? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, within Social Services 

they take advice from their professional workers in the field. 

And they’re always reviewing the systems. I would suggest that 

in some other provinces where there have been some very high 

profile legal actions and trials, that possibly they felt because 

those were high profile that some sort of a task force looking 

into this needed an equally high profile. We haven’t had such 

cases here and it’s probably because we are continually 

monitoring, reviewing, and taking advice from our highly 

professional Social Services staff, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, now I’m sorry but 55 

deaths would seem to indicate that maybe we do have some 

issues we have to look at here. The letter that we received . . . 

First of all, the 55 deaths only came out through a freedom of 

information request and the last paragraph indicated that, well 

after all, there are lots of children going through the system who 

did not die, so the percentage is small — rather than saying 55 

is too high a figure. 

 

B.C. has had a public inquiry. Is it not time that we should do  

that too so that we can see how that figure of 55 can be 

dramatically reduced? As it should be. Will the minister commit 

to a public review of child protection programs in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I believe this question 

has been asked before, and our position is that a public review 

would serve no productive purpose, that an internal review and 

constantly paying attention to analysing every single 

unfortunate instance that occurs while a child is in care is what 

we continually do and will continue to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Information Network 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Kuziak report 

into election fund-raising is not the only report that the people 

of Saskatchewan are awaiting the results of — a phase 1 report 

on the development of the $70 million health information 

network was to have been prepared for cabinet in January; 

however the Minister of Health has yet to comment on whether 

it has received cabinet consideration or approval. 

 

Can the Minister of Health tell this House today if the phase 1 

report is complete, and has cabinet made a decision to proceed 

with the project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, this 

matter is under discussion, under consideration, and we will be 

examining all of the options available to the province and 

making an announcement in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course our 

sources confirm that the phase 1 report has been completed and 

is in the hands of the government. This report is supposed to 

provide a detailed cost/benefit analysis of the project which will 

determine whether the anticipated $70 million investment is a 

worthwhile one. Much of this government’s ability to justify 

this expense depends on whether it is able to develop and sell 

this technology to other provinces before they develop a similar 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is this simply another investment scheme by your 

government, one that has nothing to do with improving health 

care in this province? And do you plan on ditching this project 

if you’re not the first one to get the project up and running? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the member 

that before we proceed with any project with respect to 

information technology, we will be examining all of the 

evidence and all of the benefits that are proposed, all of the 

costs, and trying to arrive at a decision which is in the best 

interests of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

And the member may want the government to make this 

decision in a rushed or hurried fashion. I want to say to the  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

member and to the House, Mr. Speaker, that no decision will be 

made until the matter is thoroughly studied and we do all of our 

homework, which I think is what the taxpayers would want us 

to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This project, Mr. 

Minister, has been under scrutiny and had started up back in the 

early ‘90s — 1992. So how much longer do you need? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government has not made a decision 

regarding the information network, perhaps the Minister of 

Health would explain why the Department of Health now has 

created a health information branch. 

 

The latest government directory indicates that this branch will, 

and I quote, “manage the development, implementation, 

operation, and support of this network.” Mr. Minister, if there 

has been no decision made, why has an entire branch been 

created to oversee this project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well to state the obvious, Mr. Speaker, if 

you’re going to have a study of the information network and 

what kind of network we should have in our province, you need 

to have people that will study that matter. And that’s what the 

people in the information branch do. They and other officials 

from government will be looking at whether it’s beneficial to 

have a new information system in our health system. 

 

But I want to say to the member, and particularly members of 

the third party, that before we proceed with any new system, we 

don’t want to have a repeat of some of the things that happened 

in the 1980s where money was spent on some information 

systems that really didn’t make a lot of sense. 

 

We want to make sure that we use the taxpayers’ dollars very 

wisely; that whatever we do results in a system that works for 

the benefit of the people. And although the member is impatient 

for us to make a decision, we won’t be making a decision until 

all of the homework is done and the matter is appropriately 

studied. 

 

And when that is done, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be making an 

announcement and the member will be one of the first to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Apology for Remarks about Reform Leader 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for 

the Premier or for his designate. 

 

The Premier and I now have something in common. As a school 

principal there were many times I had to discipline a student 

and force them to apologize for someone that he had hurt. The 

Premier had to do the same thing yesterday. 

 

But a forced apology usually lacks some sincerity. And if  

anyone thinks the NDP (New Democratic Party) is truly sorry, 

just look at how some of the other members responded. The 

federal NDP member said people should still be terrified of 

Reform’s extremist views. The NDP Justice minister said 

Preston Manning should get a thicker skin. Even the Premier 

seemed more annoyed than contrite. 

 

Mr. Premier, if the NDP is truly sorry, why is your Justice 

minister continuing to defend these offensive remarks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that this issue was dealt with yesterday in the 

Assembly when the member from Regina South apologized to 

the people affected. And I say to the member opposite, I’m a 

little surprised that you raise it today to continue the debate, to 

do some political grandstanding. 

 

But what it might indicate, what it might indicate is this: that 

there’s a good reason why the Leader of the Third Party 

indicates that he’s not campaigning during this election. I think 

this is what is happening here today, is support for the Reform 

Party. 

 

This issue has been dealt with and I want to quote from the 

Premier when he dealt with it as well yesterday outside the 

House. And he said, and I quote: 

 

“a bright, young, zealous MLA who overstepped the 

bounds” — did the right and courageous thing by 

apologizing before being asked. 

 

And I say to the members opposite that, why can’t you accept, 

as has been the long tradition in the House, where someone 

apologizes, why don’t you accept it and leave it — unless 

you’re grandstanding for political purposes/ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question was 

— and I guess it was missed — was the Justice minister’s 

response to that question. And we’re going to continue dealing 

with that. And the Premier’s response about asking, “Is 

everybody happy?” Maybe we’re not quite happy. 

 

The only thing the NDP is truly sorry about is the thousands of 

votes you’re losing. Voters all across Canada have now heard 

the NDP member’s offensive remarks. But they’re also 

concerned about the reaction from the members opposite — not 

stunned silence when that statement was made, but howls of 

laughter. Most of the NDP members thought this was truly 

clever, comparing Mr. Manning to the inhuman Nazi regime 

that butchered millions. 

 

And now even the Justice minister says people should get a 

thicker skin because someone calls them a Nazi. 

 

Mr. Premier, the member from Regina South and the Justice 

minister have shown voters all across Canada that the real party 

of intolerance is the NDP. 

 

Mr. Premier, what further disciplinary action will you be taking  



1696  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

against the member for Regina South and the Justice minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I just repeat for the member 

opposite, who continues to — and I say this sincerely — 

grandstand on behalf of the Reform Party here in the Assembly, 

first of all, this matter was dealt with yesterday when the 

individual involved apologized, both here in the Assembly and 

outside, as I understand. 

 

And I can’t believe that the member here would try to continue 

to try to elevate the issue. One can only ask what could be the 

reason for him doing that, unless he were trying to play politics 

on behalf of his friends in the Reform Party. 

 

Now if you want to play that game of being a Reform member, 

why don’t you go out and run for them, instead of hiding 

behind the banner of Conservative here in the House while 

you’re campaigning for the Reform publicly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Before the 

member proceeds I must warn the members that questions 

during question period must relate to government policy or a 

member’s responsibility to government policy. And I would ask 

members to please keep that in mind. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  When we’re talking about government policy 

we are discussing the kinds of actions and statements that are 

made, and the Justice minister’s statement are one of those 

things that we are talking about because that talks about 

government policy and talks about it very specifically and I 

suggest you listen to the question. 

 

Mr. Premier, from time to time the Reform Party has . . . may 

had its members make racially intolerant statements. Mr. 

Manning sent a clear message that those statements did not 

reflect the views of his party by booting those members out of 

his caucus and out of his party. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you take a similar action against the member 

from Regina South and the Justice minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I say again to the member opposite 

that the apology given by the member opposite and I say that 

. . . and I quote from Hansard, I quote from Hansard from 

yesterday; in the conclusion of his remarks he says: 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is now clear that some of those 

remarks were indeed hurtful, and for that I apologize. 

 

My understanding was at that time that the members of the 

Assembly accepted that apology, which has been the 

long-standing tradition of this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I say to the members opposite, why can’t you accept the 

apology, unless what you’re doing is trying to improve the  

image of the Reform Party by continuing to raise this issue here 

in the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Pension Plans’ Investment in Bre-X 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Finance. 

 

Madam Minister, last week our caucus submitted a written 

question asking if any provincial government-administered 

pension plan had lost any money on the Bre-X shares. Of 

course your open and accountable government refused to 

answer the question. 

 

Madam Minister, 133,000 Saskatchewan people belong to 

pension plans administered by your government. I think they 

deserve an answer on this question. Madam Minister, how 

much money did government pension plans lose speculating in 

Bre-X shares? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. First of all, no pension plans speculated in any shares. 

What occurred is one of the pension plans, like many other 

pension plans, administered by an independent financial 

agency, invested in Bre-X as part of a stock portfolio which 

they automatically invest in all TSE 300 (Toronto Stock 

Exchange) stocks. 

 

The loss to the pension plan was about $1.9 million, which is 

not dramatic when you consider the assets are 1.6 billion. 

Whether or not there will be any loss in the overall portfolio 

isn’t known because you don’t know the gains on other stocks. 

 

I think what the issue really highlights is the problem the 

Toronto Stock Exchange is now looking into. The directions 

from the independent pension board were clear — invest only 

in safe stocks. Why was Bre-X listed as a TSE 300 safe stock? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And thank you for 

confirming that the public employees’ pension plan lost about 

$2 million speculating in Bre-X stocks. 

 

That is just however, one of the 14 plans your government 

administers. Will you confirm that the public employees’ 

pension plan did indeed lose the $2 million in that pension plan 

alone? And how much money did other pension plans 

administered, the other 13 pension plans administered by your 

government lose? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  First of all, what I want to make 

clear to the member opposite is we don’t make these decisions. 

There’s an independent pension board. They hire professional 

managers to make the decisions. 

 

Second point, and the members opposite, this is why we have to 

debate this, because they twist it. There was no speculative 

investment at all. The problem was the Toronto Stock Exchange 

listed Bre-X as a TSE 300 stock, essentially a safe stock. 

Therefore pension schemes across Canada thought this is  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

a safe investment. 

 

This is the only one of the pension schemes that invested in this 

stock at all. And I would remind the member that the return on 

that particular pension scheme was 19 per cent last year. And 

we do not feel that there is going to be any dramatic impact on 

the return because of this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chief Electoral Officer Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In this day and 

age with modern technology, we have a wealth of ways to 

communicate. It’s now e-mail, faxes, and of course the 

telephone. But the minister of The Election Act has decided 

instead to communicate via the newspaper to ask the Chief 

Electoral Officer for his report on political fund-raising. In spite 

of the unusual method, it is clear that all three parties have now 

called for the release of the report, but it remains a secret. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not trying to be sanctimonious on 

this side of the House. For all we know, the report could 

implicate all three parties. The content of the report is 

important, but equally important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

timely release of the information. The people of this province 

have a right to know if all parties must clean up their act, but 

they won’t until we see the report. 

 

Will the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan if he’s 

received a response from Mr. Kuziak yet, or is he waiting for 

the next edition of the newspaper? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am not any 

wiser than I was yesterday when I stood to answer the 

member’s questions. I have not heard from Mr. Kuziak, nor has 

anyone on the government side. We have not received his 

report. 

 

I’ve tried to explain to the member over a couple of question 

periods this year, and I don’t know how many last year, that this 

is an independent position, that this is a position at arm’s length 

from the government. The Chief Electoral Officer is not subject 

to orders from me or from the Premier, nor should he be. And 

the member wouldn’t want it to be that way. 

 

We need to have an office which is relatively independent. So I 

don’t feel free to pick up the telephone and start ordering the 

Chief Electoral Officer around. I just don’t feel free to do that. I 

don’t think it’s consistent with his office or with mine. 

 

Now if the member thinks that that is appropriate, the member 

has a telephone in his office, and a fax, and he could probably 

get in touch with the Chief Electoral Officer himself. But as for 

me, I don’t consider that to be appropriate, and I don’t plan to 

do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Chief Electoral Officer 

answers to Executive Council. So I’m going to ask another 

very, very important question. 

 

This government has a responsibility to answer this question in 

connection with this report. It’s been reported that the electoral 

officer has chosen to withhold the Kuziak report on the advice 

of the Justice department. 

 

My question therefore will be to the Minister of Justice: will the 

minister tell us if he supports the decision made by his 

department — which was an advisory to delay the release until 

after the federal election — or does he support his colleague, 

the minister in charge of The Election Act, who has said the 

report should not be withheld? Which is it? Please give us one 

simple, honest answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member certainly was not implying 

that my answers have been less than honest. I know that. I know 

the member. I know he wouldn’t intend any such implication to 

come. 

 

But I want to say this. The Chief Electoral Officer does not 

answer to the Executive Council. He does not answer to the 

Premier. For purposes of budgeting, his allocation is included in 

the estimates of the Executive Council, but that does not mean 

that he is subject to any kind of orders. 

 

And I think the member would agree that that would not be 

appropriate in any way, shape, or form. It would be 

inappropriate for the Chief Electoral Officer to be subject to 

instructions from the Premier, or from me in delegation from 

the Premier. 

 

The member knows where I stand. I think the report, if it’s 

completed, ought to be made public. That’s my position. Now 

I’ve made that perfectly clear. If the member has an opinion on 

that that he thinks should be conveyed directly to the Chief 

Electoral Officer, he should do that. I don’t think it’s 

appropriate . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

would like leave of the Assembly to give a . . . to revert to 

ministerial statements. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Prince Albert Site of Youth Futures Pilot Project 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I thank my colleagues for agreeing to 

revert to ministerial statements, Mr. Speaker. 



1698  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

This morning in Prince Albert, the Minister of Social Services 

and I announced a $3.1 million pilot project called Youth 

Futures. This is a key initiative of The Saskatchewan Training 

Strategy, and is part of the social assistance redesign. 

 

Youth Futures is intended to help young people get off social 

assistance and get a job. We will do this by equipping them 

with the education, training, and work experience they need. 

 

This two-year pilot will test new ways to improve the links 

between the jobs available and the education, training, and 

work experience needs of youth on social assistance. This will 

be most effective if our plan is designed by the community for 

the needs of the community — community-developed and 

delivered, Mr. Speaker. Local people know what skills and 

education are needed and what jobs are available there. 

 

Accordingly, this project brings a wide range of partners 

together to assess the individual needs of Prince Albert young 

people. Through a holistic or integrated approach, the partners 

can best determine the individual’s different needs for 

assessment, counselling, training, work experience, basic 

education, or rehabilitation. 

 

Thirteen committee members were named today, all from 

Prince Albert. The Co-Chairs are Merv Bender, who represents 

community-based organizations, and Isabelle Impey, who 

represents a subcommittee of concerned citizens. Business 

people, elders, aboriginal people, youth, local school officials, 

and the Woodland Institute of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology) make up the balance of the 

15-member committee. 

 

I was very pleased to see such enthusiasm from the partners on 

the Youth Futures Steering Committee today. In particular I am 

pleased to see Prince Albert youth so eager and willing to be 

involved in the committee and work towards meeting the needs 

of their peers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 350 young social assistance clients in Prince 

Albert will have the opportunity to break the cycle of poverty 

and develop the skills needed to prepare for the workforce. 

Through Youth Futures we expect to learn a lot from the Prince 

Albert experience that will benefit young people all over 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And thank you to the minister for the advance copy in terms of 

the highlights of the announcement that took place this 

morning. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the Saskatchewan training 

strategy that we’ve been talking about throughout this session 

has evolved to the point now where indeed the focus is on jobs 

and retraining to meet the jobs. 

 

The other key point I think in this announcement is the fact that 

individuals will be able to break that pattern of staying on social 

assistance with no future in sight. And I think that that is  

a goal that we must focus on. 

 

And by meaning . . . by “we” I don’t mean just this legislature. I 

mean all residents in Saskatchewan must try to move to ensure 

that we move people from the social assistance line to a job that 

returns an income for their work done. This plan, I hope — and 

I say hope very, very sincerely — will be generated by ideas 

from the community level. 

 

And I want to commend the minister for indeed putting together 

a committee that includes the local people. Local people best 

know what is needed and what job prospects there are. 

 

As indicated by a letter the minister and I both received from 

the Woodlands students’ union individual who said, documents 

are fine; they contain nice, bright ideas. The words are very 

effective, but we want to ensure that indeed this plan of action 

occurs and that it doesn’t collect dust, and that indeed there is a 

benefit to individuals now. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

take this opportunity to respond to the ministerial statement, 

and also thank you for the report to give us a chance to look at 

it and know what’s happening. 

 

The amount of dollars that are being spent out there, I think are 

good. And I think the direction that that particular program’s 

going is excellent, especially when we look at what’s happening 

to our young people in Canada, and particularly in 

Saskatchewan, where the jobs always seem to be the shortest 

for our young people, forcing them to go to other provinces. 

 

I think if this program of youth Futures is a success, it’ll be a 

great step forward for the young people of this province, and 

also for the province itself. I think also to the extent that the 

hope is there that we’ll get our young people off of assistance, it 

needs to be commended. 

 

And if the program is as successful as we hope it will be, it’ll 

be giving a lot of dignity to individuals and to their families, 

and hopefully raise them to a new stature of self-worth within 

this province. And I hope the program is successful. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I request conversion of 

question no. 71 to notice of motion for order for returns 

(debatable). And with leave, I request conversion of question 72 

through to question 94 for order . . . to notice of motion for 

order for returns (debatable). 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I would ask the Government Whip if 

I understand this right. Question 71 through to 94 are moved to 

motions for return (debatable)? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  That is correct. 

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

(1430) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Next to 

me is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Behind Bill is 

Bill Van Sickle, the executive director of administration. 

Behind me is Jim Marshall, the executive director of economic 

and fiscal policy. Beside me is Len Rog, the assistant deputy 

minister of the revenue division. Behind Len is Kirk McGregor, 

who is the assistant deputy minister of taxation and 

intergovernmental affairs. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 

welcome to the minister and her officials. For the record, I 

wanted to correct a misconception that the hon. member from 

Battleford put before the House this afternoon. This is not my 

50th birthday; it’s the 11th anniversary of my 39th birthday. 

 

Minister, I would like to briefly go to an area of some of the 

charges that your department is responsible for. 

 

Firstly, the environmental handling charge in the ’96-97 fiscal 

year. The Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 

estimated that your government collected some nine and a half 

million dollars in environmental handling charges on recyclable 

containers. According to SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres) the government withheld 1.6 million of 

these charges. 

 

How much is the government planning to collect through the 

environmental handling charges in this year and will all the 

money being going back to SARCAN? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite: first of all, happy birthday, whichever one it is. 

 

And all I can give you is the overall number. This is, we collect 

$11.2 million in a bottle handling surcharge from . . . but it’s 

Environment and Resource Management that administers that. 

So what I would do is . . . When they’re here they have the 

breakdown, but we don’t have the breakdown here of what they 

do internally with that revenue. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, does Environment . . . as I 

understand it, you realize that the 11-odd million dollars goes 

into the Environment, but do you know how much is returned 

to SARCAN? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, that’s what you’re 

going to have to get from them. They’re the ones that have all 

those details. We just have the overall number. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. We’ll make note to do 

that. 

 

On fire insurance premiums, fire insurance premiums in the 

province are subject to a 1 per cent levy to pay for fire 

prevention services and fire suppression. How much money is 

collected through this 1 per cent levy? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Two point two million is what we 

expect to collect. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, can you tell me the allocation of 

the money collected. Does it go into the General Revenue Fund 

or is any of it actually returned for the specific purpose 

indicated? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, as is true in all cases, 

it goes into the General Revenue Fund. But then there’s other 

money spent on fire services around the province of different 

kinds. But all the money goes into the General Revenue Fund. 

As you will know, that’s what the auditor and the Gass 

Commission has told us we need to do with all this revenue — 

put it into the General Revenue Fund and then allocate it. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. There’s also a tire 

recycling handling charge the government collects. Three 

dollars handling charge is collected when an individual replaces 

a tire through a tire dealer. Theoretically the fee would go to a 

fund to handle the recycling of tires. How much money is 

collected by this handling charge and also what is the 

disposition of that money? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again the industry itself may very 

well have established a program, but the government doesn’t 

have a program that does that. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  One other handling charge on the Tetra-Pak 

juice containers — I believe there’s also a handling charge on 

those containers. Is that included in the $11 million figure that 

you gave me earlier on, and if it’s not, what would the number 

be? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, it’s included in the 

11.2 million. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister, and officials. That’s 

all of the questions I have through the series of estimates for 

your department. I would like to thank you for your answers 

and the officials for their diligence. I would like to turn it over 

to my colleague, the member from Melfort . . . 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, and your 

officials. I have a further question on $2.2 million that was 

collected from the surcharge on fire insurance policies. Can you 

tell me how much of that money goes to the Fire 

Commissioner’s office? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, you’d 

have to look across government because there are fire services 

in different parts of government. I think what the best approach  



1700  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

is SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management), and the Environment department, Municipal 

Government, would do most of the spending. 

 

But it’s not, it’s not an allocated expenditure. That is, it all 

comes into the government General Revenue Fund and then is 

allocated out to a variety of services. 

 

So you’d have to look through the Estimates and ask the 

Department of Environment and Municipal Government what 

they do in terms of spending money on fire prevention services. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Can Madam Minister tell me how much 

money the Fire Commissioner office spends or is allocated, no 

matter how many departments we’re talking about. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think on page 100 of the 

Estimates, there’s public safety and they have some fire safety 

there. But again what you’d have to do is you have to look 

across government to look at how much is spent in other areas 

in fire prevention. SERM spends money in fire prevention of 

different kinds, for example. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, a number of times this 

session, I asked about an exemption for the PST (provincial 

sales tax) on fire equipment. And I understand that there’s no 

breakdown exactly on how much money the government takes 

in from revenues . . . from the sale of or purchase of fire trucks 

by various municipal departments. I’m just wondering if you 

can tell me how the decision, if there was any way of . . . how 

the decision was made to not exempt this equipment when there 

wasn’t . . . when you’re not really aware of how much money 

you’re taking in from it. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I think, I think the member 

opposite is confused here, because what we’re saying is we 

don’t have a dedicated tax here. We take money into the 

General Revenue Fund; it’s spent on other services. 

 

And why I say the member’s confused is your official position 

as a party, I believe, is harmonization of the provincial sales tax 

with the GST (goods and services tax). Which means that you 

would be charging the sales tax on virtually everything in the 

province — everything that the GST is charged on. If that’s 

your position as a party, you can’t then say we want to start 

exempting all these things because that’s not possible under a 

harmonized tax scheme. 

 

Now our position is that a lot of these things sound very good 

as individual cases — why not exempt fire trucks, why not 

exempt this, why not exempt that. Rather than provide a series 

of special treatment for different groups, our choice was to 

lower the sales tax two points so that people all across the 

province can benefit. 

 

And I notice different groups writing to me and saying, well 

because of the reduction in the sales tax by two points, we’ve 

been able to hire another person or we’ve been able to give this 

other benefit to people. 

 

So I don’t think you can argue both sides of that case. You  

can’t say we favour harmonization, which would expand the tax 

base, and then say, but we would narrow the tax base. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, what I am trying to . . . what 

I was trying to let the government know is that out in rural 

Saskatchewan specifically, there is a big concern when it comes 

to keeping up with all the equipment that’s needed to make sure 

that our property and lives are not endangered out there. 

 

This is an added tax. It’s actually hurting rural Saskatchewan a 

lot. And I’m not sure if you’re aware that if we ever to allow 

. . . if in some way these volunteer fire departments can’t keep 

going, it’s going to cause an additional burden, because when a 

fire department is closed down and the trucks have to come 

from a lot further, it will raise the taxes . . . the fire insurance 

premium for towns considerably. I’ve heard as high as 40 per 

cent. 

 

I’m wondering if that’s a concern for you and your government 

and if that’s something that you considered when you decided 

not to give an exemption. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Obviously we have to be concerned 

about that issue as we have to be concerned about a number of 

issues. 

 

But I do say with all great, due respect to the member opposite, 

it’s not legitimate for the members opposite to come in as an 

opposition and to say absolutely contradictory things, which is 

what your party is saying. Because your official position is 

harmonization of the sales tax, means all these things are taxed 

— and many more other things, not just fire equipment would 

be taxed. 

 

Every repair service — every time you took the fire truck to be 

repaired would be taxed. Every time somebody had to have 

another service associated with a fire truck. Everything would 

be taxed. There would be more taxes on those local fire 

departments under a harmonized sales tax — a lot more taxes. 

 

That’s why there’s all the fuss in the Maritimes right now. So 

it’s just not legitimate to say, well but I wouldn’t do that. Well 

your party would, and you can’t have it both ways on this. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, my colleague a few minutes 

ago talked about the number of hidden taxes that we face here 

when it comes to the different issues. 

 

And I think this is something that . . . our official position may 

be harmonization, but what we’re talking about right now is 

something that’s going to directly affect the lives and the 

property of people in rural Saskatchewan that don’t have the 

benefit of having an on-call fire department that they can be out 

there in a matter of moments. And even if they did have 911 or 

some of the services that are available out there, we are fighting 

for survival out in rural Saskatchewan. And I guess I was just 

hoping that the government would in some way see that there 

are special cases out there that have to be looked at. 

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

Madam Minister, I’m going to move on to something else. 

 

The corporation capital tax resource surcharge is unique to 

Saskatchewan. We’re the only province to levy a resource 

surcharge — a levy that has no relation to the company’s ability 

to pay it. The surtax results in significant projection costs 

increases. 

 

In the case of coal, coal companies pass the full resource 

surcharge on to SaskPower, which in turn passes on the 

additional cost by increasing electrical rates to Saskatchewan 

businesses and households. 

 

Can the minister tell us the total amount collected from the 

resource surcharge tax on corporate capital, and specifically, 

from the annual surtax collected from coal? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the total — we don’t have the breakdown — but the 

total we collect is $145 million. 

 

I would say to the member opposite from our point of view, this 

is an essential part of a fair tax scheme, because it means that in 

our tax regime large companies with a huge asset base are 

taxed. It’s like a wealth tax. Other countries have wealth taxes. 

Saskatchewan has a wealth tax. 

 

And I would like the members opposite then to be on the 

record. Because if they don’t want to collect $145 million from 

this tax, please to tell me which service to the people of 

Saskatchewan you would like to cut, or which tax on the 

average person you will . . . would like to give? If you don’t 

want to charge large banks and large resource companies a 

capital . . . a corporate capital tax, then you’re going to shift that 

burden to individuals. And to me that’s not part of a fair tax 

scheme. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, my question wasn’t why are 

you doing. My question was how much? And I guess you did 

give me the answer after, and then the preamble. 

 

In terms of the level of mining taxes and royalties, where does 

Saskatchewan rank among the provinces? And what is the 

impact of this competitiveness on Saskatchewan’s mining 

industry? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  My understanding is that was 

discussed in great detail in the Energy and Mines estimates. The 

only point I would make is that our royalties are price sensitive 

and profit sensitive. That is, as companies are doing better, the 

royalties are higher. When the companies are not doing as well, 

the royalties are lower. 

 

But I think the most important thing in terms of what’s going 

on in the oil industry is that there is a very significant influx of 

oil companies into the province doing more and more 

exploration, buying more and more land. And I think they have 

a lot of confidence in the stability of our fiscal regime. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, when the Department of 

Environment . . . or no, Energy and Mines was up, I asked these  

questions and they referred it to your department. So I have 

asked it in the . . . or it’s been asked twice now. So perhaps 

maybe somebody could give me a written answer. 

 

Saskatchewan is one of the few, if not the only province, which 

does not exempt direct agents used in mining and mineral 

processing from sales tax. The government has exempted direct 

agents used in manufacturing and processing in order to 

stimulate that economy. Madam Minister, in light of the as yet 

untapped vast potential in exploration, development, and 

processing, has the government considered exempting direct 

agents in mining in order to stimulate the growth in this area? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we do exempt some 

of the direct agents, mobile capital equipment for example, and 

so there are some direct agents very similar to the M&P 

(manufacturing and processing) direct agents that are exempted. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Under 

miscellaneous payments, I notice there is an allowance for 

doubtful accounts of $2 million. Can you give me an idea of 

what that would be? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, all that is is an 

estimate of what the department may have to write off in a year 

because of people not being able to pay their taxes or 

bankruptcies. So it’s just an estimate that any business would 

make about bills that they are not going to collect in one way or 

another. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister, to you and to 

your officials. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. To the 

minister and her officials, welcome. Madam Minister, I believe 

my colleague, the member from Kindersley, was addressing 

some issues the other day regarding some of the taxation 

problems we’re running into in regards to Indians and Indian 

services on reserves and some of the PST that hasn’t been 

coming forward. 

 

I’m wondering to date, Madam Minister, what your department 

has been doing to address the areas where the province has 

jurisdiction in collecting taxes and yet hasn’t been able to, or 

have you arrived at a process of . . . or an agreement whereby 

that tax would be funded to the province, refunded? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

I think understands that we can’t talk about individual files. 

And so . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  He wasn’t talking about individual . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, but we can’t tell you that, if 

everybody in the province is or isn’t paying their taxes. And so 

all we can say to you is that we collect taxes all across the 

province. And we use the appropriate enforcement all across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, this certainly is a concern, and I guess in general from  



1702  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

what you’re telling me, is basically, in many cases, there are 

individual circumstances versus just a broad base of the 

disinterest in paying the provincial tax, and I’ll take your word 

for it. And we’ll certainly be interested in following up down 

the road to see what has happened with regards to some of the 

individual cases that I’m aware of. 

 

Madam Minister, it was interesting, I caught a federal Liberal 

campaign advertisement last evening and it reminded me a lot 

of what I would expect to hear from the Premier or yourself in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Martin was talking about 

how he had balanced the budget or has working towards . . . or 

certainly has gone a long ways towards balancing the budget. 

And he talked about the strong economy. 

 

And fortunately, Madam Minister, I think you’ll have to admit 

as well that being elected in 1991 was certainly . . . came in at a 

proper time because we were about the time where the economy 

was starting to roll again. There are cyclical cycles. I think 

federally the same thing has taken place. 

 

However, Madam Minister, as we’ve seen in the province of 

Saskatchewan, part of that so-called budget balancing has come 

at the expense of the provinces. And you’ve been talking about 

it. Your colleagues have been talking about the areas where 

financing . . . where you’ve been . . . offloading of federal 

financing or federal funding to the provinces has certainly been 

used in a major way to help the federal minister much as we’ve 

seen the offloading through rural governments in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And you’ve used some significant numbers. 

 

It seemed to me, as I was watching that ad, that it was quite 

ironical that the federal Minister of Finance would be using 

those terms, would be trying to . . . and I would have to say the 

federal minister just misleading the people of Canada by telling 

us he’d balanced the budget, he balanced the budget. 

 

Number one, if there was significant progress in addressing 

deficits and the General Revenue Fund at the federal scene, it 

came at the expense of all the provinces and the taxpayers of 

Canada. And on the other hand, I’m sure revenues, the Prime 

Minister or the federal Minister of Finance would certainly be 

appreciative of the fact that as the economy tends to grow 

again, the interest rates go down, and he’s able to then certainly 

shift, and you’re not paying the same kind of interest. 

 

So I guess I would like maybe your response to that type of ad, 

because I think in Saskatchewan we certainly have had to bear, 

whether it’s in health, education . . . certainly the social 

programs has had to pick up a fair bit of that cost so that the 

federal Finance minister can tell us he is certainly balancing the 

books — balancing the books at whose expense? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly 

agree with the member opposite. They cut about a quarter of a 

billion dollars in funding — a quarter of a billion each and 

every year that we will lose in funding for health, education, 

social programs. 

 

In 1996, both in their federal 1996 and federal 1997 budgets, 

more than 70 per cent of the cuts were cuts to provincial  

funding for health, education, social programs. And it’s always 

been a very big bone of contention between us and the federal 

government where they actually made their cuts. Because they 

try, as they now go into the election, to talk about how much 

they care about poor children and their concern about the health 

care system. Yet no government in the history of Canada has 

ever taken as much funding out of programs for health and 

programs to deal with child poverty. 

 

So we do find it rather ironic. And I’d be surprised to see if 

people in rural Saskatchewan warm up to this little argument, 

because they’ve lost very heavily from this particular 

government — $300 million a year lost in the Crow benefit 

closing down, abandoning branch lines, putting more pressure 

on our roads. Yet absolutely unwilling to share in the cost of 

improving major thoroughfares like the Trans-Canada, the 

Yellowhead, clearly roads that go right through the province, 

our national highways — no funding at all from the federal 

government. 

 

So I’ll be interested in the result, because I hope people have a 

good memory for what’s happened in the last two years. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. And 

welcome to your officials. 

 

Madam Minister, I wanted to talk to you a little bit about an 

area of concern that I think all people across . . . seniors all 

across Canada and certainly here in Saskatchewan should be 

aware of and I’m sure are becoming very much aware of — the 

concern about the federal government’s changes to the Old Age 

Security program. 

 

The new plan, the so-called seniors’ benefit, has set, as you 

know, steep claw-backs in RRSPs (registered retirement savings 

plan) for middle and upper income Canadians that are a steep 

disincentive for people who save for retirement. 

 

According to one estimate, and I have the article, Madam 

Minister, it’s from The Financial Post of March 8, 1997, 

written by a Mr. Jonathon Chevréau, I believe it is. And he goes 

on to say in his article that a pension consultant, a gentleman by 

the name of Malcolm Hamilton of William Mercier Ltd., is 

talking about the amount of retirement savings that one would 

have to have in order to compete — not necessarily to compete 

but in order to match people who have no retirement savings 

whatsoever. 

 

And I think in this day and age it’s important that we as 

governments and as government representatives and MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and MPs (Member of 

Parliament) and everyone else across Canada recognize the 

importance of saving for our old age security into the future and 

do everything we can, I think, as representatives and as 

government to promote the idea that people should be saving 

for themselves in their retirement years. 

 

Anyway, he calculates that a retired couple, a retired couple in 

the lowest tax bracket would need a combined RRSP of more 

that $250,000 — a quarter of a million dollars — just to match 

the 18,440 tax-free seniors’ benefit available to those who have  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

not saved for their retirement income. 

 

And I think it’s, I think it’s very, very important that we point 

out the significant level of claw-back that the federal 

government is promoting here — some 50 per cent plus of a 

claw-back from people who have done what I think is the right 

thing to do and have saved for their retirement through RRSPs. 

 

And I’d like you, Madam Minister, if you wouldn’t mind, to 

comment on that. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again I agree with the concerns 

raised by the member opposite and I would add a couple of 

other points. Two years ago they also clawed back a seniors’ tax 

credit, and the argument was that they were going to start 

clawing it back at a level of affluence — the level of affluence 

was below $30,000. So they’re beginning to claw back the 

funds of seniors who are living on very modest incomes. And 

that one is already in place and has been in place for one full 

tax year. 

 

We are also concerned about some of the changes to Canada 

Pension Plan which hit elderly senior women particularly hard. 

So I share your concerns. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think what it does 

is it encourages people to, essentially, to blow their money 

before retirement or hide it in mortgages or loans to their 

children rather than in trying to look after themselves in their 

retirement years. I think this scheme will ultimately be more 

costly for taxpayers and promotes an attitude of dependence on 

government. And I think that’s something that we most 

certainly shouldn’t be doing. 

 

David Lewis, editor of The Tax Letter, describes this as, quote, 

“One of the most pernicious, punitive, confiscatory tax grabs to 

come out of Ottawa in a long time,” Madam Minister. And I 

think it’s critically important that we alert the people of 

Saskatchewan and the seniors of Saskatchewan as to what this 

is going to do for them. 

 

Because you know the RRSP program hasn’t been . . . oh it’s 

been around for a good number of years, I guess, but a lot of 

people, it’s only in recent years have been, I think, 

understanding clearly the benefits associated with saving for 

their retirement. 

 

And now we see a situation where they, if they haven’t been 

able to save a quarter of a million dollars — and I’m sure you 

would agree that’s a tremendous amount of savings that you 

would have to come up — are in a very bad position, where 

they might as well have not saved anything. Might as well have 

not saved a dime and just allowed the government and looked 

for the government to look after them in their old age. 

 

And I think that that’s something that we don’t want to 

promote. And I can’t for the life of me understand why the 

federal government would want to be moving in that direction 

when their public statements have always been to the effect that  

people have to prepare themselves for their old age and prepare 

themselves and their families and their spouses for the fact that 

at some point they won’t have the capacity to earn like they may 

have prior to their retirement. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I think it would be incumbent upon this 

government to continue, if you haven’t already, to continue to 

point out to the federal government your concerns and the 

concerns, I think of all of the seniors of Saskatchewan in this 

area to the federal government. And as well I think it might not 

be a bad idea if your department, Madam Minister, through its 

budget that I assume it has for advertising, make it clear to the 

people of Saskatchewan, particularly now perhaps as we’re into 

a federal election campaign, about the significance of this 

change in the RRSP program. 

 

And I wonder if you’d care to comment. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I think the member opposite 

has raised some valid points. And the other point that I would 

add is, is there hasn’t been any coordination amongst these 

different changes. At the table when we were talking to the 

federal government about the Canada Pension Plan, the changes 

that are occurring in the Canada Pension Plan are not being 

related to the changes that are occurring in the Old Age 

Security. They’re not being coordinated with the changes made 

to the RRSPs and they’re not being coordinated to the reduction 

in the seniors’ tax credit. 

 

So besides that, there’s not an overall kind of vision to this. 

There’s a series of ad hoc measures that don’t properly integrate 

with each other. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Perhaps, Madam Minister, the other area that we 

and others should be concerned about is, it is our understanding 

that the federal government had promised to consult, had 

promised to consult with their provincial counterparts before 

this program was announced and introduced. 

 

And I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could confirm for the 

people of Saskatchewan whether or not your department was 

consulted as to what these changes were and whether you had 

any input or direction or had the opportunity to provide any 

thoughts on the implementation of this program before it was 

announced. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no there wasn’t; it 

was just done unilaterally. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Has your department, Madam Minister, worked 

through any estimates on how this will affect future retirement 

savings in Saskatchewan? If you haven’t prepared or done any 

studies with respect to this, perhaps you and your officials 

might want to offer a view as to what the likelihood of people 

moving away from that retirement savings vehicle in the future 

is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we really don’t have 

enough details from the federal government to do that kind of 

modelling yet. 

 



1704  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

Mr. Boyd:  Have you, Madam Minister, have you given any 

thought to perhaps having some of your actuaries look at, and 

some of your policy people look at this area of concern and 

look at perhaps ways to address it, perhaps ways to fight the 

federal Finance department on this issue, and perhaps ways to 

illustrate the unfairness of a system that penalizes people for 

saving. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously we 

share some of the concerns that the member’s raising, but we 

still don’t have enough detail to give you any conclusive 

answers except to say we’re working on it. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. That is an area I 

think that people in Saskatchewan should be very, very 

conscious of and very, very concerned about when it comes to 

saving for their retirement here in Saskatchewan. And I hope — 

I sincerely hope — that you and your department will be doing 

everything they possibly can to raise this issue with the federal 

Liberal government. 

 

Who knows, in the next few weeks they may not have 

opportunity . . . you may not have opportunity to raise it with 

the same people. But perhaps it’s an area that you will want to 

continue to raise with the federal government with respect to 

relations with the federal government; and the protection of our 

seniors and their seniors’ retirement income plans that are 

vitally important to the well-being of our seniors. 

 

And I think it’s incumbent, Madam Minister . . . and I would 

urge you and your department to look into this as closely as 

possible and perhaps come up with and work towards studies as 

to what kind of impact that this’ll have on Saskatchewan 

seniors. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly I’ve 

met with lots of seniors’ groups and share their concerns and 

have raised these issues with the federal government and will 

continue to do so. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Moving on to some 

other subjects now. 

 

With respect to the whole area of VLT (video lottery terminal) 

income or VLT generated to your department and the promise 

that you and your government made to the municipalities of 

Saskatchewan with respect to the revenue sharing of those 

revenues gained from gambling, I’m wondering, Madam 

Minister, at what level of discussions do you continue to have 

with municipalities with respect to this issue? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of any 

ongoing discussions about that issue. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Does that mean, Madam Minister, that this issue 

has been concluded and that there is no intention with your 

government to share revenues with the municipalities in this 

area? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No plan at present to do so. No. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well, Madam Minister, I think that creates a 

problem then for a lot of people across Saskatchewan and a lot 

of people that I think in municipalities all across Saskatchewan 

were of the belief that you were going to fulfil that campaign 

promise that you made in 1994 or ’95, somewhere in that time 

frame prior to the provincial election, with respect to the whole 

area of revenue sharing from gambling proceeds. 

 

And I think frankly, Madam Minister, I think that’s an area that 

a lot of people . . . You gained I would think some degree of 

support for your stand at that particular time, that you would be 

moving to a situation where there would be sharing of VLT 

revenues. And I think, Madam Minister, that you and your 

government perhaps owe the municipalities of this province an 

explanation and certainly an apology for the fact that you 

haven’t been able to keep your campaign promise with respect 

to this. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I guess unfortunately I’m going to have to get into this 

debate in a significant way. As is often the case, the member’s 

quite twisting the facts here. 

 

What occurred was this. We said to not only municipalities, we 

said to municipalities, we said to the teachers, the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) — the trustees — 

we said to SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations) — the health organizations across the province 

— sit down and see if you can come up with a plan to redirect 

some of the VLT revenue back to communities. They were not 

able to come up with any plan that they could agree upon. 

Municipalities took that particular process and tried to say our 

intention was to give money to municipalities for 

revenue-sharing. It never was part of the intention at all. So 

there was no agreement as to how we would put money back 

into local communities from VLTs. 

 

At the same time there was pressure on the provincial 

government, as your colleague was mentioning, because of the 

massive federal cuts to health and education. So our decision 

was, the best way for us . . . Because of the lack of agreement 

by people in education and in health care and at the municipal 

level about a common scheme, the best thing that we could do 

was to put, as we did, quite literally hundreds of millions of 

new dollars into health and into education — in the local health 

boards, in the local school divisions — to protect them from 

some of the federal reductions that were occurring. 

 

So from our point of view, that issue was dealt with in a very 

fair and reasonable way and local communities are benefiting 

very dramatically from the revenue that we get from all sources. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well then, Madam Minister, why is it that you 

. . . why do you suppose that we continue to hear, and hear 

outrage from the municipalities all across Saskatchewan with 

respect to your promise of sharing the revenue gained from 

VLT gambling here in Saskatchewan? Why is it that that 

continues to be an issue if you were as benevolent as you like to 

lead everyone to believe? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know.  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

Perhaps the members opposite do a very good job of whipping 

this up. But I think the misunderstanding was there was never 

an intention to put money into the hands of municipal 

governments. The intention was to ensure that in a very visible 

way money was going back into local communities. Our 

conclusion was, the most visible way to put money back into 

local communities were through things like local health boards, 

and to increase, as we have very dramatically, the funding for 

local health boards. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think that’s a 

very, very clever way of trying to convince people that you 

actually did what was the right thing. And, Madam Minister, I 

don’t think that you can convince people that you did the right 

thing in that area because I think is was clear that many, many 

people across Saskatchewan that were in that capacity, with 

health boards and SAHO and education groups and 

municipalities, both rural and urban municipalities, were of the 

belief that they were going to be sharing from the revenues of 

VLT gambling. 

 

And you, Madam Minister, took great . . . I think great delight 

in providing people with that kind of a view, that that was going 

to be a solemn commitment from you and your government 

with respect to this whole area, Madam Minister. And I don’t 

think it’s gone away. I don’t think that you even believe that it’s 

gone away and that it’ll continue to be highlighted by 

municipalities all across Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s an area that we continue to hear about. It’s an area that we 

hear and see responses from municipalities all across 

Saskatchewan, petitions that still seem to be going around 

Saskatchewan with respect to this issue. And it just simply isn’t 

going away, Madam Minister, because — and I think it’s very 

simple — the reason is, is because you made that kind of 

commitment to people, and because you made some sort of a 

half-hearted effort at negotiating between the various groups, 

somehow or another the public is just supposed to accept the 

fact that you were not willing to stay at the table long enough to 

hammer out an agreement with the various interest groups with 

respect to this area. 

 

(1515) 

 

So, Madam Minister, I don’t think the issue is dying at all. I 

think there continues to be a great deal of concern. There 

continues to be a great deal of concern about the whole area 

about VLT gambling in Saskatchewan. There continues to be 

concern about the loss of revenue to charitable organizations, 

the inability of charities to fund-raise within small 

communities, primarily small communities in Saskatchewan 

these days, on very important charitable areas. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I just think it’s incumbent upon you to 

provide the people of Saskatchewan and those stakeholders 

with an explanation and an apology to them. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I’ve already given 

you the explanation and I know the member opposite will 

continue . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Just give me an apology then. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, right. The member opposite 

will continue to twist this. It’s amazing what the member 

opposite will actually try to say. 

 

But I think the point that I would make to people in rural 

Saskatchewan, is we’ve shown our commitment to them in this 

budget. I’ve got a list of some of the things that affect primarily 

rural people. Million dollars new money to be invested in 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), primarily in rural 

areas; 2.5 billion over the next 10 years for roads and highways 

across the province; 23 million new dollars for municipal 

infrastructure projects; $117 million for training programs all 

across the province; $57 million new dollars for health districts 

across the province. 

 

So I think we’ve shown our commitment to people all across 

the province including to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m not sure this is 

an appropriate forum to . . . this estimate that is, to ask you this 

question, but I’ll ask it anyway. You might want to make some 

policy on the fly here, I don’t know. Probably not, but we’ll see. 

 

We’ve heard concern, Madam Minister, with respect to VLTs 

not being available in a number of facilities or groups within 

Saskatchewan, like the Legions, and people like that. They’ve 

met, I understand, with the minister responsible on numerous 

occasions with respect to this and I think the question is, is 

they’re wondering why, why they haven’t been able to have that 

type of fund-raising of machines available for their patrons? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I always think it’s 

dangerous to make policy on the fly so I think you’ll have to ask 

the minister responsible. 

 

I would remind the member opposite that one of the things we 

did commit to was a cap on the number of VLTs in the 

province. So if you’re asking for all of these new groups to be 

added on to the list, are you saying that you wouldn’t cap the 

number of VLTs in the province? But beyond that, I’d ask the 

minister involved. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The last area that I 

have that I wanted to discuss with you this afternoon was of 

course the overall provincial budget. As you know, and myself 

and a couple of my colleagues voted in favour of the budget. 

And I want to point out to you some of the reasons. Basically 

there’s only a couple of reasons why we did support it . . . or 

why I did support it. And why I think that you shouldn’t draw 

any, any great degree of comfort from the fact that we 

supported it. 

 

Madam Minister, I supported your budget for one reason, I 

think, and one reason only and that was with respect to the 

provincial sales tax reduction from 9 per cent down to 7 per 

cent. In my constituency of Kindersley, I think you realize how 

extremely important that particular issue is to the people of that  



1706  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

constituency, the merchants of that constituency, the business 

community, and certainly other areas within that constituency. 

 

Madam Minister, in my constituency of Kindersley, if people 

were going to go on a shopping trip say 15, 10, 15 years ago, 

the city of choice that they went to invariably was Saskatoon. 

The trading pattern from that area was to go to Saskatoon for 

perhaps a Christmas shopping trip or a trip in August or 

something of that time frame to prepare, you know, buying 

school books and clothes and stuff like that for their children to 

prepare for the onset of the school season. 

 

And that was, I would say, at least 95 per cent of the people if 

not more, went to Saskatoon for that shopping trip. Now, 

Madam Minister, there’s been a dramatic shift in that the 

shopping patterns of people within that area, my constituency 

. . . and I think that extends all along the west side of 

Saskatchewan — the Maple Creeks and the Leaders and even as 

far in as Swift Current certainly on the other . . . further north 

right up to Lloydminster; although of course as you know, 

Madam Minister, Lloydminster has the tax exemption there 

with respect to the provincial sales tax. 

 

But what has happened over the last number of years — and 

North Battleford is another good example of this as well — 

what has happened, Madam Minister, over the last number of 

years is shopping patterns have dramatically shifted. Within our 

area now, as I said it used to be about 95 per cent if not higher, 

percentage of people that if they were going to go anywhere 

they were going to go to Saskatoon. 

 

I would say it shifted now to something like 50 per cent are 

continuing to go to Saskatoon and the other 50 per cent are 

going to either Medicine Hat, which consists of the largest 

group, or perhaps Calgary. And if you get further north, it’s 

Lloydminster because of the tax-free status within the city of 

Lloydminster. 

 

And I think that that illustrates the significance of the problem 

that has been in place as a result of the provincial sales tax. And 

I’m sure, Madam Minister, you’re going to argue about the fact 

that it’s been around a long period of time and everything. But 

frankly, I don’t care about that. And I don’t think the people of 

Kindersley care about it. 

 

I think they want a government to address it and address it as 

quickly as possible. I think they want, Madam Minister, for you 

to look to continued tax relief when it comes to the provincial 

sales tax, to put their business or their opportunity to buy goods 

in a competitive position with Alberta. 

 

Because I think we’ll continue to see that trend escalate. We’ll 

continue to see the fact that people are leaving Saskatchewan 

and taking their hard-earned dollars — what is left after taxes in 

this province — and taking them elsewhere to shop. And any 

one that lives along the west side of Saskatchewan knows how 

very important that issue is. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is why, when it came it to the whole 

. . . the provincial sales tax and the issues surrounding it in the 

provincial budget, I felt that I had to — had to, absolutely had  

to — support any reduction in the provincial sales tax just 

simply based on the fact that I have given the commitment to 

the constituents of Kindersley and to the people of 

Saskatchewan through our campaign in 1995, the provincial 

election campaign, that we would work towards a provincial 

sales tax reduction here in the province. So that is the reason, 

Madam Minister, that we felt — I felt — that it was important 

to support this. 

 

And I want to try and convince you this afternoon here, Madam 

Minister, to stay on track, to stay on track for future reductions 

in the provincial sales tax. And we would certainly offer up any 

help that we might be able to in providing you with areas of 

further reductions of government spending and allow for the 

offset of revenues that are lost from future reductions in the 

provincial sales tax. 

 

Madam Minister, that I think is, in a nutshell, the reason why I 

felt compelled to support your budget. 

 

The other . . . The concerns that we have with respect to your 

budget are still there. They’re still there in terms of high tax 

loads in many areas. They’re still there in terms of wanting to 

support you and convince you to keep on track in terms of 

deficit reduction here in Saskatchewan. The deficit has been 

addressed — debt reduction I should say, debt reduction here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Because I don’t think we’re out 

of the woods at all, Madam Minister. 

 

And I guess you and I can debate all afternoon about where the 

debt came from and all of that kind of stuff. But the fact of the 

matter is, Madam Minister, that is history, and that is I think 

something that people want, I think, us as legislators here in 

Saskatchewan to set aside and start looking at solutions rather 

than assessing blame. They want solutions in terms of what 

we’re going to do to drag down and work towards reducing the 

provincial debt here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Madam Minister, I would offer our support and our 

encouragement in areas of debt reduction here in the province, 

and I’d be more than happy to provide you with some examples 

if you chose. 

 

But, Madam Minister, those are the areas that I wanted to point 

out to you here this afternoon with respect to the provincial 

sales tax. Continue good luck and continue with your stand that 

the provincial sales tax reduction was important. Continue, 

Madam Minister, to work towards reduction in the provincial 

sales tax in the future and continue with your work in terms of 

reducing the debt here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I thank you, Madam Minister, for your answers to our 

questions here this afternoon, and I thank the officials for their 

help in your answers here as well. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 18 agreed to. 

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance — Servicing The Public Debt 

Government Share 

Vote 12 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 167 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advancements and Investments 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

Vote 154 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Vote 143 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Vote 153 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Debt Redemption 

Vote 175 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Sinking Fund Payments — Government Share 

Vote 176 

 

Authorized by law. 

 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Interest on Public Debt — Crown Enterprise Share 

Vote 177 

Authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Authorized by law. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 18 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

 

(1530) 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 2  The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

right is John Edwards, director of municipal policy and 

legislative services branch of Municipal Government. And on 

my left is Perry Erhardt, legislative officer in the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, 

Madam Minister, to yourself and your officials. 

 

Just have a couple of questions, Madam Minister, because 

we’ve been over most of this stuff either in question period or a 

number of other debates we’ve had. 

 

I believe possibly this question I’ve asked you earlier, Madam 

Minister, but you’ve had somewhat of more time now to look at 

the six-year phase-in that you’re bringing in. 

 

Can you tell me right now how many — and I would presume 

it’s only the cities that would consider using this — how many 

municipalities would be using this? Are any of the rural at all 

thinking of it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, not that we’re aware 

of. It was . . . that clause was included to make the Acts  



1708  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

consistent. And certainly if a rural municipality had a peculiar 

kind of industry or something of that nature that was different 

than the rest of their assessment base, they might want to 

exercise it. But to my knowledge none have to date. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would think 

though with the next reassessment being done in 2000 and 

someone going by the six-year plan, would that not create 

confusion in itself? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the reason that the six 

years was chosen is because we had representations from 

municipalities, urban municipalities mostly, particularly with 

respect to their commercial assessment base and business 

assessment base. That they wanted . . . some municipalities 

wanted 5 years, some municipalities wanted 10 years. 

 

And being conscious of the point that you’re making that when 

another assessment comes along in 2000, the year 2000, if 

there’s a change, I mean is it due to the phase-in or is it due to 

the reassessment? So we thought that the most appropriate 

would be six years, which would be two cycles of the 

reassessment system. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, when the agriculture land assessment seemed to climb 

much faster or was assessed much higher than the urban land in 

many cases and you brought in the .84 factor to take some of 

the brunt of the shift from rural back to urban — as you know, I 

believe we’ve caused quite a rift between the rural 

municipalities, the urban municipalities, and actually problems 

for the school divisions themselves — was there not any 

anticipation at all that the rural was going to be . . . the 

assessment was going to climb much faster than the urban 

properties? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, based on the 

market adjustment factor that was used, it was quite obvious 

that agricultural land has increased in market value 

proportionately much higher than other kinds of property since 

1965. So it was known. 

 

But at the same time the assessment in a number of smaller 

towns and villages, which have lost elevators and part of the 

accompanying maybe agri-business base, was also dropped. So 

until the actual numbers started to come through, we weren’t 

confident of the magnitude of the shift. And when we became 

aware as the numbers started to come out, that is when we gave 

consideration to the mitigation on agricultural land for school 

purposes only. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, I believe that in other venues you’ve answered a 

number of my questions that I would have had today; that’s all I 

have at this point; that I would like to tell you that I will be 

presenting an amendment as we go through the Bill. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to: 

 

Amend clause 33 of the printed Bill by deleting it and 

substituting the following: 

 

“33 This Act shall come into force when the Executive 

Council presents a structured plan to reduce the portion of 

education costs raised through the municipal property taxes 

back down to 40 per cent of the total.” 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I see that the Clerk has 

had an opportunity to peruse the amendment, but I would 

suggest, with respect, it may very well be out of order because 

The Rural Municipality Act does not have any clauses relating 

to the funding of education. So in any event we will be 

opposing the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

The Chair: — Is the minister raising a point of order? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. I would rule the . . . Order. I would 

rule the amendment in order. This is not dealing with education 

tax; this is simply a condition for the clause 33 before coming 

into order, this is a condition. So the amendment is in order. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Chairman, would I be allowed to speak 

to the amendment before we have the opportunity to vote on it? 

 

The Chair:  Yes, any member can speak more than once in 

committee. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

completely disagree with what the minister was saying because 

I think one of the biggest problems created by reassessment has 

been the education tax portion of it — the shift from urban to 

rural and then with the .84 factor back. And I think 

reassessment would have been a lot smoother had the education 

tax not been on property tax at all. But being that it is, and the 

government of the day has been reneging on their share of it, 

has caused much more confusion. And I would hope the 

member, or the rural members across would take that into 

consideration and support this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:48 p.m. until 3:53 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 13 

 

Krawetz McLane Gantefoer 

Draude Osika Bjornerud 

Belanger Hillson Julé 

Aldridge Boyd Toth 

Heppner   

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

Nays — 20 

 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Mitchell 

Johnson Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Teichrob Trew 

Lorje Renaud Nilson 

Cline Serby Murray 

Kasperski Sonntag Langford 

Murrell Thomson  

 

Clause 33 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The indications 

I have received is that this amendment will have little or no 

practical impact because, you know, it has come so late in the 

piece that municipalities really can’t use a six-year phase-in. 

And of course in any event it seems very, very difficult to 

understand how you could mix a six-year phase-in with a 

three-year rolling reassessment. So how could you have a 

phase-in that’s going to last longer than the assessment itself? 

 

Now I realize that the minister’s position is that assessment is a 

dynamic process that of course unfortunately this year seems to 

be changing on a weekly basis. But I’m going to ask her: how 

many municipalities have indicated their intention to use a 

six-year phase-in, and whether they’re indicating they’ll use it 

for their entire tax roll or for certain segments of the tax roll. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, certainly Regina and 

Saskatoon have made use of this provision, and we . . . this will 

be effective as of January 1. And they were given that 

undertaking by the Premier at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) meeting in January that this 

legislation would be forthcoming so that they would have that 

ability. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So when you say Regina and Saskatoon, is that 

for the entire tax roll or is that just for commercial or residential 

or what portions of the tax roll will it be used for? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the local 

municipalities have got the capacity to be flexible, and they’ve 

exercised the phase-in on different parts of their tax roll. We 

don’t make the decisions on that. In Regina there’s some 

phasing-in of the residential. In Saskatoon it’s being applied 

mostly to their commercial sector, I believe. But they have the 

flexibility to make those decisions themselves. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I realize that, Madam Minister, but I’m just 

wondering what indications you’ve received. And are you 

saying that Regina has told you that they will be using a 

six-year or longer than three-year phase-in for their residential 

tax roll? 

 

(1600) 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. The residential 

phase-in in Regina, I believe, is over four years. And in their 

commercial sector, the phase-in is longer than that. In 

Saskatoon as well there are longer periods of phase-in for 

different parts of the assessment roll. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — As you know, Madam Minister, the underlying 

problem, I think, that all the municipalities are experiencing 

which has led to so much conflict at the local government level 

has been the fact that education is now funded 60 per cent by 

the property tax load. Traditionally it was funded as 40 per cent. 

What aid and comfort can you give that this province has a 

commitment to get back to the traditional level of property tax 

support? Or is the 60 per cent load on the local ratepayers for 

education, is that just going to continue going up, up, up? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, again the Premier 

made in his address to municipal associations a commitment 

that as we developed the fiscal capacity to make such a move 

sustainable, that we would begin to incrementally fund 

education more from the treasury, which would reduce the local 

tax load. But we don’t have a time frame on that yet. We 

wouldn’t want to do it one year and then not be able to sustain 

it. We need to be able to see it in the context of our four-year 

budget plan, that it is realistic and a sustainable timetable. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Can you say anything this afternoon, Madam 

Minister, that will give municipalities any confidence that 

assessment information will be supplied to them on a timely 

and accurate basis that will allow them to complete their work 

of finalizing the tax roll, getting assessment notices out, and 

setting the mill rate. As you know, that process has been very 

much delayed this year because of the difficulty in getting 

proper assessment information and because, in case after case 

after case, assessment information has been cancelled and new 

information issued and it’s just led to unnecessary hardship in 

implementing reassessment. If the assessment valuations had 

been in the councils’ hands six months to a year before 

reassessment, then this whole process would have been an 

awful lot smoother than it’s been. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, municipalities did 

have their information by November of 1996, and the changes 

that were made were generally in response to questions that 

were raised. So it was a massive job — a massive job — to 

reassess the whole province, and using 1994 values. I expect 

that in future years, as everyone has more experience with the 

new system and the new regime, that it will become more 

timely. 

 

But I’d like to remind the member opposite that I am not the 

minister responsible for SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency); I am responsible for the SAMA 

legislation, but SAMA is an arms-length, independent body 

with the majority of their members elected by SUMA, SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and the 

trustees association. 

 

So if municipalities want to get guarantees for performance and 

so on, they should get in touch with their appropriate 

representative who sits on the board of directors of SAMA and  



1710  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

directs the activities of that agency. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, we’ve had a number of 

discussions over the last few months about the fact that you tax 

municipalities, but municipalities can’t tax the provincial. Now 

there’s a new twist. The most recent story is that SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is going to make fire 

protection vehicles be licensed — not the engines themselves, 

not the fire engines, but other auxiliary vehicles owned by the 

fire departments. The city of Saskatoon says the bill for them 

alone will be $15,000. 

 

So here’s another case of more money is going to have to be 

charged to the municipal taxpayer in order to send money to the 

provincial government. 

 

Now I realize that you can say, well this is an SGI issue; but I 

assume you’re talking to your colleague, the minister 

responsible for SGI, and here’s another case where you’ve just 

added $15,000 to the cost of operating the Saskatoon fire 

department. There will be presumably prorated costs the same 

for every fire department in this province. 

 

Isn’t this going in the opposite direction of where we want to 

get? That here’s another case where you . . . you say in principle 

it’s wrong for one level of government to be taxing another 

level of government, but here’s a new area where you’ve just 

laid another heavy expense onto the costs of municipalities 

operating fire departments in this province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I, as Minister of 

Municipal Government, haven’t done that and I would suggest 

that these questions should be more appropriately directed 

towards the minister responsible for SGI. And I might 

comment, Mr. Chairman, that this issue has absolutely nothing 

to do with the Bill that’s under discussion. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I have a couple of questions to do with the . . . and I 

brought it to your attention before, but the town of Saltcoats 

and the number of appeals, I believe, is 50 plus that came out of 

that little centre. And I think that’s amazing in itself and it 

should show us that there has been a tremendous oversight in 

the assessment and the numbers that have been brought up 

there. 

 

Can you tell me if any other urban centre within the province 

has had that comparison of appeals come forth and that type of 

a problem brought to the forefront? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we wouldn’t get that 

data unless someone from the municipality called or wrote to 

volunteer that information. But I’m aware of the ongoing 

dialogue in Saltcoats. I understand that there was a court of 

revision held on May 6 and 7. And that apparently all the 

appeals have not yet been heard and that decisions will not be 

rendered until . . . well the guidelines are, 15 days after the last 

appeal has been heard. 

 

So they’re in the process of appealing now, and making their 

comparisons with other like properties. So if there are some  

unique circumstances in Saltcoats, the court of revision will 

review that and make their decision in due course. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And, Madam 

Minister, I’m not pointing the finger at you in this case because 

I do know how the system works with three, three, and three. 

But I think where my frustration and the people of Saltcoats’s 

frustration comes in with this, is that no one body is over 

SAMA. 

 

And as a reeve I had problems with SAMA from time to time 

and didn’t disagree with some of the things they do, and yes I 

could go to SARM and say to the . . . SARM was representing 

us, that I didn’t like what was happening. 

 

But with the current system set up as it is, on a three-three-three 

basis, SAMA can go along and do anything they want in this 

province, answer to no one, and when we get a problem come 

up like we have in the town of Saltcoats — and once again, 

Madam Minister, I am not pointing the finger at you — but 

what I am saying is this system is flawed when no one is over 

SAMA individually at some point. And my understanding of 

how this should work is that, even though SARM, SUMA, and 

the government have three members on this board, someone has 

to take a leadership role when there is a problem such as there 

is in the town of Saltcoats. And there’s definitely a problem 

when this many appeals come forward and SAMA gets away 

scot-free. 

 

And I have much problem with the way SAMA does some of 

the things and the attitude that they show towards the taxpayers 

of this province, when the taxpayers of this province, as you 

know, are paying requisitions to run SAMA. Someone, Madam 

Minister, has got to take the bull by the horns and straighten 

this mess out. 

 

I would suggest that if we ever got to the point where SAMA 

was going to be disbanded . . . and this is probably the question 

I would like to ask you now: who set up SAMA in the first 

place? I believe it was government. And if SARM and SUMA 

and yourselves, as the representatives on that board, felt that 

there was a time to disband SAMA and get rid of it, is that a 

possibility? If it is a possibility, who would do that? 

 

Because, Madam Minister, right now we have SAMA actually 

running around this province like a chicken with its head cut 

off, and nobody is answering the questions for the people of 

Saltcoats, for that matter anybody else in this province that has 

a problem with them. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I need to take 

exception to the member’s statement, because I often receive 

copies of letters and reports of public meetings that have been 

written to and from SAMA from municipalities regarding the 

assessment practice and results. And as far as I can see they are 

being as diligent as they can in trying to attend to those 

problems. 

 

And when you talk about the operation — I mean are you 

saying that you’re not in favour of democracy? The majority of 

the board of directors of SAMA are elected and if mistakes are  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

made, that’s what the appeal process is for. So I just don’t agree 

with the statements the member opposite is making about the 

operation. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well, Madam Minister, we’re going to 

continue to disagree on this, because if you agree that no one 

individual body has, other than the way . . . We’re passing the 

buck here. We can pass the buck from SARM to SUMA to the 

government, and we continually do this and the problems stay 

out there. 

 

And if you don’t agree that there is a big problem within the 

town of Saltcoats when you get 50-plus appeals come out of a 

town of that size and no one is addressing this problem . . . And 

SAMA, some of the people they have sent out there has that 

holier-than-thou attitude, that if you don’t like what we do, 

that’s too bad — you are stuck with it because we are the 

assessing power. No one has the right . . . Yes, they are 

appealing, but it costs them money and I’m afraid at the end of 

the day that SAMA is going to not have to go back and address 

the problem. 

 

And what I am saying is somebody has to be responsible, 

Madam Minister. And again I am not pointing the finger at you. 

I know the position you’re in here. What I am suggesting, that 

there has to be a system set up, that at some point somebody is 

really the overseer of SAMA and where we can’t keep passing 

the buck from one part of government to another. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

member’s earlier question, the SAMA was created by 

legislation in 1987 by the previous administration. When they 

had partially achieved their task by 1991, by the time this 

administration was elected, we had a choice to make as to 

whether to continue in that way. 

 

When we reviewed the situation we found that the creation of 

an independent agency to carry out assessment was a 

recommendation of the Local Government Finance Commission 

that had held hearings throughout the province in the early 

1980s. I think they reported in 1984. And that municipalities 

said loud and clear at the hearings of this commission that they 

wanted to own the system. They did not want assessment to be 

a function of government. And so the agency was set up by the 

previous administration on the basis of that recommendation. 

 

So when we reviewed the history and municipalities had said 

they wanted it to be independent of government, and we had . . . 

the government had funded SAMA operation from the time the 

Act was passed to the stage in 1991. So the decision was made 

to carry on with that model in response to the municipalities 

wanting it. 

 

We did make some legislative changes later on which allowed 

for the election of the board at annual meetings instead of 

having a whole board appointed by government. But that is 

what the board is for. The board of SAMA is to direct the 

operations of SAMA. They are in the driver’s seat. And they 

hire the employees, they set the goals, and they’re elected. It’s a 

democratic process. 

So if the organizations that they represent think that the current 

board is not doing a diligent job, well they have the opportunity 

at the annual meeting of SAMA to replace those members. And 

so in the meantime, I can only say that is the role of directors. 

And if urban municipalities have a problem with SAMA, they 

should take it up with the urban representative or any of the 

representatives on the SAMA board. Operating SAMA is the 

job of the board of directors. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess we’re 

going to continue to disagree, because I believe with three, 

three, and three, the way the current board is set up, it really . . . 

And I know in this case, your hands are tied, SUMA’s hands 

are tied, SARM’s hands are tied, and it seems we are getting 

nowhere. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to thank you for your responses but I 

would like to caution you that this problem is far from over. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 

minister and her officials this afternoon. 

 

One of the clauses of this Bill requires villages between 500 

and 100, or some place in those low numbers, to employ an 

administrator that’s certified by the Urban Municipal Board. 

And having been involved in small communities, my question 

is, why is this necessary? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s certainly in the 

interest of municipalities to have a qualified administrator. This 

has been a requirement of rural municipalities for some time. I 

think it’s a positive step forward. Most of the administrators are 

very well qualified. There are some exceptions. And we think 

. . . And municipalities believe that it’s in their interest to have 

well-qualified administrators. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  If we look at the communities that fit into 

this category, with almost no exceptions these are not 

communities that are growing. These are communities that are 

fairly stable in what’s happening there. There are very few new 

ventures that are happening out there. They are not growing; 

they are not buying up land; they’re not in the new 

developments. 

 

The job that they do is one that is being done in many of these 

communities by an accountant or a well-qualified secretary; 

does that very well. And so specifically, what benefit could 

communities of this size gain in getting a professional 

administrator? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, for one thing, in 

the interests of leaner government — and in response to it, 

that’s what people say they want — our municipal advisory 

services branch is not staffed to the extent that it once was. 

 

And the job of an urban administrator is much more than 

simple accounting. There are issues of bylaw preparation and 

passage, understanding assessment and taxation issues, 

licensing matters, and a host of other responsibilities that urban  



1712  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

administrators have to deal with regardless of the size of the 

community. 

 

So if these things are to be done properly, the administrator 

should be familiar with all of these things. In smaller 

municipalities the volume may be less but the principles are the 

same. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The kinds of 

things that you’re talking about that apply to those small towns, 

they do not create a raft of bylaws. The pet bylaw they had 50 

years ago is probably adequate, and changing a pet bylaw does 

not require some sort of administrator with some high 

qualifications. These are things that the mayors and the 

councillors of those communities can understand very well. 

 

And you’re saying this is brought about by the fact that your 

department’s been downsized, so in effect here’s another 

opportunity to offload by the provincial government onto 

communities. And this time you’re taking communities of 100 

to 500 and you’re asking them to hire a well-qualified person 

and pay him those particular prices. 

 

So my question then is, what is the added cost of a village 

hiring a professional administrator instead of making their own 

arrangements? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the certificates of 

qualification can be gained through a correspondence course. 

It’s not very expensive and most administrators, or a large 

number of administrators, do voluntarily want to improve their 

credentials and their knowledge, and many of them take these 

courses. 

 

So it doesn’t necessarily have to increase the cost to the 

municipality, but it does mean that the 225-or-so municipalities 

between the population of 100 and 500 will have well-qualified 

administrators. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, I would suggest to you just 

the opposite. It does very definitely increase the cost. Because 

the minute that that administrator has another title behind their 

certificate, and it doesn’t matter whether they took it by taking 

classes by correspondence or whatever, they’re going to walk 

up to their council, Madam Minister, and they’re going to put 

right in from of them on the table of that council and say, here’s 

the wage scale that I am now and I want that particular raise. 

You’re dealing very much with a union mentality out there and 

those particular administrators will put down, right on that 

table, I’ve gained another certificate, I’ve gained another letter 

behind my name, and this is what I’m now worth. 

 

The job hasn’t changed. They could do it before, but they have 

that other title that you’re now requiring them to have, and so 

there is a very definite cost to every one of those municipalities 

for what you are asking them to do. 

 

My question is, where did the suggestion come from to make 

this particular amendment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to point out to  

the member opposite that UMAAS, the association of urban 

administrators, has, to their credit, held a number of workshops 

and has a sound education and information program for 

administrators, and they support this. They support this. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I have no doubt 

they support that. It’s hard to believe you could go to a union 

that’s asking for an increase of wages, or any particular group 

who’s asking for more money, and say would they not support 

it. They definitely would. 

 

My question is, did you consult with any of the communities to 

see if they wanted it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we consulted SUMA 

as well. And I’d like to take issue with the member opposite, in 

that this doesn’t happen. I can tell you about the municipal 

office where I used to be the reeve and there was qualified, 

superior A certificate rural administrator, who also had urban 

administration credentials, and every single clerical staff in that 

office has achieved, through the correspondence course, with 

tuition paid for by the municipality, their superior A certificate. 

Like the file clerks and the people who deal over the counter 

with the public all have superior A certificates. And not one of 

them in the 10 years that I was there, and to my knowledge the 

last six years since I haven’t been there — the same employees 

all there — they never asked for increases above and beyond 

the wage scale they were on by virtue of the additional 

qualifications. 

 

They were conscientious; they wanted to be sure that they were 

doing their job in the most efficient and effective way possible; 

and they voluntarily took those courses to improve their 

credentials and improve their effectiveness. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister; you made my 

point exactly. When they take those other credentials and get 

those other certificates, they fit on a different point on the wage 

scale. You said they weren’t asking for anything more than the 

wage scale sort of put them at. That wage scale is their wage 

scale and it goes up with the certificates they have, and when 

you require them to have those, they’re there. 

 

And I as well, as you know, have served on municipal boards, 

and without exception — without exception — when we had an 

administrator that took another one of those courses, the paper 

was put on there and say, I’m now worth more money. The job 

hadn’t changed, but it happened. And that’s why when I asked 

had that come from individual municipalities and what kind of 

support did you have for that, obviously the support there was 

very weak. 

 

Under section 6 this Bill requires that municipalities prepare 

their own financial statements rather than rely on an auditor, as 

many of them do. What benefit do you, the municipalities, or 

the provincial government gain from this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the reason’s that the 

administrator is to prepare the financial statements for the 

municipality and then have them audited, because the job of the 

auditor is to audit. If the auditor prepared the statement, then  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

he’d have to have another auditor audit it. So it makes sense 

that any qualified administrator should be able to prepare a 

financial statement and then has it audited by an independent 

third party. But if they were doing both functions they’d be 

supervising themselves, which is not appropriate. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Dealing with the assessors: will the assessors 

have any regulatory guidelines to constrain them or will they be 

able to make personal judgement calls? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, assessors have very 

little leeway because they have to follow the provisions of the 

Act and the assessors’ manual, which is consistent across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  With the reassessment taking place, why do 

we not allow, in this particular case, taxpayers to state their case 

before raising their assessment? What happens now seems to be 

the principle of no taxation without representation seems to be a 

problem, in that they have to do it after the fact and the thing is 

in place. With the changes that are there, it would have seemed 

that they could have dealt with that ahead of time. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how you 

would appeal before you know what the assessment is, and that 

is what the appeal process is for. And if the . . . there is also 

open houses that SAMA attends. The administrator might be 

able to explain the rationale to an individual ratepayer for their 

assessment. And if all that fails, they have the right to appeal, to 

be heard; and if they have to pay a fee for that, if they win, even 

partially win their appeal, the money is refunded. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay, that took care of my questions, and I’d 

like to thank the minister and her staff for the answers that we 

did receive. Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 38 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 39 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you. I rise to 

propose an amendment to this section. And the amendment, 

which I am sure colleagues opposite will agree is a very fine 

amendment and one desperately needed, reads as follows: 

 

This Act shall come into force when the Executive Council 

presents a structured plan to reduce the portion of 

education costs raised through municipal property taxes 

back down to 40 per cent of the total. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister has already said that the Premier 

admits this is needed. So she’s really not breaking new ground 

to say that she’s prepared to sign on with this. 

 

Really we all, we all agree that the chaos caused at local 

government level is because we have pushed more and more 

education costs down onto property. Some of the education 

costs should properly be borne by property, but we can’t 

continue escalating the proportion of education taxes for ever.  

We’ve already raised it from 40 to 60. Where is it going? Let us 

have a commitment that we’ll get it back down to the 40. This 

will stop the infighting between school districts and 

municipalities. 

 

(1630) 

 

The minister admits that this is where we have to get back to. 

This amendment gives her the structure to put something 

behind her words, put something behind the Premier’s words. 

She’s already told us that she’s in favour of it. The Premier’s in 

favour of it. 

 

Okay, Madam Minister, put your money where your mouth is. 

Vote in favour of this amendment. Accept this structured 

amendment so that we get back to where we were, back to 

where we should be — 40 per cent of education costs borne by 

the property ratepayers — and quit escalating education costs 

on the backs of property owners ad infinitum. 

 

Therefore I so move, Mr. Chairman, and I call on all members 

of this House who are concerned about this issue to join in 

supporting this very worthy amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the minister on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that we 

will be opposing the amendment. 

 

The Chair:  Well would the minister wait until the question 

is . . . 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 39 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mental lapse there on Carl’s last name. 

With me is ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) . . . Norm Ballagh, the head of ACS; and Carl 

Neggers to my right. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I would 

like to welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon. I 

know earlier in the afternoon the minister was begging 

questions of me so I don’t want to disappoint in this regard, but 

I will be brief. I don’t have that many questions. 

 

The dissolving of the Ag Credit Corporation, I believe was 

announced in the 1996 budget. I guess one of the questions I’d  



1714  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

have, given that the Act wasn’t amended that year, is, what 

really changed since then to make these amendments necessary 

now than . . . Why not a year ago, I guess would be one of the 

questions I’d like to put to you. 

 

I’d be curious to know what would be the total dollar value of 

the Ag Credit portfolio that is eventually to be sold to third 

parties. I guess another way of putting it too, another way of 

answering it would be, how many of your, I guess we could still 

call them clients, how many of your clients are up to sale? Or 

up for sale I guess, so to speak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairperson. The 

reason that the amendments were put in this year instead of last 

year is that the decision was made last year and then we took 

the time to figure out exactly what was going to happen. When 

you wind down a corporation like this, you’ve got lots of 

options. 

 

We had meetings with financial institutions and looked at other 

jurisdictions that wound down, for example New Brunswick 

wound down their credit corporation. And just a matter of 

timing and deciding what had to be done and what processes 

had to be put forward. What we actually had to do . . . the 

technical detail of winding down a corporation, providing all 

those options and then deciding what amendments we needed 

to fit those, to accommodate that wide variety of options. 

 

It’s hard to . . . If the corporation were to be sold to another 

party, you don’t know how much money would be in it. 

Because right now, if it were to be sold today, if somebody 

wanted to buy it — there’s nobody knocking on the door — but 

if somebody wanted to buy it, it would be a value of $263 

million a portfolio — 263. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Deputy Chair. The minister just 

answered what was another question I was going to put to him. 

But going back to the time that is elapsed since the 

announcement of the dissolution of the Ag Credit Corporation, 

during that period of time, did that involve writing down a 

significant number of loans on behalf of clients; was that part of 

the process or was it very much one of studying other 

jurisdictions or . . . I suppose if you would perhaps give us, in 

terms of the number of clients whose loans may have been 

wrote down with ACS, and how many dollars we are talking 

about there. 

 

I know given . . . as you say, the current portfolio is valued at 

something around 263 million, but what would have been the 

extent of write-downs to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m not sure I know exactly what the 

question you’re asking is. But as far as the restructuring, or 

write-downs as you put it, the restructuring of clients’ 

portfolios, the wind-down of ACS did not have any effect on 

that. We continued . . . we made a decision — what, three years 

ago basically — to handle each case on what we call a 

businesslike basis, case to case. 

 

If, I mean, if we were spending $5000 of lawyers’ fees to chase 

$4,000 of credit that was highly unlikely that you were going to  

get, because there was no equity, then you wouldn’t do that. 

That’s just a good business decision. And so we handle it on a 

case-by-case basis. 

 

But I’m not quite sure what you mean as to the value of the 

write-down. You mean over the entire life of the corporation? 

Or since we made the decision to wind it down? Maybe you 

could just explain that. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I had I guess 

referred to the period of time that’s elapsed since the 

announcement was made in the 1996 budget. But if you have 

both available, I’d certainly appreciate both of those figures. 

 

And before I take my place, just would invite some further 

comment with respect to, as you still refer to them as clients of 

ASC and will be until they’re essentially sold to the highest 

bidder, could you make some comment with regard to this: and 

that is, that I’d suggest that perhaps these third parties who 

these loans, these accounts, will be sold to may not be quite so 

farmer friendly as perhaps has been the experience of the past. 

Is the department taking any action to try and alleviate any 

actions by third parties against these clients who in essence are 

being sold? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  As far as the farmer-friendly institution 

is concerned, we would certainly scrutinize any turnover of any 

portion of the corporation. But you must remember, in reality 

— you’re a farmer — if you go to a banking institution or a 

credit union for a loan you have to list your net worth, you have 

to list all the other loans that you have with other institutions 

and what’s outstanding and what’s not. And the reality is, on an 

individual case-by-case basis, the lending institutions have an 

opportunity to pick off sort of the better clients, okay, and really 

don’t have an interest in the entire portfolio. 

 

But the second thing I would want to say is because of our 

policy . . . we implemented a policy of the interest rate being 

cost-of-funds. And you will know that over the years the cost of 

funds for ACS, when the interest rates were high when we’re 

still tied into some of those, would dictate that in some cases 

the ACS interest is actually higher than the interest a farmer 

could get at the bank. But we made a policy decision that we 

would not be subsidizing any more because of our tough 

financial situation we were in and so we said, set the rate at 

cost-of-funds. 

 

So yes, there would be a concern. I think if it was some, you 

know, maybe . . . We wouldn’t be selling to a disreputable 

operation. We’d check that out. But in many cases individually, 

the farmers might get lower rates. That’s just the way it is. 

 

Now with your other question, from April 1, 1996 to December 

31, 1996 — I won’t give you individually; I’ll give you the total 

— but this includes capital loan program, production loan, 

livestock cash advance, spring seeding loan, calf . . . and that 

total is 32.71 million of write-off during that period of time. 

The total, and this is an astounding number to me, but the total 

loan losses, from program inception — I’ve seen this number  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

before; I’m always surprised by it — is 297.75 million. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 

minister, yes it is indeed an astounding figure. And I guess it 

does lend itself to wonder why we entertained to leave the 

matter roll on as long as we did. 

 

I think though that I would still have to ask one more question 

and it concerns confidentiality with respect to information, that 

what were your clients, or still are your clients, in terms of 

informations that they had provided at one time to the 

department, to ACS in this matter, thinking that they would 

remain as such with government, so to speak, and now in fact 

as a result of what is to happen at some point in the future here, 

the information will rest with a third party. 

 

Do you have some reservations? Because I think there are some 

reservations being expressed on behalf of some of the . . . or on 

the part of some of the clients with respect to now this 

information, which was considered confidential and privy to 

government officials only, now being in a third party’s hands. 

 

And aside from that, awaiting your comments, I have no further 

questions of you in this matter. So I would just thank you in 

advance and your officials for entertaining and answering these 

questions for me this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well as I said, on an individual basis, 

the institutions have access to that information, if you were to 

go to them and ask for a loan. So the corporation wouldn’t have 

to give out that information because, as I say, before you get 

that loan, you have to list all your assets and debts and that kind 

of stuff. 

 

In a general way though, this Act, amendment, would allow us 

on a very selective basis, to paint a picture for some body that 

wanted to . . . that may want to purchase the portfolio. I think 

you can understand, in order for them to want to know whether 

they should buy or not, they would have to sort of get a general 

picture of the liquidity of the total account — the total portfolio. 

 

So this Act allows us to do that on a very restrictive basis, of 

course, and that they would not be using it for any other 

purposes than determining whether they might want to purchase 

this. And I might say, this has been known for a number of . . . 

a year or so now. 

 

And as I say, we met with banking institutions. There’s really 

been no big interest in buying the whole package because I 

think that . . . So as far as farmers are concerned, if they want to 

stay with ACS, if they don’t want to go with another institution, 

and we don’t sell, of course they will continue to be in the 

jurisdiction of the public loans program that they started in. 

 

So there’s lots of if’s and and’s here, but we have to, with this 

legislation, have the flexibility to wind down the portfolio, and 

this does it. I would thank the member for his questions. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister. I 

understand in winding down the corporation, there’s a couple 

of questions that I would have. And that is, where do a lot of 

the  

programs and the loans that ACS has go right now? If I 

understand from your last comment, there is going to be some 

form of program in the Department of Agriculture that will still 

carry them on. When I refer to programs, I refer back to all the 

land that was purchased in the late ’70s by the NDP under the 

land bank program. And as far as I know, most of that land is 

still under ACS. It’s been moved into the Agriculture Credit 

program. And if it’s been moved out, I’d like to know where it 

is, because I’ve been looking in the blue book. 

 

Now through the ’80s, there was a period of time . . . And you 

talked about a 200 million write-off and write-offs that 

happened through the ’80s as a result of an agreement between 

the former government and land bank tenants and, you know, 

the circumstances that took place in ’82 with the change of 

government, land bank tenants . . . There was about $100 

million that had to be picked up by the public in shortfalls as a 

result of lease fees that didn’t cover the cost of the interest that 

was on that land. 

 

And so what I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what happens to all 

the capital land purchases that ACS was responsible for as a 

result of the winding-down of the corporation? Who’s 

responsible for that? Who is carrying those loans and have 

some of those loans moved into private lending institutions? 

Does the department pick that up? Where is that loan portfolio 

now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Forgive me, I’m not sure I understand 

your question, but I’ll answer it, and if I haven’t answered your 

question, then you can ask again. 

 

The land bank land was all rolled into lands branch, which is a 

department of Sask Ag and Food. It wasn’t . . . And because it’s 

Crown land, there was no lending on it so ACS really didn’t 

have anything to do with that. So does that answer your 

question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Department of Agriculture 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I believe the minister has the same 

officials. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. With the 

winding-down of the Ag Credit Corporation and with the 

agri-food or agri-equity fund, I guess, being continued, I 

suppose it would seem logical that the fund rest with the 

Department of Agriculture and Food. 

 

But would you — and my questions here again will be brief — 

but would you be able to outline for us here this afternoon just 

how much has the fund invested to date; in how many projects;  



1716  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

and what sort of projects? 

 

Would you also outline what is your policy with respect to the 

amount of equity taken by this fund in any specific project. Like 

for any given project, is there a limit, I guess, on the equity 

position the fund can take in terms of a dollar amount or a 

percentage? And how would that maximum amount, how 

would it be determined by the minister on any given project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We don’t go below 25,000 . . . projects 

below 25,000, public dollars into these projects. And we just 

recently moved the cap from 500,000 to 1 million to give 

ourselves a little more flexibility. 

 

And I can just run through the . . . There are 10 projects 

approved to date; eight have been announced and two are 

pending. And you understand that . . . I’ll give you the eight that 

have been announced. 

 

In Yorkton, Popowich Milling, to help them expand the rolled 

oat plant there; in Yellow Grass, Northern Genetics, so that’s 

the elk embryo processing . . . or elk embryo business that they 

have there, whether it be exporting embryo; the Thomson Meats 

in Melfort, to help them expand their meat processing 

operation; Randolph & James Flax Mills in P.A. (Prince Albert) 

or flax flour; Melville seeds in Melville; Schneider’s Popcorn in 

Saskatoon, to help them go into more varieties of popcorn; 

Canadian select growers of Eston — that’s the chick-pea plant 

we just announced not too long ago — and Rinkles chips in 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 

with respect to the Department of Agriculture, there’s a certain 

amount budgeted for the agri-food equity fund I understand, for 

investment management and also for investment financing. I’m 

told for investment management something in the order of 1.2 

million — I don’t have the Estimates book before me right now 

— and 2.4 million under investment financing. 

 

But going back to the investment management aspect of it and 

tying it in with my previous question, because maybe I wasn’t 

clear enough, but I understand as you’ve advised us, that the 

cap for investment has just been increased from a half a million 

to 1 million. I guess what I was getting at, and I suppose it leans 

towards the investment management aspect of it, is how do you 

decide what amount you’re going to invest in that specific 

project? Is it at your sole discretion, or is this where the 

investment management aspect comes in? 

 

It would seem to me that those particular roles would have a 

more appropriate place perhaps in, well in Department of 

Finance or with SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation). And why would they rest with Department of 

Agriculture instead of those departments instead? 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There are a few reasons why it’s in 

Agriculture. First of all, we’ve got the expertise in Agriculture. 

 

I want to tell you first off though that I have no control over the  

projects that are taken . . . that are approved, rather. We have 

investment people around the province that make 

recommendation to an Investment Review Committee, and that 

committee then makes the recommendation to which projects 

would be approved and which projects wouldn’t be. 

 

We take no more ownership than 49 per cent in any project. 

And the percentage up to 49 will be determined on a 

project-by-project basis. 

 

So we think the process is quite sound where we have 

professional people and knowledgeable people on the 

Investment Review Committee. And so far I think we’ve been 

fortunate and we’ve made some investments that have been 

working quite well. 

 

And the difference with SOCO let’s say, and Economic 

Development and the ag equity, is we are an equity partner, 

whereas SOCO is a debt partner for the most part; and not 

Finance because we have the expertise in the agricultural field 

for milling say flax or genetics or whatever. So that’s the logic 

behind it. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, with respect to then the Investment Review 

Committee of non-departmental officials, would you just 

outline for us the size of the committee and perhaps the 

structure or procedure of how the members of that committee 

are chosen. But then also on the departmental side, if you would 

also advise us here this afternoon what department officials are 

responsible then for these particular activities. 

 

And that would pretty much round out my questioning for this 

afternoon. So I thank you again and your officials in advance 

for your responses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We only have one department person on 

the committee, and that’s the chairman, and that’s my assistant 

deputy minister, Dale Sigurdson. 

 

And we have eight more members on the committee, two of 

which are vacant right now at the moment, but there’s provision 

for eight. 

 

And we have a broad range of expertise on the committee. 

Accountants, lawyers, food processing industry — people who 

are knowledgeable about the agri-food value adding of 

agriculture in Saskatchewan. They are appointed by order in 

council and to date we’re very pleased with their performance. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, before I move the Bill I 

would like to thank my officials and I would like to thank the 

members opposite for their questions. And now I would like to 

move the Bill be reported without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  In pinch-hitting for the Minister of 

Health today, Mr. Chairperson, I would like to introduce to you 

Barry Lacey, director of integrated financial services unit, 

finance and management services branch, Saskatchewan 

Health. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 

minister of agri-food and animal health and to his official as 

well. 

 

Just a couple of questions that I hope the minister can answer in 

regards to this Bill. And part of it is setting the maximum 

remuneration for district health board members. And I’m 

wondering if the minister could elaborate a bit on what those 

actual amounts are now that are set in regulations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, the chairpersons for Regina and 

Saskatoon get . . . the maximum rates are $830 and for other 

districts it’s 415. The per diem, that’s the retainer, monthly 

retainer, the per diems are $300 for Regina and Saskatoon and 

$200 for other board members; $300 — let me get it straight — 

$300 for the Chair in Regina and Saskatoon and . . . Just let me 

make one more check . . . (inaudible) . . . Okay. The per diems 

for all the Chairs right across the piece is $300 and the per 

diems for other board members right across the piece is $200. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Just for the record, Mr. Minister, I’m going to 

ask you to go through those numbers again and talk about the 

retainers, whether it’s per day, per month, per year, as it relates 

to both the larger boards, Regina and Saskatoon, and rural, as 

well as also adding in the actual remuneration per day for the 

two sectors as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  This is a monthly retainer for the 

chairpersons — okay? — in Regina and Saskatoon of $830 and 

in other districts of 415. On top of that, the chairpersons across 

the province get $300 a day per diem for a board meeting, the 

other people across the piece get a per diem of $200 per board 

meeting. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So the per diem is there regardless if the 

board meeting is 15 minutes or 5 hours. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, if it’s a regularly scheduled board 

meeting then they will get those rates. If it’s a meeting other 

than regularly scheduled meetings they would get an hourly 

rate, and that hourly rate is 37.50 an hour for chairpersons and 

$25 an hour for other board members. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe you could 

table those regulations with those on for us if you would, 

please. 

 

Also I guess I should ask you, and I really . . . it’s unfortunate  

the minister wasn’t here, but do you see, because you’ve got 

these maximum amounts set out in regulation, do you foresee 

an increase in the near future, a decrease in the near future, or 

no change? 

 

Mr. Minister, maybe when I say near future — maybe you could 

give me a guestimate on within six months, within a year, 

within two years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There’s no anticipated change in those 

rates right now as far as a year, two years down the road. I 

couldn’t have possibly answered that. I don’t think anybody 

would know. That would have to be brought forward through 

some kind of mechanism too. 

 

I think they are set sufficiently that they probably think, say in 

the foreseeable future there certainly wouldn’t be . . . have to be 

changed. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Could you tell us how many of the board 

members and chairpersons across the piece, across the 30 

districts in the province, have their rates set at the maximum 

level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Right now there are 19 districts or 

two-thirds of the districts that have their rates set below the 

maximum rate. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I wonder, Mr. Minister . . . I ask if you could 

table the regulations as to the per diems and the retainer. Can 

you do that? Could you also table the information regarding the 

districts that are paying out those amounts? And for the 

districts, the total amount that each district would pay out 

possibly for the last fiscal year in per diems and remuneration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  On your second point, we don’t have 

that information with us but certainly we will make sure you get 

that. 

 

And what I will table is the order in council, that is the public 

document, that has the information on the per diem rates. Okay. 

Table them. He’ll get them. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So you will send the information then on the 

districts as to the amount that is spent, and the districts that are 

at the max. 

 

Do you also have the information that, that a district that is 

under the max, where they’re at — that particular information 

as to what each district has individually? And if I could have 

that information as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, what we’ll have to do is request 

that information from each board. And then we can do that, and 

assuming they cooperate and wouldn’t have to go through an 

FOI (freedom of information), I don’t think it’s a problem. 

 

(1715) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, on that subject of FOIs, does 

the department have an FOI officer that deals with all those  



1718  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

requests? And do each of the districts have a specified person 

that deals with those requests as they come to the district? 

 

I’m not only talking about information regarding board 

business, remuneration, that type of thing; I’m also talking 

about requests for information on individuals and all those type 

of things. So the question is, does the department have one 

person designated and does each district have one person? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The districts handle their own requests. 

And I apologize, we don’t have . . . we don’t know if they have 

each a specific person appointed to do that or if it’s simply 

through the CEO (chief executive officer). But it would 

probably be one or the other, and I would, you know, probably 

guess that the CEO would be the person to do that instead of 

hiring somebody. 

 

And as far as the department goes, yes, we have one person to 

coordinate all the FOI requests to the department. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Could I have the name of that 

person? And could you provide us with the information as it 

pertains to the districts, who those officers are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The department person is Jahzi Van 

Iderstine. And we will attempt to include in the other 

information we’re giving whether it’s the CEOs or somebody 

appointed from all the districts. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Just about through, Mr. Minister. 

Upon assent of this Bill, section (3) of the Act comes into force 

retroactively to May 14, 1996 when the order in council 

establishing the maximum rates for the remuneration and 

expenses for the district boards was made. I’m wondering what 

would the reason for that be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, this is a clarification. This allows 

. . . the boards have always had the opportunity to set rates 

below, and what this does is it outlines specifically and clarifies 

that section, where the intent of the old legislation is now 

clarified in the new legislation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Did the cabinet feel it was necessary to issue 

an order in council because there were maybe some districts 

that were starting to climb, were paying probably more than the 

cabinet wanted to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, that wasn’t a factor. Simply you 

need an OC (order in council) to establish board remuneration. 

So that’s why it was done. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Just for clarification then, before May 14, 

’96, was there an order in council then establishing a maximum 

height ceiling then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No. Previous to the order in council the 

department simply issued guidelines that they should follow. 

The auditor pointed that out, that this may not be the proper 

way of doing things. So in order to make sure that things were 

being done properly, the OC (order in council) was put in to 

clarify this point. 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would hope that 

maybe in the future, over the next couple of years, that if there’s 

a cabinet shuffle that you might become the Health minister, 

because you appear to be much more forthcoming with 

information than our present minister. So thanks to you and 

thanks to your official this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well flattery will get you everywhere. I 

want to thank you for your questions and the official for being 

with us today. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 

today Mr. Brian King, who is the deputy minister of the 

Department of Highways and Transportation; and seated 

directly behind him is the legislative officer, Mr. Dave Abbey, 

with the Department of Highways and Transportation as well. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

welcome. This is the first opportunity I think that I’ve had to 

ask some questions of you since your appointment to the 

portfolio, and I look forward to that. And welcome to your 

officials as well. And I realize that of course if you need 

back-up, it’s right behind you there a couple of seats back, so 

I’m sure the member from Tisdale will be happy to help us out. 

 

Just a question pertaining to this Bill and to your new 

transportation policy. Can you tell me what this piece of 

legislation might do to ensure that our short-line rail lines 

across the province are going to be made useful and will get the 

traffic back on the rails where it should be, as opposed to 

tearing up our provincial highways, which are already tore up 

and which causes most of the traffic now to be getting on to the 

municipal roads. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much. I want to first 

indicate to the member that there are three or four areas here 

that we’re working on that will assist us with the short-line 

issue. 

 

First of all, of course, the planning authorities that we talked 

about in the documents speak extensively about the importance 

of developing the short-line system throughout the province, 

and the planning authorities of course would be playing an 

active role in that. We have within the department of course a 

short-line advisory committee which primary focus will be to 

look at the development of short-lines across the province. 

 

I think thirdly, we have also a committee that’s made up of  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

SUMA and SARM, and representatives from both of those 

bodies, to assist us with the development of our strategy. And I 

think further, some discussions of course, as we’ve indicated in 

the past and in the document, talk about enriching and 

enhancing links north-south. 

 

So there are four areas of recognition that we’ve given to the 

development of the short-line issue for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Of course I’ve been 

very critical of your government that there hasn’t been a plan in 

place since you came to power in the early ’90’s, and I am — 

still am. 

 

And I would ask you, what are you doing? What is your plan 

doing to ensure that lines such as the Imperial subdivision, 

which is up for abandonment, which Canadian National is not 

interested in selling, what’s the process? What’s your 

department doing, and you as minister to oversee it, to ensure 

that possibly the feasibility of that line is kept, and to ensure 

that the traffic that that line is now carrying stays on the line 

and not onto the highways which are in such terrible condition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think certainly the member has identified 

very nicely that what our strategy will be is to try to enhance the 

development of short-lines of course across the province, 

because we share the same sort of concern that you do in terms 

of the heavy truck traffic, and not only on our highway system 

but certainly on our grid road system. And so part of the 

strategy of course, will be to continue to work at the local level 

with those communities to involve the local decision makers in 

assisting us in developing the short-line systems in each of 

those jurisdictions that you talk about. 

 

I mentioned earlier that we have within the department 

established our own committee, a planning committee that will 

be working with each of the municipal levels and the local 

bodies to work at getting that strategy in place. As you know, 

this is relatively new in terms of our horizon and we’ll be 

working closely to expand that. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’m glad the minister can admit that it’s new. 

And that’s part of the problem, that this strategy’s been left to 

the last minute and now it’s an emergency-type situation. 

 

What commitment could you give to the people of the province, 

and I guess in particular to my constituents out in Arm River, 

on the Imperial subdivision, that your officials in this part of 

your department will get out there and start talking to the people 

that are affected, including the municipalities and the farmers, 

to see what can be done to stop this line from being abandoned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think what’s important to realize here, 

Mr. Member, is that of course when I say to you that the 

strategy in terms of our partnerships that we’re working with 

with local authorities right now is somewhat new and it’s 

developmental stages, it’s not that those discussions haven’t 

been ongoing. 

 

Because as you can well appreciate, that we’ve been handed a  

fairly large responsibility by the abandonment of the federal 

government, in our opinion, of some of those responsibilities — 

as you recognize, with the disappearance of the Crow rate, the 

deregulations of the railroads. That’s put a tremendous amount 

of pressure of course, on the transportation network in the 

province. And so I think it’s important to recognize how it is 

that we’ve inherited this major responsibility. 

 

And of course the response to that is the new transportation 

strategy and the Bill that is before us today, which is 

encompassing of the entire transportation process. So in spite of 

the fact that there’s some criticism that you make as to the 

degree in which we’ve enhanced or advanced this particular 

process, I think it’s important to recognize that we do have a 

plan and we have a strategy. And it involves communities; it 

involves the entire province; looks at transportation in the broad 

perspective. And we’re having to address that at a much quicker 

rate today than we had thought we’d have to do, based on some 

of those decisions that have been made at the federal 

government level. 

 

(1730) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I guess first of all to address the 

issue of the Crow, certainly it was no surprise to most of the 

people in the province I guess, other than maybe your 

government, that the Crow was on its way out. 

 

And before this House right now we have a piece of legislation 

brought forward by your Agriculture minister that is trying to 

give him absolute control over marketing boards. And one of 

the reasons that he needs that is to enhance the value added 

industry that’s going to flourish in this province, despite your 

government. 

 

And so the argument of whether the Crow was good or bad is 

starting to come into fruition, that hey, that’s been the 

stumbling block to value added industry in Saskatchewan. 

We’re seeing that. I’ve heard your Premier talk about . . . admit 

it, and so let’s not talk about the Crow as caused all this 

problem. Most people knew it was going. I certainly was aware 

of it; 99 per cent of the farmers in this province knew it was 

going to have to go if we were going to move ahead in this 

province in value added industries and keep the jobs in 

Saskatchewan that we need. 

 

So let’s move away from that argument until we could spend 

some time on that if you wish. 

 

However, I guess what I need to know is — again, I asked it 

before — and my first question, was: what can you do as 

minister to guarantee to me and the people of Arm River, in 

particular the ones affected by the Imperial subdivision, that 

there’s going to be some effort made there to maintain that rail 

line? 

 

I would ask the same about the line from Broderick to Tuxford, 

for example, which is up for abandonment. At least it’s for sale. 

The rail line’s at least willing to sell it. What’s happening? Now 

I’ve had calls from people asking me what in the world do we 

do? I’m interested in maybe buying the line. I’m interested in  



1720  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

doing this and doing that. They’re getting very little response 

from your department. 

 

Take the initiative, Mr. Minister. And will you give us that 

guarantee tonight, that you will take the initiative to get out 

there and start the discussions and not let these rails be tore up 

where they need not be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think what’s important here to 

recognize is that, as I’ve said to you earlier, we’re already 

involved with . . . in the process of meeting with communities; 

talking with communities. I would expect that if we haven’t that 

my folks in the Department of Highways, who are working on 

the short-line committee, are in fact having those discussions 

with both of those communities that you’re talking about right 

now, in terms of trying to develop the strategy or partnership, in 

terms of getting that railroad in place if in fact that’s the interest 

of that particular part of the community. 

 

Now I think that producers in that part of the world that you 

talk about, both at Imperial and at Tuxford, they need to make 

an investment in that themselves. If the railroad has made the 

decision that of course it’s not required any longer on their 

behalf or it isn’t in fact profitable for them to be in there any 

longer, now the decision I think needs to be not only that of the 

provincial government, but it needs to be one that’s coordinated 

in partnership with the producers who are in that part of the 

world, to ensure whether or not that’s the means that they want 

to see into the future in terms of transporting their agriculture 

products. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess in part I can agree with some of your 

comments, if there’s a whole bunch of players that have to be 

involved in this. And one you’ve left out is the grain 

companies. The problem that we’ve got on the Imperial 

subdivision for example, is your grain company. Your grain 

companies are wanting to move out; we’re seeing all sorts of 

cement elevators being built. 

 

And of course the grain companies are interested in one thing 

— and this includes the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, who’s now 

a privately traded company — they’re interested in one thing, 

Mr. Minister, and that’s the bottom line, their bottom line. They 

don’t particularly care about Joe Farmer out at Liberty, 

Saskatchewan; or Hawarden, or anywhere else. They’re there 

for the bottom line. 

 

The discussions have to take place by and with the leadership 

role by the provincial government along with the producers 

affected — the municipalities are going to have to pick up the 

tab for a mammoth road bill — and these grain companies. To 

my notion, to my knowledge, that’s not happening. And I guess 

the question is, is why isn’t it happening? 

 

On our line, the Imperial subdivision, mainly Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool elevators. Is a discussion taking place between you 

and that grain company and saying what can we do to maintain 

that line? Will you take grain on that line? Will you buy the 

grain? And if not, if that discussion isn’t taking place, then why 

isn’t it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think the member raises a very 

significant point here, and I certainly as a producer agree with 

the point that he makes. I mean what’s happened in this 

province over the last 10 years is that we’ve seen the face of 

rural Saskatchewan change, by and large, by the construction of 

the high through-put facilities. 

 

And it’s not only the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool where you’ve 

seen that develop. I mean you’ve seen Cargill Grain and 

ConAgra and Pioneer. I mean these people are developing their 

elevator system along the main lines. They’re not developing 

them on the branch lines or on some of the secondary rail in this 

province. They’re developing them right on the main lines. 

 

So I think when you raise the issue or make the point that there 

needs to be a broader discussion here about how it is that we 

develop the transportation system, it needs to be coordinated of 

course with the grain companies across the province. And that’s 

the kind of partnership that we’re talking about. And that’s 

some of the discussion that we’re having today with them. 

 

But the grain companies haven’t in the past consulted with the 

governments, this administration or previous administrations, 

about where they’re going to build a grain elevator. They’re 

going to build it by in large where they’re going to generate the 

largest profit. And as a result of that, what you’ve seen of 

course, is many of your smaller points across the province 

disappearing and the reason for that being is that as a producer, 

I’m going to haul to where I can get my grain stored or sold. 

And as a result of that, we’re seeing some of the smaller rail 

lines in the province diminishing. 

 

But your point about working in partnership with some of the 

grain companies, or the grain companies and the transportation 

system, which is the railroads, is critical in developing the 

strategy for Saskatchewan transportation. I accept that. And that 

is part of the role of the entire transportation package that we 

have in front of you. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Of course because the government that’s in 

power today in Saskatchewan has not had the foresight to move 

ahead with this since 1991 when they came in to power. Gainer 

had an emergency, crisis situation. And a month or two ago we 

put forward a proposal that would, once these lines are up for 

abandonment, they’re under provincial jurisdiction, that would 

put a moratorium on the rail line carrying up the rails. 

 

Your predecessor did not look favourable upon that. It’s a way 

to stop the wholesale of abandoned . . . of branch lines in rural 

Saskatchewan; and why is that not something that you would 

look at and say okay, we need some time; we’ve been a little 

slow getting this thing out of the start. 

 

You’ve talked about all sorts of federal government offloading, 

so if you need some time why don’t you take some measures 

that would stop this and give us a chance to get out there and 

consult with the producers and the people affected and do some 

common sense decisions — where it makes sense to have these 

rail lines, where we get a commitment from the producers, and 

enforce these grain companies to make a commitment; and if 

they don’t, there’s other methods. 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

We have all sorts of producer sidings. The Canadian Wheat 

Board has now said that they’re willing to come out and buy 

grain on the spot. We can load those Canadian Wheat Board 

cars right on the spot. We don’t have to have huge grain 

companies out there to buy our grain for us any more. Things 

are changing. But we need time. We need some time, Mr. 

Minister, so that some of these changes can take place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think that the member identifies a 

number of points and I want to just take a moment here to 

suggest to the member that we aren’t distantly behind the ball 

here. In fact it’s our position that we’re leading the parade in a 

lot of different areas. And I think what’s important here for us 

is that there won’t be any rail line abandoned in the province 

until we have an opportunity to have that discussion both with 

the rail companies and with the communities that are being 

affected by it. At the end of the day, if we don’t have any kind 

of interest on the part of the communities that are going to be 

affected by the rail line abandonment that the federal 

government is initiating and forcing, then of course the question 

would have to be asked about why it is that the provincial 

government would be interested in that particular rail bed or rail 

line. 

 

So to suggest here today that we’re going to have rail coming 

out of the province without anybody sort of paying attention to 

it is not correct, because the provincial government is going to 

be very much involved in that process, and will be discussing 

that at the local level with the producers and the communities to 

look at the viability of what those lines might be. 

 

And I’m sure that, you know, you as a producer, if on the piece 

of rail line that you talked about, are not going to be prepared to 

make an investment in it, if in fact it doesn’t provide you the 

kinds of benefits that you expect it’s going to provide for you as 

a producer. Nor will I, if it happens to me on the part of the 

world that I produce as a farmer either. 

 

So those discussions are going to be very much enriched and 

enhanced over the next several months, and there won’t be any 

rail line abandonment in the province until we have those kinds 

of discussions. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well I guess I would ask you, what happens 

tomorrow if Canadian National comes out in Imperial 

subdivision and starts pulling rails? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well the answer to that is that they’re not 

going to pull them out until we’ve had that discussion with the 

local authorities or the individual communities, which would 

include the producers of course in that particular area. I mean 

that’s the process as it exists today. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, you’ve presented some 

amendments to this Act that I was not aware of, and we were 

thinking of moving this Bill through, but because we’re not sure 

about the amendments — we’ve got our people looking at them 

now, I believe, with an official of yours — I’m not sure that 

we’re going to be able to finish with this, with this particular 

Bill this evening because of those amendments. And that’s . . . 

for us that’s not a problem. We can come back. 

Just a couple of further questions though regarding the 

highways I guess is, in particular, what will this Bill in 

particular in your new strategy do to, for example, bring 

Highway No. 44 back to pavement? It’s been half ripped up 

now — half of it’s gravel, half of it’s pavement in terrible 

shape. What’s the strategy going to do to that in terms of fixing 

that particular highway, which is a major link between a huge 

centre of Davidson and many communities to the west? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The upgrade of the future highways in the 

province of course is, as you well know, is done on a 

cost/benefit analysis. And there are some roadways in the 

province today of course, that are going to need some attention 

that we haven’t been able to provide them to the same degree 

that we’d have liked to. And of course the $30 million that’s in 

the budget this year of course — the additional $30 million — 

is going to help to enhance that. 

 

In that particular roadway that you talk about specifically, it’s 

my information that what we’ve done with it of course, is we 

had to take the cap off it because some of it was cracked and 

broken up and we needed to let some of the base on that 

particular highway dry out. Once the base of that highway dries 

out to the degree in which it would be prudent again to 

resurface it, then we’ll begin that process again. 

 

And there are several pieces of roadway in the province that 

require that kind of attention, and we’ll be sure that happens as 

time moves along and as the resources continue. 

 

In respect to the housekeeping amendments, certainly I extend 

my apologies to the member for not having that to them a bit 

earlier. The amendments that are before us however are 

basically language changes in terms of making the Bill more 

conducive to what we want to reflect today. The Bill hasn’t had 

a change for about 30 years, I think, to it. 

 

And so what we’re doing is changing some of the language in a 

minuscule fashion. We don’t believe that it affects at all the 

intent of the legislation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of 

Highway 44 and the portion of it that’s been broken up, there’s 

many people — I’m not sure if you’ve ever been on that road or 

not; sometime if you’d like to take a trip, I’d be happy to drive 

you out there — but there’s a number of people live on that 

particular highway on the side of the road. And of course their 

concern is that it’s gone; it’s been left to such a state that it had 

to be ripped up. 

 

But more than that, of course living along the highway, a gravel 

highway, is a . . . the dust conditions of course in this country 

are most often unbearable. 

 

Their request was that at least the portions in front of their 

houses and their yards would have some sort of a membrane on 

it so that the dust wasn’t a factor with the fairly heavy traffic 

that’s on those roads — not only vehicle traffic, car traffic, but 

also large trucks. 

 

Is there something, some commitment you could make to the  



1722  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

people in this situation? As you’ve mentioned, there’s more 

than just Highway 44. Is there some kind of a commitment you 

could make to these people to ensure that they will get the 

membrane until your plan does kick in and you can eventually 

get this highway rebuilt? 

 

(1745) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well one of these days when we both have 

a little free time on our schedule, I’ll get in the car with you and 

we’ll go down that Highway 44 and see how much dust we can 

make, because I’m not familiar with the condition of the 

highway to the degree that I’d like to be. 

 

But I think what we need to do here is, sort of, examine what 

kinds of options we have available to us to put some dust 

retardant on it. I don’t know what condition or state the 

roadway is in. I take it from you that it’s created some problem 

for people who live in that particular . . . along the roadway. 

 

I know that there are a variety of different chemicals that you 

can put on the roadway and some retardants for the dust, but I 

can’t specifically tell you how that’s done. But we’ll certainly 

. . . I’ve made a note of it and we’ll see what options are 

available to us. 

 

Mr. McLane:  One further question. And I appreciate that, 

Mr. Minister, and I likely will hold you to that. 

 

Also while we’re in that general vicinity of the country, we may 

as well talk about Highway 19 for a minute, and of course I 

don’t think Highway 19 is any stranger to you. I noticed on your 

latest ranking list it at least appears on there or portions of it do. 

 

We’ve been lobbying hot and heavy with the infrastructure 

committee, with the federal government, to have something 

done to that highway. The latest information that I have is that 

because of the enormous cost to build that much highway, it’s 

highly unlikely that there will be money out of the infrastructure 

program spent on that particular highway. I think a couple of 

the elected people over in that country have received letters 

from your department stating that there is going to be nothing 

done with 19 Highway, as indicated by your ranking. 

 

I do have, however, a commitment from the federal government 

that they are going to initiate a study on that highway and that if 

the provincial government is not willing to spend some money 

on it, they will. And I’m just wondering where the discussions, 

as far as you know, are on this particular highway. 

 

The highway is a major tourist . . . carries a major tourist flow 

to Lake Diefenbaker of course, and to the Harbor Golf Club, 

which many of your members and ministers over there have the 

pleasure of visiting. I guess it’s getting to the point where the 

MLA there might have to start trying to initiate some sort of a 

taxing policy for your ministers as they drive in and out to try 

and get this highway built. It’s a major, major detriment to the 

businesses of that community, not to mention the flow of 

agricultural products that have to go on that highway to market,  

to the elevators. 

 

So what have you got to say about Highway 19? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I know that from time to time I’ve 

heard from some of my caucus colleagues who obviously are in 

the same golf area as you are from what I hear. And just 

recently my deputy minister has been on that highway, not to 

play golf but to certainly be on the highway as part of his 

responsibilities, duties, in checking out many of the highways 

across the province. 

 

But my understanding is, is that I’m told that Highway No. 19, 

from No. 1 to Hodgeville, is actually on the sheet this year for 

some major work. So that piece of highway is going to be done. 

 

Mr. McLane:  The last question, Mr. Minister. You’re 

ducking the issue. I think you’re probably aware that that 

portion of the highway is not in my constituency and is not the 

portion I’m talking about. You may want to move a little bit 

north and then you’ll understand where we’re at. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon sitting beside you there will 

certainly tell you where the portion of Highway 19 that I’m 

referring to, as it relates to Elbow, Strongfield, and Hawarden, 

as well as Loreburn. 

 

So thank you, Mr. Minister. Our officials have had a chance to 

look at your amendments. I understand that they are virtually 

some housekeeping things. And with that I will turn it over to 

my colleague, the member from Battleford, if he cares to be 

recognized. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, as 

you know, Highway 40 enters Highway 16 at North Battleford 

at a particularly bad and confusing spot. We had another fatality 

there last year. There are several highways that converge at that 

one spot and at weird angles. And this has been identified as a 

serious problem for some time. We had another fatality there 

last year. 

 

I must say, even for those of us who are residents of the 

Battlefords, with the service road, the industrial road, Highway 

16, Highway 40, all different angles, it’s difficult for us to keep 

it straight and it’s certainly no wonder that those who do not 

live in the Battlefords simply don’t keep it straight. 

 

This has been identified as a priority, but it’s not on the work 

list for this year. When can we expect something to be done 

about Highway 40 entering where it does? It’s supposed to be 

moved further east so it will enter at a safer place and enter at a 

90 degree angle. When is the department going to put that on its 

list for this year’s work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We’re going to be getting into some of the 

discussion, I think tomorrow, on the estimates. I do have some 

information on this, but if you might want to wait till tomorrow, 

I can answer that question for you. I’ll just make a note of it and 

deal with it tomorrow, if you like. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — That’s satisfactory with me. Thank you, Mr.  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

Minister, and thank you to your officials. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Clause 9 reads: 

 

in section (4) we’re going to be adding “or shall be 

instituted” after the word “no action lies”; and 

 

(b) in: 

 

(i) subsection (5); 

(ii) subsection (6); 

(iii) of (b) is section (7); 

(iv) subsection 8; 

and subsection 10; 

by adding “or shall be instituted” after the words “No 

action lies”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Clause 10 would read: 

 

Amend clause (3) . . . 

 

I move the amendment to clause 10. It would read: 

 

Amend clause (3)(b) of Clause 10 of the printed Bill by 

adding “or shall be instituted” after “no action lies”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I move that: 

 

Amend clause (2)(b) of Clause 11 of the printed Bill by 

adding “or shall be instituted” after the words “no action 

lies”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I would move that clause 12 we: 

 

Amend subsection (5) of Clause 12 of the printed Bill by 

adding “or shall be instituted” after “No action lies”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I would move on clause 13 by: 

 

Strike out clause (1)(b) of Clause 13 of the printed Bill and 

substituting the following: 

 

“(b) ‘development’ means any project, operation or 

activity or any alteration or expansion of any project, 

operation or activity that, in the minister’s opinion, is 

likely to increase or change the utilization of a provincial 

highway, or adversely affect safety on a provincial 

highway, to an extent that alterations are necessary: 

 

(i) to protect the existing public improvement; or 

 

(ii) to maintain an acceptable level of safety”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 14 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 38 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  

 

Clause 38 of the printed Bill 

 

Amend subsection (5) of Clause 38 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in the portion preceding clause (a) by striking out “by 

weigh scales certified by an inspector within the 

meaning of the Weights and Measures Act (Canada)” 

and substituting “by any means other than the one 

described in subsection (4)”; and 

 

(b) in clause (a) by striking out “by the weigh scales” 

and substituting “pursuant to this subsection”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 38 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 39 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 52 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Clause 52, I move that we: 

 

Amend section (1) of Clause 52 of the printed Bill by 

adding “or shall be instituted” after “for damages lies”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 52 as amended agreed to. 



1724  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

Clauses 53 to 55 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 56 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I move that we: 

 

Amend Clause 56 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

word “paid” and substituting it with the word “provided”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 56 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 57 to 79 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1800) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Prior, Mr. Chair, to moving the Bill with 

amendment, I want to first of all take this opportunity to thank 

the members opposite for the questions that they provided this 

evening. 

 

I also want to take this opportunity to extend my appreciation to 

the excellent work that the officials over at the Department of 

Highways and Transportation have taken over the last year or so 

in developing this major piece of legislation for the province. 

 

I also want to pay tribute credit today, Mr. Chairman, to the 

minister responsible for Highways and Transportation prior to 

my assuming these duties, because over the last year a great 

deal of work has gone into developing a very significant, 

important, strategic strategy in transportation for this province. 

And I just want to take this moment to recognize those people 

who have done some tremendous work in that area. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to . . . or Mr. Chair, report the 

Bill with amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Highways and Transportation 

Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant 

modification corrélative á la loi intitulée The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2  The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Department of Agriculture 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 46 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Highways and Transportation 

Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Labour to 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated beside me 

is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of the department. 

Behind Ms. Morgan is Cheryl Hanson, assistant deputy 

minister. Behind me is Sharon Little, the manager of budget and 

operations. Also in the Assembly is Eric Greene, the assistant 

director of labour standards; and Doug Forseth, who is a labour 

relations consultant. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome 

to the minister’s officials here this evening. 

 

I’m going to keep my questioning and comments relatively brief 

here this evening, but I think I would be . . . as official 

opposition we would be remiss if we didn’t raise the issue one 

more time, of the mix-up surrounding the bringing in of the 

regulations related to the care-givers in The Labour Standards 

Act. 

 

The last time we had the officials here I had asked for what 

were the total number of complaints received to date. I was told 

at that time there was a total of 40. I wonder if we could receive 

some update from you this evening as to whether or not there 

has been any new complaints lodged since we last had 

requested that information. And does the ratio remain the same 

as far as those settled, those still outstanding? At that time there 

was 27 settled; 13 outstanding. I would just request this 

information update, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and I must say to the 

member that I don’t blame him for raising this again. It’s one of 

those situations where it’s quite appropriate for the opposition 

to keep pressing us. We have 41 complaints, which I think is an 

increase in one since we last discussed the matter in this House; 

27 have been settled, 14 remain unsettled, and the department is 

working on those. 

 

The average amount involved in the complaints, that is to say 

the average settlement, is about $596. Whether or not that will 

be the settlements in the 14 remaining claims I can’t say that; 

we’ll just know that in time. I think those are the figures that 

the member wanted. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, of course averages always fail to highlight the severity 

of the hardship caused to those most affected, and maybe it 

might be more appropriate this evening to express to the 

Assembly what is the actual range in terms of the amounts of 

settlements. 

 

(1815) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member. The high  

end of the range was $3,800. There was one claim at that level. 

There were five claims which were found to be not valid and 

they were settled at zero, in effect. There were five such claims. 

So the range of settlements has been between zero and $3,800. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, could we also have you express to us what would be 

the range in terms of those claims which remain outstanding at 

this point in time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I am advised that of the 14 remaining 

claims, one is in the $4,000 range, and at the other end of the 

range the claim is about $300. So the range for those 14 is 

between $300 and $4,000. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And also, Mr. 

Minister, if you could outline for us this evening what steps are 

being undertaken by your officials at this time in terms of 

investigating a mechanism of compensation for all of those that 

have been affected through the, essentially the fumbling of this 

issue. 

 

There is . . . we all recognize there’s some significant hardships 

here. And would you just outline what is being undertaken by 

your department at this point to work on establishing and 

investigating some mechanism of compensation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Before getting into the substance of the 

member’s question, I would like to comment for a moment on 

his use of the term, fumbling. I am not sure that that word quite 

captures it, but it is a fact that everybody makes mistakes and 

that no matter how careful we are in our private lives or in our 

businesses or in our professions, these things will from time to 

time happen. And it certainly happened in this case. 

 

It is . . . it would have taken a very, very sharp eye to have 

caught the mistake. If someone had said to me, there is a 

mistake in this packet of materials, find it, I don’t think I could 

have found it. And I’ve practised labour law for all of my 

professional career and I don’t think I would have found it. But 

nonetheless fumbling is not bad. It’s not precise, but it’s not 

bad. 

 

And I really must say that I admire the tenacious effort that the 

member has put forward on behalf of the people who are 

affected here, because they have had to pay money pursuant to a 

mistake that was made by the government. And in those 

circumstances it is quite appropriate for someone like the 

member to champion their cause. 

 

We are considering options. I don’t want to put on the public 

record what those options are because one of the things that we 

must guard against here are claims being put forward that don’t 

have a basis in facts. So we have to be a bit circumspect at this 

stage about what the options might be. 

 

We are monitoring, as the member will know. I’ve given you 

the update on the monitoring to this point. We have out there a 

number of people who complied with the law and ought to be 

treated on the same basis as those who failed to comply with the 

law. And we’re . . . one of the puzzling parts of this for us is  



1726  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

to try and figure out who those people are. And we’re 

considering a couple of options with respect to how we might 

go about that. 

 

So while it must be a terrible aggravation to the people 

involved, I’d ask them just to be patient until we have had an 

opportunity of properly understanding this situation, and 

properly considering the alternatives that are available to the 

government. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, in a previous session in estimates we did in fact speak 

at some length concerning some options of identifying those 

who are essentially affected by this matter. And as you say, it 

turns out that those individuals were in compliance versus 

inadvertently not in compliance with the regulation. And I hope 

that you and your officials have perhaps taken seriously some of 

the suggestions I made in that regard and perhaps they could be 

incorporated in some of your options. 

 

And just in concluding my questioning and comments here this 

evening, I do feel that I do have to continue to press on the 

issue and just provide notice to you that I’m awaiting a few 

more petitions concerning the matter and all those affected — 

all of those who have encountered hardship as a result — and I 

will be presenting such in the House next week. 

 

Having said that, I wish to thank the officials who have come 

here this evening, and the minister as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I just might say a word of 

response. It is the fact that we are considering some of the ideas 

put forward by the member. And let me say through you, Mr. 

Chair, that if he has any other ideas with respect to some of the 

problems that I’m obviously having with this, we’d be glad to 

hear from him. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 

have a question for some clarification and perhaps some 

edification on my part . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it was 

a question that was raised by a constituent of mine which 

alerted me to the fact, after doing some reviewing, that there is 

a regulation which disallows young people under 16 to work in 

certain establishments. I believe that regulation came into effect 

in 1981 or thereabouts. It’s not really relevant, but it has been 

some time ago. 

 

The question that was raised was why, particularly in rural 

areas, in small town Saskatchewan, why can’t my daughter, 

who’s 15 years old, work three or four hours on the weekend in 

a restaurant — whether it be a family restaurant, a friend’s, an 

uncle’s, whatever — to earn a little bit of spending money, 

which is desperately needed in some of those small 

communities by people? 

 

Is there any consideration, Mr. Minister, to review those 

regulations? Getting on into the ’90s and into the next century, 

perhaps a review of that and perhaps other regulations in that 

regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I recall the member writing to me about  

this some months ago — or at least raising it with me — 

because it is a matter that I’ve had on my mind and that the 

department has been considering. 

 

These restrictions are in the form of an order of the Minimum 

Wage Board and it has to do in part with liquor — with the 

availability of liquor on the premises — and in part, and this 

applies to the 16-year-olds, to do with the requirements of The 

Education Act for them to be in school. 

 

Now it’s a complicated question and I can’t help but say that I 

share the member’s concern. I mean I think that some of these 

rules were laid down when our understanding of ourselves as a 

society is different than it is now. And we will be reviewing 

those and trying to either underpin them with solid logic or else 

asking the Minimum Wage Board to consider a change. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, thank you. And thank you to the 

minister. That was the only question that I wanted to ask and I 

appreciate your response to it and your consideration of that 

particular regulation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister 

and to your officials, I’m not going to take a lot of time this 

evening as well in raising questions, but there’s a few concerns 

I’d like to raise. 

 

Number one, I’d like to certainly commend you and your 

department for what you’ve done in the area of occupational 

health and safety and the educational program and certainly 

working through the schools. I think the Southeast Regional 

College needs to commended for their initiatives that were 

taken. 

 

And thank you for the invitation to join with you yesterday in 

recognizing the individuals who have already taken the course. 

Certainly it sounded like the students I had talked to were quite 

pleased to have been involved and given that opportunity. 

 

Having said all that though, Mr. Minister, there’s an area where 

I think occupational health and safety may be a major factor, a 

major concern. And while it’s not your department, the 

occupational health and safety area is. 

 

It’s in the area of health care. And I believe a group of nurses 

were meeting yesterday in Regina to discuss some of the major 

problems they’re running into as a result of decreased funding 

in the health care field, the cut-back in staffing, and the 

problems arising especially in the area of back problems in as 

far as working with and dealing with and lifting patients. 

 

And I guess what I would like to know, Mr. Minister, is what 

your department is doing to address this concern on the basis of 

the occupational health and safety aspect of your program and 

of your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the point is a matter of great 

concern and has been for some time. And it happened long 

before there were any — at least publicly aired — staffing 

problems in any of the institutions. Because frequently nurses 

have to handle heavy patients, and if there’s no one handy to  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

help them they’ll frequently try and do it themselves and 

they’ve been hurting themselves in this respect for years. And 

it’s happened within my own family. We had injuries like that 

and they’re of great concern. 

 

The member, Mr. Chair, may have seen the media coverage of a 

program that was sponsored by SAHO and the Workers’ 

Compensation Board — in which the department had a great 

interest — to demonstrating and providing some training in the 

use of devices that can be used to help lift — lifting devices. 

These are not terribly expensive and are very effective in 

assisting nurses to handle patients. 

 

We have this very high on our list of priorities in the 

department and SAHO certainly has it high on their list, and I 

know that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses feels very 

strongly about it and I think working cooperatively we can 

make a lot of progress. 

 

As I mentioned, the equipment is available, the technology is 

there. It’s easy to use and we hope that before too long it’ll be 

in common use and we can get away from these needless back 

injuries. 

 

(1830) 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. The unfortunate part I 

think, when you talk of equipment and certainly different 

methods of lifting patients, we start talking of funding again 

and that is one of the big questions. And so I guess when it all 

is said and done at the end of the day, it’s a matter of, I guess 

the will to provide for and make sure that there are areas and 

ways and means in which you can address some of these 

concerns so that we don’t have so many of these injuries. 

 

As you indicated, Mr. Minister, certainly it was a concern that 

was being raised but it certainly has escalated in the last little 

while. And I find more and more nurses, and specifically not 

just in hospitals but care homes and even you get to the private 

care home facilities, where we’re dealing with heavier care, and 

actually heavier-level cares of personnel, that it becomes a 

problem, Mr. Minister. So I certainly . . . I think from your 

comments we do recognize that it is something that we would 

need to address and look at it very carefully. 

 

In regards to that, I’d like to come to another aspect and that’s 

the Workers’ Compensation Board and some of the problems 

that are continually brought to my attention. I am sure that as 

minister you’ve had it, and even as an MLA you’ve had issues 

dealing with Workers’ Compensation that have been brought to 

you. 

 

One of the biggest concerns I have, Mr. Minister, other than we 

have a disagreement between the auditor and the Workers’ 

Compensation Board as to who should be auditing and who 

they should be responsible for or whether it’s Public Accounts 

— one of the biggest concerns I do have and that is . . . and it’s 

not just Workers’ Comp. We get into this whole aspect of 

no-fault insurance and some of the onus that Workers’ Comp or 

. . . and I’ll use no-fault insurance as an example as well, what 

SGI basically requires of people. When people are injured they  

go see a general practitioner. A general practitioner looks at that 

person, they suggest, well I’m going to have to send you to a 

specialist because I’m not trained in that area. 

 

A specialist looks at a patient and says, well there’s some real 

problems here. And if those problems lead to having to be off 

of work as a result of it, and then they’re available or able to go 

to Workers’ Comp, they go to Workers’ Comp; but 

unfortunately all of a sudden they get there, Workers’ Comp 

wants them to go through a process of dealing with their own 

so-called trained specialists. 

 

And there doesn’t seem to be . . . Or SGI for that fact has their 

own rules and there doesn’t seem to be a working relationship 

or an understanding of really being able to work with the 

professionals that are already out there in the medical field. It 

seems like every little board sets up their own level of training 

or personnel. And I think that’s where we run into a lot of 

conflict. Where the Workers Comp medical personnel may say 

no, that didn’t happen as a result of this, whereas the medical 

profession who has been dealing with a person, has seen that. 

 

And I’m wondering what is being done by your department to 

address some of these concerns that are being brought forward, 

and how do we arrive at a position whereby people can feel that 

their concerns are legitimately being heard rather than many 

occasions they just feel they’re being pushed under the rug. 

And in the meantime they continue to have to live with injuries 

or ailments that are bothering them and yet being told you’re 

well enough to go back to work. 

 

What does your department do in the light of those concerns, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  One of the aspects of the question that 

the member asks, Mr. Chair, is a problem that’s been around for 

a long time, and I think that the board is doing better now than 

they have before. I remember in my own experience as a 

freshman MLA, finding a situation where the claimant’s doctor 

had reported to the board that the injury was real and the injury 

was work-related and therefore seemed to be compensable. 

 

And another doctor — who may or not have been employed by 

the board, I’ve forgotten — another doctor reading that opinion 

decided that the doctor was wrong and that no claim should be 

entertained by the board, which struck me as being a little bit 

out of line. 

 

Now the story has a happy ending because in the end a medical 

panel was set up under the Act and the medical panel found in 

favour of the employee, of the injured worker, and 

compensation was paid. 

 

But I just cite that story to demonstrate, as the member will 

know — we’ve been in this House exactly the same length of 

time — that this is an old story. And I think we’re getting better 

at it. 

 

The board of review that has reported just in January of this 

year dealt with the question and recommended, among other 

things, that the board should add a chiropractor to their staff,  



1728  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

and dealt with medical opinions in a variety of ways. I’ve 

forgotten just the detail of that, but it is addressed there. 

 

It’s a difficult question. I mean very often, lawyers are spoken 

of in terms of a client can shop around until he finds a lawyer 

who agrees with the opinion. And I don’t think that’s true, but 

there is some doctor shopping too, as people go around trying 

to find a doctor who will support their claim. I don’t, I don’t 

know whether that actually happens but the story is out there. I 

hedge my statements because I just don’t know from my own 

personal experience whether that’s true, but that’s the story 

that’s out there. 

 

So the board has to careful about these cases, has to ensure that 

the injuries are real and that they are work related; but there will 

be controversy always when there are differences of opinion 

between doctors, and the board has to somehow arbitrate 

between those opinions and make their decisions. 

 

Just to sum up, I think the board is doing better. They’re 

certainly tuned up to this issue. And they are trying to take their 

responsibilities very seriously in this respect. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister. Yesterday 

actually we had a couple of people from Workers’ Advocate 

drop by the office as well and they are dealing with a number of 

issues that are ongoing with Workers’ Comp. 

 

I see in your estimates you actually have a figure of $288,000 I 

think, goes towards this and I would gather that Workers’ 

Advocate certainly does work and gets involved in appeals or 

areas where workers feel that their concerns have not been 

heard properly and appropriately. And they try to represent 

individuals and get to the bottom of some of the issues where 

workers are basically feeling left out in the cold. 

 

Unfortunately there was so much material, I didn’t have a 

chance to get through it all or to really get to the bottom of it 

and I’m not going to get into a number of details I’m not 

familiar with, but I think it’s certainly, just from what was 

handed to me, there is a problem there. And it’s certainly 

something that needs to be worked on and addressed. 

 

And I guess what I would say at the end of the day, I think we 

need to find a mechanism whereby medical professionals have 

some understanding of where a medical person that’s hired by 

the board . . . and where they’re coming from. Rather than a 

specialist is over here and makes a diagnosis, but the board’s 

medical personnel seems to come up with a different decision. 

And yet this person is still living with a problem. 

 

And I think that’s where a lot of the confusion comes from, 

especially when you’ve gone through a general practitioner, 

maybe to a specialist, maybe to the second one and then find, 

when you go to Workers’ Comp, you’ve got to deal with 

another medical personnel who . . . he doesn’t follow that . . . I 

mean hasn’t been through that and all of a sudden comes up 

with a different choice. 

 

So we need to work and find ways and means in which we can 

address these concerns and make sure there’s some working  

together and communication, rather than Workers’ Comp over 

here trying to protect itself and paying out funds and individuals 

trying to receive a fair compensation for the loss they’ve 

incurred. 

 

One other area, and I won’t belabour this one as well, but the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Act. We’ve raised 

this on a number of occasions. I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, 

where you are; if you’ve taken a review of what’s taken place 

on this Crown construction tendering program. 

 

Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that there are two or three 

issues here that certainly need to be reviewed — the concern 

that we’re spending more money on some programs simply 

because there isn’t the competitive bids coming in because a lot 

of the non-unionized contractors have decided not to get 

involved in bids. 

 

And the other concern, if a person does even put a bid in or a 

company contractor puts a bid in, the fact that if they don’t have 

a unionized firm and there are unionized people in the locality 

where they live who would be available to work, but the 

unfortunate part as I understand it, they have to go through the 

two union shops either in Saskatoon or Regina, which creates a 

problem for them in funding local employees. 

 

So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, where we are in this; what 

your department is doing to address a number of these 

concerns; and how we are looking at ways and means in which 

we can take a serious look at making sure you’re using . . . get 

the best bang for our buck, that you get the best qualified or 

lowest qualified tender. And you’ve got the opportunity of 

being able to look at that so you can stretch the dollars in 

government further and certainly provide as many if not 

expanded services as a result of being able to take advantage of 

lower contracts with qualified bidders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is a very, very difficult issue. At 

the root of the issue is not the agreement. At the root of the 

issue is this abhorrent, utterly incomprehensible notion of 

double-breasting or spinning-off non-union subsidiary 

companies. I use those adjectives about it because you could go 

across this country and look in every jurisdiction there is and 

not find a labour relations board anywhere who is prepared to 

accept that idea. 

 

It just seems laughable to think that a company like IPSCO, 

let’s say, who’s had a bargaining relationship with the 

steelworkers for how long — 30 years, maybe longer — to 

think that the law might allow the employer, IPSCO, to avoid 

the union certification and the collective agreement by simply 

setting up another company and announcing that from now on 

that company is going to be running the steel business. The law 

would not permit that for a moment. 

 

And yet for some incomprehensible reason the jurisprudence 

has developed in boards in this province over the last 15 years, 

that allows that to happen in the construction industry. 

 

And that’s what’s at the root of this thing. I mean if that 

problem could be cleared up, as we thought we had cleared it  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

up in the 1993 legislation, there wouldn’t be any CCTA (Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement); there wouldn’t be any 

need for one. So I just observe that in passing. 

 

But I want to make a more positive response to the member’s 

intervention. There are processes that I’ve initiated that I hope 

is going to come to some resolution to many issues surrounding 

the agreement and surrounding the legal questions that exist in 

this area. Collective bargaining in the construction industry 

simply is not working. It is not working. It is in a state of near 

collapse. And it falls on the minister and the department to try 

and do something with that. 

 

So I have initiated discussions with everybody involved here — 

with the Saskatchewan Construction Association, the labour 

relations organization, the Construction Labour Relations 

Association, with the building trades, to begin to talk about 

these things and to try and in the end get everybody together 

and decide what we’re going to do in order to normalize 

relations in the construction industry. 

 

I think that if we’re successful in doing that, then the CCTA 

will no longer be necessary as a matter of a public document or 

a document affecting the capital program of the government, 

and we can return to a state of normalcy in the industry. 

 

I’m certainly going to do my best and we’ll see whether we can 

produce any results. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think based on just the 

last comments that were made, if some of that was followed 

through prior to CCTA we might have created a better 

environment and that could be in place right now. 

 

I don’t really know, but I’m suggesting that certainly CCTA has 

really played a major role in some of the confrontation that is 

out there and some of the disagreements that we have within the 

construction trade. 

 

But I don’t intend to belabour the point, other than I trust that as 

you’ve indicated, you’re taking a look at it; you’re going to look 

at ways and means of addressing some of the concerns and 

coming up with a better understanding so that we have . . . so 

that construction firms across the province have the ability to 

hire union or non-union, or be involved in unionized and 

non-unions, and really recognize the fact that they’re able to bid 

on projects based on their best estimates, whether they’re union 

or non-union, and know that they have a good chance of 

receiving that tender. But I think if we work through that 

process we certainly open the door for a better working 

environment and construction environment in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

With that, Mr. Minister, I thank you and your officials for 

having taken the time to come in this evening. 

 

(1845) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, if I may, I’d like to ask just one question. 

Of course recently, occupational health and safety has 

developed in the area of sexual harassment of workers. And I  

think that this is a positive development that most of us applaud 

and we realize the unfortunate necessity of it. 

 

However, I would like to ask the minister this. There now 

appears to be some overlap between the Human Rights 

Commission and occupation health in this area, and I know of 

complaints that are going concurrently to both bodies. And so 

it’s somewhat of a problem that we don’t seem to know which 

body should really be in charge of a complaint in this area. 

 

And I trust the minister will agree with me that while sexual 

harassment is a serious issue that has to be dealt with, on the 

other hand, it doesn’t make a lot of sense to have two bodies 

dealing with the same complaint. 

 

I wonder if the minister could speak on that for a moment for 

me, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I thank the member for the question, 

Mr. Chair. Our regulations require that employers have a policy 

with respect to harassment. If someone runs afoul of that policy, 

our people go in and try and help them resolve it. And if they’re 

able to resolve it, that’s fine; that’s the end of the matter. 

 

We have no power to do anything beyond that. We have no 

power to order anybody to do anything or stop doing anything 

or to impose any penalties or anything. 

 

If we’re not able to work it out then their recourse to the Human 

Rights Commission is there to legally enforce their rights. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 

begin by thanking the members of the opposition, my 

colleagues, who have dealt with, I believe, the important issues 

that exist so far as the department is concerned, at least the 

issues of the day. 

 

And I would like also to thank my officials for coming here 

today. It’s become a small department over the years, Mr. Chair, 

as a result of successive economy measures taken by successive 

governments. And we have now a small band of highly 

qualified people working far too hard and I just want them to 

know how much we all appreciate it, including I’m sure 

members on the other side of the House. So I’d like to thank 

them very much. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, I am pleased to  



1730  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

have with me this evening Brent Cotter, the deputy minister of 

Justice and the deputy attorney general; Doug Moen, the 

executive director of public law. And Ron Hewitt, assistant 

deputy minister in the back; Colleen Matthews, who’s executive 

assistant to the deputy minister; Elizabeth Smith, who is the 

director of administrative services branch; Richard Quinney, 

who is the director of public prosecutions. And I also have with 

me in the back, Keith Laxdal from finance administration; 

Darryl Bogdasavich from civil law; John Baker from law 

enforcement; Dick Till from corrections; and Betty Ann 

Pottruff from policy planning and evaluation. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To me 

maintaining confidence in the administration of justice is 

always the first and most important task of the Minister of 

Justice. And that requires that the Minister of Justice be 

somewhat above the political process at times, even somewhat 

non-partisan, and that the Minister of Justice brings some 

dignity to the process. 

 

And it was with that in mind that I was extremely disappointed 

yesterday, when we were into this unfortunate, unfortunate 

debate about calling political opponents Nazis. That the 

member for Regina South — the member for Regina South — 

had the decency to retract and withdraw. The Premier of the 

province, and of course the former justice minister, also had the 

decency to say this is inappropriate. 

 

But the Minister of Justice yesterday on television appeared to 

be still arguing that it is fair game to call political opponents 

Nazis, and appeared to be saying that if anyone objects to being 

compared to the Nazis that they’re being thin-skinned. 

 

Then earlier today in this House the Minister of Justice was, I 

think encouraged and given every opportunity to retract. Again 

he declined to rise. He did rise for the Norwegian national 

holiday, but despite repeated references to his interview 

yesterday he did not take the opportunity to follow the lead of 

the minister of Regina . . . the member for Regina South and the 

Premier of this province in saying that this is beyond the pale in 

responsible political debate. And this has no place for any 

member of this House, but particularly for a Minister of Justice. 

 

Sir, I regret to say that your comments were unworthy of you 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. I’ve listened 

carefully to the minister’s comments, as I’m sure he will 

appreciate — or the member’s comments — as I’m sure he will 

appreciate, and I simply wish to ask that you tie your comments 

to the Department of Justice estimates before the committee as 

that is what the committee is dealing with at this point. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well yes, but I . . . as the minister responsible 

for this department, do you now wish to take the opportunity to 

address this issue that unfortunately you did not take the 

opportunity to address earlier . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. I wish to point . . . Order. What a  

minister or a member of this legislature states as their personal 

opinion is just that. What is before us this evening is 

Department of Justice estimates. I ask the hon. member for 

North Battleford to move to Department of Justice estimates. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I would then — on the work of the Department 

of Justice — then like to move to the issue of the Kuziak report, 

and the media reports this week that the department gave an 

opinion that that report should be suppressed pending the 

federal election. And I wish to ask the minister if in fact those 

reports are correct? Was an opinion prepared by the 

department? If so, by whom? And can that report be filed with 

this House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I have to start all of my 

responses with questions about the research and the kinds of 

things that the member raises. 

 

This whole situation . . . I responded to questions in the press, 

and basically I will give you the same response that I gave to 

the press. 

 

What happens, as you know or you should know by now, the 

Department of Justice has many legal officers who provide 

advice throughout the government, including to the Chief 

Electoral Officer. And it’s not political advice; it’s legal advice. 

 

And as it relates to this particular issue, because of some of the 

comments that have been made, a request was made to the 

Chief Electoral Officer that it would be okay if the privilege 

was waived as to some of the advice provided by officials of the 

department. And as it relates to this specific part, he agreed that 

that should happen. 

 

And so what I am going to say to you now is that department 

officials provided advice in the process of preparing this report. 

They also, at that point, said that there are a number of factors 

that you should look at as it relates to the timing of the release 

of the report. And that included things like making sure that 

when you release the report, all the individuals who were 

interested, including obviously presidents of political parties 

and others, that they were all available to get it at the same time. 

And so that was one factor. 

 

Another factor was that . . . was to make sure, if possible, to 

have it available in a way that would allow for some 

involvement at the legislative level, if that was possible. It’s 

another factor to consider. 

 

And a further factor was basically a fairly standard policy 

throughout government, but also within the Department of 

Justice, that you look at whether the release of a report would 

affect an election, whether it’s a by-election, a provincial 

election, or a federal election. And all of those factors are laid 

out. 

 

But it’s very clear that the Chief Electoral Officer is a 

independent officer. He can make the decision that he wishes to 

make, but he does seek advice. And that is the extent of the 

situation. 

 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

Now I know that when the Chief Electoral Officer eventually 

releases his report, I’m sure he’ll be happy to answer a number 

of these questions. But at this stage, that’s the extent of the 

advice. 

 

(1900) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well the Chief Electoral Officer may be a 

independent officer, but he claims to be acting under advice 

from your department. So I have to ask: was an opinion 

prepared, and if so, can that opinion be filed with this House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s not an opinion that we would be 

tabling in the House. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair . . . (inaudible) . . . your 

colleague, the Minister of Labour, who of course also is a 

former minister of Justice himself, has said quite clearly he 

thinks the report should be released. Now the officer is saying 

he’s not releasing it on advice from your department. You are 

the present Minister of Justice. Will you now stand in this 

House and agree with your colleague, the former minister of 

Justice, that yes, that is the appropriate course, and that in fact 

in a democratic society, people have the right to information. 

Indeed, how can they make right judgements on public issues 

without information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that the whole way that we’re 

trying to deal with this is to make it as apolitical a situation as 

we can. Because the Chief Electoral Officer has the choice of 

making . . . he has to make his own choice. He uses his 

discretion as to what to do here. And I think just by the question 

you raised, you point out exactly that the Chief Electoral 

Officer is independent. I mean my colleague can have one 

position and we can give some advice that’s opposite, but he 

finally makes the decision. 

 

And what you are in fact requesting me to do is somehow to put 

even more pressure on the Chief Electoral Officer to do 

something. And I’m not going to do that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well I think what I was asking you to do is to 

do the same as your colleague, the former minister of Justice. 

 

I guess the other thing that disturbs me and disturbs a lot of 

people is that of course this is a report on provincial party 

fund-raising. We’re now in the midst of a federal election. I can 

think of no connection, no nexus, no similarity whatsoever, 

with one small possible exception, namely that the official 

agent of the New Democratic provincial party, through the 

years in question, is now a federal candidate. I can’t think of 

any other possible connection between a provincial report and a 

federal election. And I encourage the minister to correct me if 

there are some other connections here I’m missing. But I can’t 

think of any other connection. 

 

We’re not talking about the federal election. We’re not talking 

about the federal parties. We’re not talking about federal 

fund-raising. We’re talking about a report on provincial 

fund-raising that we can’t release in the midst of a federal 

election campaign. And we’re talking about a federal candidate  

who happens to be a provincial official agent a few years ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think one answer to your question 

is very close at hand for you. If you just lean over to your seat 

mate and ask what he referred to the Chief Electoral Officer, 

what the issue really was, is interplay between the federal 

parties and the provincial parties. And that included the Liberal 

Party, the Progressive Conservative Party, New Democratic 

Party. 

 

And if that’s not something that directly relates to a federal 

election, I don’t know what is. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’m trying to be non-partisan. I think my 

colleague from Melville has indicated that there may be issues 

that have to be addressed by all three parties. And if they have 

to be addressed by all parties, so be it. But part of having free 

elections and part of voting is that the information is open and 

made available, and so I can’t possibly imagine why your 

department would take the view that it’s terribly important that 

voters have information withheld from them prior to making 

their judgement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think you’ve misunderstood my 

previous answer. Our department, our officials, have not said to 

the Chief Electoral Officer, don’t release this report. What they 

have said is, when you look at this, take into account the 

various factors and you make your decision. But make sure you 

look at some of these factors. But you’re absolutely wrong to 

say that advice has come from our department to not release 

that report. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — If I may, Mr. Deputy Chair, and obviously I 

accept that the Leader-Post is not always necessarily gospel 

truth, but I must read a sentence from it and ask the minister if 

it is correct or not. May 14, 1997: 

 

Myron Kuziak says the investigation he launched last June 

is complete, but he is holding back the report on advice 

from the provincial Department of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I have no reason to doubt what Mr. 

Kuziak says, but I know that he has given permission to me to 

release the information about the kind of advice that we’ve 

given and that’s what I’ve told him. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Are you prepared now to stand in this House 

and say that you see nothing wrong with releasing the report 

and that you agree with your colleague that releasing the report 

would be one small step away from cynicism; one small step 

towards public confidence in the political process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  What I would say is that in my role as 

Attorney General, I end up having to be part of the advice 

process in the whole system. And what I have told you is the 

advice that my officials have given to an independent officer, 

and that person is evaluating the various options as to what to 

do and they will finally . . . he will finally make his own 

decision. And I’m not in here in a position, and I don’t think 

you necessarily should be in the position, where you’re putting 

the Chief Electoral Officer in a place of difficulty. But I will not  



1732  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

step into this position. 

 

I think you can have your opinion. I think that my colleague can 

have his opinion, but in the final analysis what we have here is 

a Chief Electoral Officer who has a job to do and he will have 

to do it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — As I said earlier, this is a report about 

provincial fund-raising. We’re having a federal election. The 

only nexus I can figure out is that one of the federal NDP 

candidates was, from 1993 to 1996, official agent of the 

provincial NDP. 

 

Can the Minister of Justice at least go so far as confirming and 

reassuring this House that that is not the reason why this report 

must be kept from voters’ eyes until after June 2? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well all I will say is that the particular 

issue that was raised by your colleague was the federal tax 

credit and its interrelationship with provincial parties. And 

that’s directly something that’s involved in this federal election. 

 

The advice that we provided through the Department of Justice 

was advice saying, look at all of these factors and make your 

independent decision. And I think that’s the appropriate advice 

that we gave and I think that other than that I can’t say anything 

more. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But I guess I have to come down to you 

personally. Can you personally give us your assurance that your 

failure to join with your colleague, the former minister, and say 

I want to see that report, I want it out in the public, that your 

failure to do that has nothing to do with trying to salvage the 

Dick Proctor campaign? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I guess I’m very surprised that you would 

make that comment. And basically my role as Attorney General 

gives me some specific positions that I end up taking in this 

legislature, and I greatly resent that you would say that I would 

be in any way dishonouring that role. 

 

So I guess what I would say that we have — through the 

department — have provided advice to an independent officer 

and that independent officer will make a decision, and it’ll be 

his decision. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yesterday, according to reports, Mr. Minister, 

you met with the police association in order to discuss some of 

the issues before us, especially to do with youth crime. And 

according to media reports, they had been trying to arrange a 

meeting with you for a year. I want to ask you if that is in fact 

correct and give you the opportunity to rebut that if it’s not 

correct. 

 

But the reports were saying that the police association was 

trying to meet with you for a whole year. And I want to know if 

that is in fact the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well you know, if all your research 

basically is done over coffee in the morning with the paper, 

then you know I’m not sure how long we’ll be here. 

But practically, yesterday I met with the police officers at their 

request. They asked that I come last year to this meeting 

because it’s a meeting for the whole province. And it ended up 

that I couldn’t go because of responsibilities here in the House. 

And the deputy minister went. 

 

This year when the invitation came I said, of course I want to go 

and be part of this. We had a very good discussion. The issues 

revolved around many things that are of concern to police 

officers. And I think practically, they were very pleased with the 

way that we look at and are examining the justice system. And I 

have a standing invitation to go to every one of their meetings, 

and I will try to go to them when I can. 

 

Because I think as I said in the media, if you caught this, one of 

the important things I said to these police officers was that I 

need to thank you on behalf of all of the people of 

Saskatchewan for the role that they play in being the interface 

often between the justice system and ordinary people. And that 

they have a very important role to play in educating people 

about how the justice system works. 

 

And we then ended up talking about many things which are of 

importance to policing in the province, and I guess what I 

would say is that the press reports were quite different than 

actually what we did. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m aware that 

the minister did publicly thank the police officers, and I 

congratulate him for that. 

 

May I just ask though, you’ve referred to of course the public 

meetings of the association. We know that public meetings are 

not usually the place to do serious business. What about private 

meetings with the police association where there can be a frank 

exchange of views and receiving opinions back and forth as to 

how we can deal with the issues before us at this time? Have 

those been requested? Have they been responded to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well this meeting yesterday was a private 

meeting. It was . . . If that’s what your question is. It wasn’t a 

public meeting; it was a private meeting, that was, meeting with 

their board of directors or their representatives from the 

different areas. 

 

And practically I’m, you know, ready to meet with them at any 

time. Now because of not missing some of these . . . or not 

being able to go other times when I had been invited, it took us 

awhile to get there. But there was never, ever any sense that we 

were avoiding meeting with these people. 

 

The other side of it is that the officials in the Department of 

Justice meet very regularly with these people on the different 

legislative amendments that are proposed to The Police Act, 

also about issues that relate to some of the other concerns about 

public safety in the province. And that happens on a very 

regular basis and there’s a very good rapport I would say, 

between our department and the police officers. And it just 

happened that I wasn’t able to be at some of these meetings. 

 

(1915) 



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, and one final question. I believe 

my colleague from Melville and the hon. member from 

Moosomin may have some questions but I wish to return to the 

fact that your response to the suppression of the Kuziak report, 

it runs completely contrary to the former minister of Justice. 

Have you had consultations with your colleague so that you can 

come to some joint understanding as to the appropriate way for 

the Minister of Justice to respond to these requests when your 

department is cited by the Chief Electoral Officer as the reason 

why that report is being suppressed? Have you had 

consultations with your colleague? Are you going to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think we go right back to the basic point 

I made before, is as Attorney General, and through my staff and 

people who work within the department, we provide advice 

right throughout the government. And on this particular point 

the advice was provided, and through the kind agreement of the 

Chief Electoral Officer, he allowed me to talk about the 

particular advice on this point. And I’ve done that and that’s the 

advice that’s come from our department. And basically that’s 

the position that I end up having to take here. My colleague has 

another position on this and I think that’s appropriate. But as far 

as me as Attorney General, this is the advice that I’ve given. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I realize that, but I say . . . 

my question is though, you can see that your position is 

diametrically opposed to your colleague and the former 

minister. Are you talking to your colleague in an attempt to 

come together into a proper understanding of what your 

response ought to be? I realize you can’t give orders to the 

Chief Electoral Officer, nor should you, but you can at least say 

what your colleague has said, namely, I think the report should 

be out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I disagree with your comment that we’re 

diametrically opposed, because the position that I’ve taken as 

the legal and constitutional adviser to the Chief Electoral 

Officer and to the government is that through my officials, they 

have laid out these points and said, you’re an independent 

officer, then you have to make a choice. That’s as far as I can 

go on their advice and I can’t . . . I don’t . . . that’s where it 

stays. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a few 

questions here I’d like to address before we move through the 

Committee of Finance. The other day I was talking to you about 

custody, and about joint custody and about some of the 

problems that are arising. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I think you received a fairly thick piece of 

information from the National Shared Parenting Association in 

Regina. And they raised a number of problems or a number of 

issues, brought them to your attention, to the department’s 

attention, a number of concerns they had. 

 

Number one, the problem with what they called the adversarial 

courts forum, and number two, the problem, children are often 

used as pawns in litigation process. The problem of our children 

have price tags on their heads. The problem, our current justice 

system is concerned with the rights of parents and not of 

children. 

And then it spends . . . it goes on further to explain exactly what 

they mean by that, such as spending time with children, don’t 

neglect children. The myth of disruption, dispelling the 

disruption myth, and a number of other areas. 

 

And I think under the former minister of Justice there was a 

process of mediation that was brought into play to try and 

alleviate some of the major problems that were arising out of 

custody battles. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if that process of 

mediation is working. I think, Mr. Minister, what we’re finding, 

parents and custody battles are . . . they go through it . . . in 

some cases they indicated they’re forced into it without really 

taking the time to look at the problems that may arise if they go 

beyond that. And the fact that mediation can work or possibly 

can work if people are willing to work with it. 

 

Number one, it would probably do two things for them. It 

would save them some money at the end of the day. It will 

probably put more money in their pockets and in the pockets of 

the children at the end of the day versus a long-drawn-out court 

process system. Plus they may end up as friends and being able 

to provide parenting, ongoing parenting, to their children. 

 

What we have today, Mr. Minister, is a situation where . . . and 

one of the biggest concerns is the fact where in many cases the 

wife may receive custody of the child and then in some cases 

uses that in . . . or as well as while they receive custody and 

have been awarded a maintenance agreement, they . . . at the 

same time there’s custody allowed or access given to the father 

who’s the parent. 

 

And on some . . . many of occasions . . . Of course the ones we 

hear are for the ones where there’s ongoing disagreements that 

arise — where parents don’t feel they’ve received appropriate 

or get appropriate access. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in the March 12, 1997 Times Union article, 

an article of . . . and I believe this is from the United States, 

there was a decision made and I believe in a Saratoga court 

where a question of custody and access was addressed. Now in 

this case the, I believe — and I’m just going to go through a 

specific case here just to bring this to your attention — I believe 

the mother was awarded 60 per cent of children and the father 

was awarded 40 per cent. But the father was given 25 per cent 

. . . sorry, ordered to pay a level of maintenance of 25 per cent 

of his income. And he carried this case through to the point, 

because he argued while he was making $53,000, his wife was 

making $43,000, it wasn’t fair that he had to pay all the 

maintenance. 

 

At the end of the day, and just for your information, a new 

ruling came down which said well — a judge looked at it and 

said — well you know, that might be fair. The custody is 60 per 

cent for the wife, she should pay . . . So the father therefore is 

responsible for 60 per cent of the financing. But the wife is 

making $43,000 so it’s only fair that for 40 per cent of the 

custody that the father has, she should pay 40 per cent. I think 

in the end they ended up with a saw-off of about $69 that the 

wife got. 



1734  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

Now what I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, is what is being done 

to address the concerns where custody is denied? And I think I 

mentioned this the other day, about maybe tying the fact . . . 

Maintenance may have been awarded but if custody is not being 

followed through, then maybe is it reasonable to suggest that 

maybe maintenance payments may be reduced? I think you 

talked about the fact that if you awarded custody but custody 

isn’t followed through, that you then would have to take civil 

action to address this question. 

 

And the concern I raise and the reason I would like to raise this, 

Mr. Minister, is why would a person then be forced to take civil 

action to make sure that the court indeed follows up on the 

decision that was made by the court in regards to number one, 

maintenance; and number two, the biggest question of access to 

the children and custody of the children? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you for that question. I think the 

point you’re wanting to make is that access was being denied, 

not custody being denied . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Yes, access. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, access, okay. As we looked at some 

of these issues before, one of the questions that was asked was, 

why aren’t we doing more in this area. And I think that is a 

good question. But what I would say is that our Children’s Law 

Act in Saskatchewan actually has more remedies for access 

that’s denied than most other jurisdictions in Canada or maybe 

all other jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

And some of the things that can be awarded include other time 

to make up for the access that’s been denied. Expenses — you 

can get your expenses reimbursed if you’ve had to travel 

somewhere and then the access was denied. And so there are 

some extra remedies. One of the things is accurate though that 

you say, well you end up having to go to court to get some of 

these remedies. 

 

And so as part of the overall discussion and strategy relating to 

family law which has been worked on through the special 

family law working group through the federal, provincial, 

territorial ministers across Canada is, we looked at child support 

guidelines of child support issues. That is now in place as of 

May 1, 1997, and we are now going to hopefully focus our 

efforts in a broader way on access, custody issues. That’s on a 

national basis. And we have people from our department who 

are working on that. 

 

On a provincial basis, we know that a year ago the Children’s 

Advocate raised some issues around access and the rights of 

children to see both parents. And out of that an 

interdepartmental working group has been working over the 

past year at trying to identify the issues and some of the 

responses that might come. And we’re hoping within another 

month, month and a half, two months, to go out into the 

community of Saskatchewan to discuss these issues and see if 

we can’t address some of the specific things that you’re raising. 

 

I think that many of the models and things that we have done in 

Saskatchewan have gone a long ways to addressing some of  

your concerns, but I agree with you that we’re not there yet. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess the 

real question I’m raising is the fact that up until now, and I 

believe today, if you don’t have access you do have to go back 

through the court. Which can become a monetary problem for a 

number of individuals, especially if all of a sudden you find 

yourself with . . . you’ve lost your job and you’ve got a lower 

paying job, you still have this maintenance question that you 

have to deal with. 

 

And if you’re then forced to go to the courts . . . and you talked 

about, just mentioned the lawyers a minute ago I think, when 

you were talking, made a comment about lawyers, talking about 

the minister of North Battleford. Unfortunately they don’t really 

come cheaply. And these costs become an abhorrent cost. And 

it would seem to me we need to find a way of addressing this 

without forcing people back into the court system to make sure 

that we follow up on orders that have been given by one level 

of the court in this area. 

 

While you’re saying changes are being made, I would certainly 

encourage you, Mr. Minister, to look at ways in which we can 

make sure that we certainly follow up. That if an order is given, 

that order has some bearing, and you don’t have to then follow 

another process of court procedure to make sure that the 

original court order was followed through on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well that’s a good suggestion. And it is I 

think, I can quite clearly say, included in the discussion about 

how we provide self-help kits for people so that they can 

identify this. We do have a part of our family law division of 

the courts that includes public education and there are seminars 

and things that help people understand some of the issues. 

 

But I think you’re going another step, saying let’s figure out 

how to make this even more user-friendly, if I can put it that 

way, and that’s our goal. So we agree that we will continue to 

work on that and maybe next year you can ask me and I’ll say, 

well here’s the things that we’ve been able to do in this past 

year. But we’re working in that direction. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 

commissioned the Martin report to look into prosecutions in the 

province of Saskatchewan and a number of issues and concerns 

that have been raised about prosecutors and prosecutions and 

how they’re followed through. And as has already been 

indicated, Mr. Minister, that was spurred on because of some 

key and some high-profile cases where some . . . what would 

certainly appear there was some major blunders made in the 

way prosecutions were made and followed through on. 

 

And I have some very deep concerns in that. I think you might 

share in some ways the views of other people on it as well 

because of the fact that so many, especially in the Martensville 

case . . . we had so many charges laid and we ended up with, I 

believe one actual conviction at the end of the day. And so we 

have a number of people . . . in fact I don’t know right now how 

many people are actually suing the department as a result of 

what happened in the Martensville case. And it seems to me, 

Mr. Minister, as a result of that we find ourselves where the  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

department is under purview . . . or under investigation or under 

severe criticism for what happened there. 

 

Now in higher profile cases where people may be able to take 

on the department to gain compensation for economic loss as a 

result of charges — and of course when you look at 

Martensville that is a higher profile case than other ones — 

there are some real concerns there. 

 

Now when the report came down I was very disturbed in the 

fact that . . . and the thing that really disturbed me, Mr. 

Minister, is — and this was an issue that I think was raised 

when the report was originally commissioned — that it was 

really limiting Mr. Martin and his official in their review. 

 

(1930) 

 

And I noted that they had basically talked to lawyers, they had 

talked to prosecutors’ offices, they had talked to policemen. No 

one really took the time to talk to . . . and I guess maybe that’s 

because of what the parameters they were given to review. But 

it appeared they really didn’t look outside of the very core of 

the judicial process; that one would have to question whether or 

not you would get a fair review, because this level of the 

judiciary are all involved in prosecutions and it wouldn’t be in 

their best interest to come out and say to the public of 

Saskatchewan, we have a very poor and a very inefficiently run 

prosecutors’ office or judicial process. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, why there wasn’t a broader 

review and a broader opportunity for Mr. Martin to review the 

concern and specifically look at cases like the Martensville, like 

Milgaard, and the Latimer case, to be able to look and come up 

with a review that would look in depth at prosecutions in this 

province, that would address some of the concerns that we have 

and certainly in the minds of the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I could respond to your question 

quite simply by just taking the terms of reference in my letter to 

these people that do the review. But all I’ll do is say that they 

were given the opportunity to interview and deal with as many 

people as possible, but the fifth term of reference was: consult 

and interview, as required, to address the above terms of 

reference, individuals within and outside the criminal justice 

system. 

 

And the people who were interviewed included many people 

within the criminal justice system, but it did also include many 

high-profile defence lawyers who have lots of questions about 

the justice system. And I think practically, the kind of review 

we got came back and said very clearly that you have 

competent, capable people running your prosecution system. 

And that there are some areas that you may want to look at, and 

they laid all of those out. But it provides us with, I think, a very 

good review of prosecutions in Saskatchewan and allows us to 

build on this review to make a better prosecution system. 

 

I would also say that this review is one that’s taken place in the 

Department of Justice and follows on the heels of other 

reviews. We did one in corrections. We did one through the 

land titles system. We did one in public prosecutions. And there  

are obviously many hot points that relate to the prosecutions 

issues and that means that there are many times that issues 

arise. 

 

But I think that to say that they did not have the ability to go as 

broadly as they wished, that’s not accurate. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think for individuals who 

are trying to deal with the system and have certainly been 

affected by decisions in the system, they certainly may disagree 

with you. And of course the system itself doesn’t seem to have 

a level of responsibility at the end of day for when charges are 

laid and when they’re dismissed. There again you’ve got to go 

through the whole process of court review and you’ve got to 

have the money and be able to go back to court and then to get 

due compensation for economic loss or whatever if you prove 

your innocence. 

 

And someone obviously . . . A decision or choice was made that 

certainly put an individual or a group of individuals in an 

awkward situation. And that’s one of the problems. 

 

Now you mentioned in your letter when you presented the 

report, the Martin report, you mentioned: 

 

It cannot be overemphasized that the purpose of a criminal 

prosecution is not to obtain a conviction. It is to lay before 

a jury what the Crown considers to be credible evidence 

relevant to what is alleged to be a crime. Counsel have a 

duty to see that all available legal proof of the facts have 

been presented. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in regards to that — and I’m not getting 

into a specific case — but based on a broad overview of some 

of the situations that have arrived on my desk, some of the 

things, some that I’ve presented to you, one that we just 

discussed a moment ago, there seems to be situations, Mr. 

Minister, where individuals find themselves as a result of 

allegations made against them eventually going to court. And it 

appears that until they get to court they’ve never really had the 

opportunity to sit down and explain or find out what allegations 

were originally made and at least being interviewed to find out 

whether or not there is substantial evidence to go to court. 

 

Now you say it’s the responsibility of the Crown to make sure 

there’s enough information. Now I would like to know where 

the Crown gets its information, whether or not the Crown 

interviews alleged individuals who may be convicted of a 

crime, or how they derive the information that they are to deal 

with. Or do they just take the information that comes via a 

police officer in a specific case and determine whether or not 

that is sufficient evidence to lay a charge? 

 

Now I think you’re talking of . . . in the Martin report you point 

out the fact that we’re going to implement a screening system to 

make sure that there is — I guess what you’re basically 

suggesting — a better system of sitting down to determine 

whether or not charges should be laid in appropriate situations, 

rather than because an allegation is made, someone feels a 

charge should be laid, then we end up in the court system. 

 



1736  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

What process is followed in order that a Crown prosecutor for 

sure has the evidence in front of him and an individual, who 

may be convicted at any . . . or may face a conviction, knows 

that they have had the opportunity to present and to answer to 

any questions that are raised to determine whether or not there 

is sufficient evidence to go to court versus an allegation is 

made, a charge is laid, a person ends up in court before they’ve 

even had a chance to be interviewed or talked to. 

 

And in the case that I’ve presented to you, there certainly seems 

to have been some lack of communication. I’ve got another 

circumstance where an individual now is $32,000 on the hook. 

But this is one we’ve talked about back and forth, where it’s 

gone between jurisdictions, which has certainly been a problem 

for us. And in the end there hasn’t been the . . . The Crown is 

. . . in this case the other jurisdiction finally stayed the charges 

and allowed it to come back here. 

 

It just seems, Mr. Minister, that the door is too wide open and I 

guess what I’m saying here is while you say it’s not the purpose 

to obtain a conviction, it is the purpose to lay it. It’s almost like 

you’re saying all the Crown has to do is just lay the charge and 

try and present enough evidence to gain the charge, rather than 

determine whether or not they should be going to court at all. 

And that’s part of the interpretation that may be here. 

 

And I think that’s something that we need a clarification on and 

a better understanding of the process. So that at the end of the 

day in due course the legitimate charges are being followed up 

on, and what would appear to be charges that really aren’t 

shouldn’t be going to court, that they don’t end up there tying 

up our court system and costing individuals thousands of 

dollars just to defend their innocence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what I would say in response to 

your question is try to give you a bit of an idea of what happens 

and . . . because I think that is your question. 

 

When the police receive a complaint they begin gathering 

evidence. And their job is to gather sufficient evidence so that a 

charge can be laid. Sometimes they are in a position where 

they’ll actually lay the charge. Quite often they will be involved 

in consultation with a Crown prosecutor. 

 

The Crown prosecutor standard of review is a little bit higher, if 

I can put it that way, than the police’s standard. And the 

standard for the Crown prosecutor is, should this matter 

proceed. And the question they ask themselves, is there a 

reasonable likelihood that somebody will be convicted as 

opposed to whether there’s sufficient evidence to lay that 

charge. 

 

Our system has full disclosure of the information that the 

prosecutor has. So that means a person who has been charged 

receives full disclosure of the information that the Crown has. 

And then there’s a process to deal with this which is the court 

process. 

 

I think that what you should maybe recognize or maybe what all 

the public should recognize is, and I think what the report says, 

is that when a conviction is not obtained that’s not a  

failure of the system. And in fact it may be a success of the 

system. Because when it does happen is the point you were 

making, is that there the defendant is finally in a position, if 

they wish, to present their whole story. 

 

And I guess what I would say is that the system that we have as 

it relates to criminal prosecution has developed over many, 

many, many years and it has many checks and balances in it. 

But that the system is designed so that the defendant receives 

full disclosure of the evidence against them as early in the 

process as possible. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately, Mr. 

Minister, when you suggest that the system works and if a 

person at the end of the day proves their innocence, if that 

person has in the process, and let’s say it’s been a 

time-consuming process and they find themselves with 

anywhere from 20 to $200,000 in the red, who covers that? 

 

The person that was forced to prove they were innocent is left 

to bear that. It may mean, in some cases, Mr. Minister, it may 

mean a family breakdown. In other cases, it may mean the loss 

of a business. And I’m not exactly sure we can just hang our hat 

on the fact the system works because you were able to prove 

innocence at the end of the day. 

 

Now you made the comment about full disclosure. What I 

would like to know, Mr. Minister, is when is full disclosure 

available to a defendant? Is it when a charge is laid and then the 

prosecutor is to make full disclosure if it’s required . . . 

requested by the lawyer? Or who makes that . . . and what do 

you mean full disclosure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well full disclosure can occur at a couple 

of different times, but often it’s at a time when the charge is 

laid or it is automatically given at the time a person pleads not 

guilty. 

 

I think another point that I would make is that at any point in 

the process a defendant who wishes to make a statement about 

what has happened, they’re free to do that and provide that 

information to the Crown which then is reviewed in the whole 

process. And there have been instances where at that stage, the 

charges would be dropped. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I guess the 

reason I ask that question, I go back to some of the former 

members that are on trial right now. And I know a number of 

members I’ve talked to didn’t find out till they got to court, 

some of the information that was certainly being used against 

them. 

 

Now if you’re telling me that full disclosure is available, they 

should have, if you will, full access to anything or all 

information that would have been used against them. The only 

reason I raise that one is because of having communicated with 

some of the individuals. 

 

Now another individual, there’s a couple of cases I’ve brought 

to your attention right now where the circumstances are much 

different, but the feeling is that they don’t really know what  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

they’re facing as well. 

 

So when you mean full disclosure, you’re basically suggesting 

and telling me that any defendant has, should have, or can gain 

access to all evidence that would be used against them. Is that 

true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think the answer is that full 

disclosure will take place automatically at first appearance in 

court. It may happen earlier than that. 

 

The other point I would like to make is that there’s disclosure of 

all evidence, both for, you know, in favour of a defendant, or 

against the defendant. So that practically all of that information 

is there and it’s fully disclosed. 

 

I think I should also say that when you refer cases to me in this 

area, as you know, I refer them to the director of public 

prosecutions and they’re all handled there because I do not get 

involved in individual cases. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Toth:  And I thank you and I’m not expecting that. But 

I’m basically looking for some information. On many occasions 

from when individuals contact me with a particular case, I’m 

looking for some background and what can be possibly done in 

certain circumstances. And yes, I realize as well if something is 

before the courts, there isn’t . . . you have to allow the process 

to follow. 

 

But if there’s some information that can be given or they can be 

steered in a direction, then I think it’s my responsibility and 

your responsibility as well. That’s something that we need to do 

as representatives of the public to make sure we’re working and 

trying to give them the help that they need as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the Martin report you mentioned about the fact 

that there’s not only going to be a screening process in place as 

far as prosecutors to try and deal with and determine to take a 

closer look at whether making sure that when cases are . . . 

certainly, charges are laid and cases end up in court, that you’re 

dealing with situations that would certainly be the type that 

would stand up in court. 

 

But you also made another recommendation that there be more 

computers available. What I’d like to know is what do you 

mean by computers? Are we talking of computers available to 

Crown prosecutors to utilize in the courtroom? Or are we 

talking computers available that could be used and utilized in 

offices versus being carried into the courtroom and used in the 

courtroom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer is both. I mean there 

are some cases where through the use of various types of 

software, if you have thousands of documents, then the judge, 

defence, and prosecutor will all have a computer so that they 

can access material through a computer. So that’s one area. 

 

But also we’re providing more than within the offices because 

they’re of great assistance when it relates to legal research and  

also preparation of documents. So I guess I would say it’s all 

those areas, and we know it’s an area that we have to provide 

better resources. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s one question I 

do have here in regards to the use of computers, and having sat 

in on a couple of court cases recently and watching the . . . and 

the one that we’re all familiar with is the most recent former 

MLA and his challenge of computers. 

 

The concern I have, and I think the public won’t be too long in 

gathering this as well, is the fact that when computers are keyed 

up, computers are keyed up and they’re only as good as the 

person keying them up. And it would seem to me a prosecutor’s 

only going to key in evidence that he’s gained that would 

substantiate his case, not anything that may point to the 

innocence of an individual. 

 

Now the biggest concern at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, is 

the fact that if evidence has been gained and you’re going to 

key computers, number one, where did you get that evidence? 

You probably would have received it either from interviews or 

from taped interviews or even from printed material that goes 

back and may be dated back a while of period of time. 

 

And the biggest concern is, as we see in the one case, where 

material has been shredded. It would seem to me that until a 

case is completed, heard, and is put to rest, that all backup 

information should basically be available — any printed 

material to substantiate what’s on that computer chip or that 

computer disc. 

 

Secondly, you made the comment that the defence would have 

access to. The concern there is as well, information can be 

deleted or added to on a disc very easily. And how does the 

defence, or if you will, say the defence has something and they 

utilize the computer. The prosecutor wants access to it. How are 

either one of them assured that they are receiving all the 

information that is being utilized in the case? Or just what 

either of the different to the defence or the prosecutor might 

feel they’d want to give because they may not want to 

jeopardize the area or the mode of question that they would like 

to get into. 

 

What assurances do we have that when disclosure or access to a 

computer is given, ordered by the court or requested of, that all 

of the information will be made available, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answers can be very 

general. And I’m not in any position to comment on any 

specific cases, as I’ve said before. 

 

But lawyers as prosecutors and defence lawyers are officers of 

the court and there’s a code of professional ethics that has been 

developed over centuries that relates to criminal proceedings. 

And the full disclosure means full disclosure of all relevant 

evidence. 

 

And I don’t think it really matters what kind of technology there 

is or isn’t. The code of professional conduct says if you have 

relevant evidence, then you need to make sure that the  



1738  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

defendant and their defence counsel know about it. And that’s 

the answer. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you. Mr. Minister. On to another line of 

questioning. 

 

There’s been a fair bit of debate about volunteer groups and 

certainly the Eastend Rink Complex board being held 

accountable for some problems that arose from a fund-raiser 

that went wrong. What has been done to date, Mr. Minister, to 

address a similar circumstance that may happen down the road 

so that we don’t jeopardize the work of volunteer groups in . . . 

well throughout Saskatchewan? 

 

I shouldn’t say just rural, because I’m sure large urban centres 

as well have many people who volunteer time and efforts to 

fund raise and to provide for recreational facilities and what 

have you, and we’ve got different opportunities. What has been 

done to date to address a circumstance such as the one we’ve 

had show up in the Eastend area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think basically what happens in 

this area, and we’ve talked about it before, is that in 

Saskatchewan we have certain standards as it relates to directors 

of non-profit corporations. And those standards are related to 

the reasonableness of a person’s actions, and if people take 

reasonable actions as directors of a corporation, they don’t need 

to worry. 

 

Now there was a specific problem that arose in this one 

community that has raised the issue again. And we’ve been 

looking at this but we know that the present standard is really 

quite high and the ability to be successful in a lawsuit of a 

director of a non-profit corporation is quite remote, as long as 

the people are acting in a reasonable way. 

 

I think that the standards are quite good there, but that’s where 

it sits right now. But it doesn’t mean we’re not continuing to 

look at what other options there might be. But at this point we 

think there is actually fairly good protection, but we are 

examining other jurisdictions and other places to see if there are 

some other ways of doing something. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, as you can appreciate and you’ve 

probably noted, just in the last few recent days while we’ve 

been receiving phone calls and we’ve been receiving a number 

of letters regarding the Appeal court’s decision regarding 

strippers in bars in the province of Saskatchewan, and then just 

recently we’ve had just an onslaught of petitions that have been 

coming in from across the province. 

 

Now I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, what the government is 

doing to address this concern. I’m sure that your office has 

been, and your MLAs have been hearing from people who have 

been calling regarding it. Our caucus has certainly suggested 

that the notwithstanding clause of section 33 of the charter of 

rights is something that could be of use to address this problem. 

 

According to Mel Smith, a former constitutional adviser for 

several B.C. governments, Justice Hrabinsky’s rulings is a 

prime opportunity for your government to invoke section 33 of  

the charter. Mr. Minister, while I think you were looking at the 

Minister responsible for Gaming, there is a judicial situation 

here that we want to bring to your attention. I think your 

department has a responsibility as well and you’ll be probably 

asked to give information on this. Is it possible to use section 

33 of the charter as suggested by Justice Hrabinsky? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that that remedy that you suggest is 

an uncommon remedy. It’s not one that one would use in the 

first instance. This particular case is under appeal at this point, 

and practically I don’t think you’d even look at the kind of 

suggestion that you’re talking about until the full appeal process 

has been completed. It’s a section that is rarely used, but I think 

the possibility of using it is there. 

 

But our position is that we are going to go through all of the 

appropriate legal processes, the appeals, before we look at that. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, another question, another concern 

that I’d like to raise and it comes from . . . and it’s actually 

something that’s been ongoing. It goes back a few years; it’s 

prior to your term as minister. 

 

It began when the member from Saskatoon was the minister of 

Justice, and it’s this whole issue of the judges in this province 

and a piece of legislation that was enacted that agreed to a 

process of working out monetary provision for the judges. Then 

when the government felt they couldn’t honour that they 

revoked that. And as of right now, I believe it’s before the 

courts. 

 

And you’re probably going to stand and say I can’t respond to 

that because it’s before the courts, but I can ask you the 

question. When do you think, or when do you anticipate that 

there will be a response or an answer to this question that is 

being raised and to this lawsuit that has resulted as a result of a 

decision by the department in response to what was basically 

agreed to be prior to negotiations regarding salaries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  You were correct in surmising this is 

before the court. I can say though that the present situation is 

that examinations for discovery are being completed, and I 

think that they may be close to completion. And the next step 

would be the parties certifying to the court that they’re ready for 

a pre-trial conference. So at this stage it’s in the court process 

and we hope that it will be resolved soon. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, the only thing I can say is I think 

most people are thankful that it’s the judges and the lawyers 

who are in this process. They probably can afford to follow the 

. . . afford to follow through the process. And the cost at the end 

of the day is something that they’ll probably be more than 

willing to eat up whereas a private individual would really 

begin to think, well, I really can’t afford this any more. But 

we’ll let the process work. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other day you announced with the Minister of 

Social Services that you were bringing in . . . or going to work 

at a program to try and deal with prostitutes on our streets, and 

specifically with child prostitution. And at that time, Mr. 

Minister, I raised the concern that well on one hand, yes, it’s  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

appropriate and it’s proper that we deal with the problems on 

the streets and individuals who would take advantage of 

children. I think you’re going to basically deal with prostitution 

on the basis of sexual assault or child assault or whatever the 

term. I forget the term. 

 

But on the other hand, there’s a question that is not being 

addressed and that’s the question of how do we deal with . . . I 

guess the circumstances that allow for and certainly that bring 

children, especially when we start seeing 10-, 11-, and 12- and 

14-year-olds on the streets, the circumstances that certainly 

allow them or even encourage them to be on the streets, Mr. 

Minister. I think that is one area that we are overlooking and we 

haven’t even started to look at yet. 

 

Now that may be outside of your department. I know the legal 

aspect question is something that’s there. But I think it’s 

something that maybe your department needs to take a close 

look at as well with the Department of Social Services; that 

there’s another problem there that needs to be addressed as well 

as dealing with individuals who would take advantage of young 

girls on this — or I shouldn’t say young girls — young people 

on the street, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would hope that your department is looking at ways and 

means of addressing the other end of the problem. And I’m 

wondering what your views are, whether or not this is 

something that is an issue that is being addressed. Or are we 

just dealing with it after the fact and the johns who would take 

advantage or would be out on the street trying to solicit the 

availability of these individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I appreciate your question and the way 

that you’ve asked it because it does allow me to respond by 

saying that the issue is these young people and why are they on 

the street. And there are lots of factors that are social factors. 

 

What we in the Department of Justice are doing is working 

closely with the Department of Social Services, Department of 

Health, Education, and very much that cooperation along with 

other departments through the child action plan tries to address 

some of the issues that results in people or young people being 

on the street. 

 

I think that the concerns that you raise identify that often the 

Department of Justice has a role of picking up the pieces when 

things don’t go quite right for people, whether it’s adults or 

young people. And that often means that we’re involved in 

some situations that are really quite distressing. 

 

And I think that the role that we can play is to help solve those 

specific instances if we can, but also to identify too all of the 

appropriate services — whether it’s education or health or 

social services, the kinds of things that we find that they can do 

that would maybe prevent kids being on the street or other types 

of crime. 

 

And we very much work in cooperation with all of the other 

government departments as well as non-profit community 

organizations and municipal governments throughout the 

province. 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just 

want to add another couple of concerns and questions and 

throw out something your way as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, when this whole case of prostitution and how we 

deal with it comes forward, I think it’s incumbent upon 

everyone involved that there is certainly a level of respect and 

regard and that the levels of . . . whether it’s the police; whether 

it’s the judiciary; whether it’s the legal community, certainly are 

free of and make themselves as clean, if you will, in dealing 

with the situation. 

 

You and I, as individuals in this Assembly, people look to us 

and we have to . . . we basically are, I guess, elevated to a level 

where people expect us to maintain a certain level of conduct. 

One of the concerns I do have . . . and I take a Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix article and I believe it was the 26th. I forgot to 

write the date down; I didn’t get it. But the article talks about 

Belleville, Ontario where a police inspector was one of six 

people charged in the prostitution crackdown in Oshawa last 

week. 

 

Now unfortunately, Mr. Minister, when we look at this case or 

prosecution, it doesn’t matter what sector of our society . . . 

we’re probably there . . . you probably will find that of all 

sectors of society. Well just the other day we heard in 

Saskatoon where another member of the clergy is being charged 

by a number of individuals. 

 

And I’m not sure how you deal with that. I know someone’s 

going to be throwing back in your face, well what about this 

person? What about individuals in possibly our police forces or 

individuals in government? 

 

I’m not sure how you’re going to deal with it, but I think it’s 

going to be an interesting challenge for you and your 

department when you start dealing with this. Because I think 

some of this may be thrown back and establishing, I guess if 

you will, a level of credibility so that we are indeed showing 

people that while we’re concerned we’re not just elevating, but 

we’re holding to a standard that we’re trying to impress upon 

society. 

 

And that’s a concern. I think it’s something that we need to 

work towards. And as minister, I think certainly leadership is 

going to come from your office as well, and responsible for 

that. And so I don’t know if you want to comment about that on 

this time, but I’m throwing it out as something that we need to 

certainly be very cognizant of and very mindful of. 

 

Mr. Minister, one other question and just a quick . . . Your 

department I believe is responsible for the Human Rights 

Commission and the Human Rights Code. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. I’m the minister who is 

responsible in the legislature for the Human Rights 

Commission. They are obviously independent, but I’m the 

person who answers questions about them. 

 



1740  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, as well, just prior to the last 

election, the former Justice minister brought forth a change to 

the Human Rights Commission, and his argument was that we 

needed this change. We added the words “sexual orientation” 

so that there was a sector of our society could not be picked on 

or could not be trodden upon, or made slightful allegations of 

or racial slurs about in our society. I believe that was brought 

forward to address a concern regarding the sexual orientation of 

individuals. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, the reasons that were used were 

that there was a group in our society that certainly could face 

persecution as a result of the fact that they weren’t dealt with 

clearly. Now I think you were here at the time. I think you heard 

some of the arguments we presented when that Bill was brought 

forward — the fact that we felt there was enough in the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms to certainly address that. 

 

But I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, your view . . . is this . . . has 

the change really made a difference in regards to how people 

perceive other individuals and how they treat them, and the fact 

that there aren’t racial slurs or individuals mistreated as a result 

of their personal abuse? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I wasn’t in the legislature during that 

debate, but what I would say is yes, I think it is an important 

signal to all of the community that discrimination based on 

sexual orientation is not tolerated. And the Act itself and those 

words being there are part of the education process for society. 

So yes, I think it was an important step and it was something 

that should have been done. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And yes you’re correct. 

Now that I recall, you were elected in 1995. And I appreciate 

that. 

 

Mr. Minister, as the minister responsible for Justice, as the 

minister responsible for the Human Rights Code, and in view of 

what has taken place in our country over the past . . . not even 

too distant numbers of weeks — and we certainly heard some 

of that today: the response that the Leader of the Reform party 

had to make in regards to a couple of comments made by his 

members. 

 

And then there was the president of a riding in B.C. was forced 

to respond to an allegation that what he used . . . as an East 

Indian suggested they’re looking for all-white candidates. 

There’s been a lot of media attention. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that it certainly would be 

your responsibility as well to uphold . . . And whether it’s a slip 

of the tongue, I think it takes . . . and it’s certainly incumbent 

. . . And I know even in my case on many occasions, where you 

may say something that afterwards you regret having said, you 

wished you could pull it back. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I do have a concern over an issue that arose 

last night that certainly appeared on the network. And it would 

seem to me, Mr. Minister, that it would certainly be appropriate 

as the minister to acknowledge that if a case like where the 

member from Regina South had apologized, I think a comment  

such as we heard last night it certainly wasn’t becoming. 

 

And I just . . . I’m not sure how you feel about that comment 

but I just want a response or give you a chance to respond to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I should explain that yesterday 

morning, before any of these comments were made in the 

legislature by my colleague, the press asked me about this 

incident and basically wanted me to make some comment. That 

really wasn’t what I wanted to do. 

 

But my response was that it appeared that the member from 

Regina South had intended it as a spoof. And then I went on 

and made the comment that when one goes into politics, talking 

about myself and I suppose all politics, that you can’t do that 

with a thin skin. The comment that I made at that point was in 

reference to all kinds of comments. At that point I had no 

knowledge that the Leader of the Reform Party even knew 

about the comment. 

 

Later in the day the apology came forward, which I think was 

entirely appropriate. And as I said to the press this afternoon, if 

there was any problem, it wasn’t intended by me and I 

apologize to all who may have been concerned about that. 

 

So practically, it was a situation where comments that I had 

made before an apology had been given were then played after 

the apology had been given, without any explanation about the 

timing of it. 

 

And it’s a situation that I regret because it clearly doesn’t reflect 

my position or my perspective. And I would hope that you and 

all the people here in the legislature would understand that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think you 

can certainly appreciate where we’re coming from as well. 

Because we’re out in the public and it’s easy to take comments 

and run with them. And I’m sure the member from Regina 

South is quite well aware now of the fact that you need to be 

somewhat cognizant of the public perception and what we 

would like to certainly present. 

 

And I just felt it was important that as minister responsible for 

this level and for the Human Rights Commission, that that 

should be acknowledged, and I appreciate that and I thank you. 

And I thank your officials for being here tonight. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. The recent exchange 

between the hon. member for Moosomin and the hon. minister, 

Mr. Chair, has compelled me to go back to a question that was 

raised earlier. And, Mr. Minister, you alluded to the fact that we 

develop mutual respect, we develop mutual respect with our 

electorate, and that’s the reason that we’re here and we’re 

honoured to represent the public in this venerable institution. 

 

We also develop a mutual respect for one another in this House, 

and despite the differences of opinions we still have a mutual 

respect; although people watching some of our proceedings  



May 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

would never believe that. 

 

The less than complimentary comments . . . And, Mr. Minister, 

you’d said that . . . and again, in a comment . . . and this is not 

being critical. But when I hear people say you have to have a 

thick skin to be in politics — and I agree — you have to 

develop some thick skin. But the fires of public cynicism and 

some of the comments that people make about politicians, 

regardless of how thick your skin is, does hurt. Especially when 

the motivation for being in this honourable institution is such, 

that is to represent the best interests of the people who elected 

you here and the people of the entire province. 

 

It’s saddening when you hear people have derogatory remarks 

about politicians and paint everybody with the same brush. I 

know, I’m sure, that — and I know — that you have a great 

deal of respect for this institution. You and I being relatively 

new, share that feeling in a very, very strong manner. Because I 

know that you as I do feel very honoured to be here in this 

House and be able to represent the folks that allowed us to be 

here. 

 

I guess what I’m getting to is, Mr. Minister, is I’m going to 

implore you once again to do the decent thing, as the leader, as 

the Minister of Justice, with respect to an investigation that has 

been ongoing for a number of months, an investigation that may 

or may not implicate all three political parties; may or may not 

involve some perhaps contraventions of The Election Act — 

may or may not. If it does, are people now that are viewing us 

saying, well it’s there, the investigation’s been completed, why 

is it not being revealed to the public. Why can’t the people 

know what’s in that report? 

 

If there’s something that’s going to get someone in trouble, or if 

it involved an infraction — regardless of who it is — let’s deal 

with it. Let’s not delay and fuel, continue to fuel, these fires of 

cynicism by having people respond by saying oh, they 

obviously have something to hide. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Minister, one last time, I’m imploring you to 

please perhaps pour some water on these fires of cynicism, that 

fuel the fires of cynicism. And please, you in your authority and 

your capacity, you are in a position to ask for that report 

without jeopardizing the integrity of the Chief Electoral Officer. 

I believe I heard the minister responsible for The Election Act 

earlier say in response to the question from my hon. colleague 

about the matter of babysitters, that you know people do make 

mistakes. And he also accepted the fact that perhaps fumbling 

was not the appropriate word. But human nature being what it 

is, perhaps there was an error in judgement when certain advice 

is given to people. Perhaps there was in this case. 

 

And so I guess I’m asking you, as the Minister of Justice, who 

has waited, as we all have, over almost 11 months to get to the 

bottom of an investigation that’s now done . . . The report is 

available. It does not impact — it should not have any impact 

— on whatever else is going on federally. This was a provincial 

issue, provincial matter. The people have a right to know. 

 

(2015) 

 

And I guess once again, I implore you to reconsider, to ask your 

Justice officials to reconsider the advice they gave to the 

Electoral Officer, if you or the hon. minister of The Election 

Act do not feel it proper to request that report for distribution in 

this House and for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess what’s the difference whether it’s revealed now or 

whether it’s revealed later. If it’s a matter of it’s there but we 

won’t let it go, I go back to what I said earlier — all it does is 

fuel the fires of cynicism that there’s something to hide. And I 

would hope that that’s not the case, and I’m not suggesting it is. 

 

But you do have an opportunity, sir, to come clean with that 

report or let us see it — not come clean, I’m sorry, that was the 

wrong choice of words — but to ask for the report in a way that 

will not discredit anyone that’s been involved in leading up to 

my beseeching you at this point to ask you to reconsider. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I appreciate your comments. And 

unfortunately you, by the comments that you’ve just made, have 

put onto me as Attorney General the decision. It’s not my 

decision. What my role is, is through my officials to provide 

advice and the advice given is as I stated earlier. And I am not 

the person that makes the decision, and I’m not the person 

that’s to step in there and make a request. 

 

You have a position that you can take as a member, and other 

members here can take positions, but as Attorney General I 

have a couple of different roles. When I’m acting as Attorney 

General, my role is providing the advice to an independent 

officer and that person has the discretion to make the decision. 

The advice provided through the officials from the department 

set out some of the factors that should be taken into account by 

the Chief Electoral Officer, but finally the decision is his. 

 

I’m not in a position and I don’t think that the people in the 

department are in a position to force the Chief Electoral Officer 

to release this report. And you put me in a very awkward 

position when you say that I have that power, because I don’t. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. In the 

event . . . and again now all of a sudden people speculate all 

sorts of things and this is what happens when there’s a 

reluctance to reveal certain information. It’s taken a long time 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I thank the hon. member 

from Melville for yielding the floor to the Chair. I’m listening 

very carefully to a debate that has some difficulty for all 

members. 

 

I just want to read a portion of Beauchesne’s 6th edition, 

chapter . . . or pardon me, paragraph 481. And I’ll quote it in 

part, “. . . it has been sanctioned by usage that a Member, while 

speaking, must not” . . . And in section (e), it lists (a) through 

(j), but section (e) of that ‘while speaking must not impute bad 

motives or motives different from those acknowledged by a 

Member.” 

 

And I sense that we’re skirting or flirting with this this evening.  



1742  Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1997 

And I know that hon. members would not want to be imputing 

motives different from those acknowledged by other hon. 

members. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I certainly wasn’t 

meaning to skirt around any of the issues, but this was a forum 

that would give an opportunity for some discussion with respect 

to the Justice minister’s responsibilities and how he sees them 

and as being part and parcel. If I’m incorrect on that, I 

apologize. 

 

I guess only one more comment and that’s with respect to your 

response, Mr. Minister, then. What if, as I said, what if there 

was something in that report that did identify a violation and 

it’s been delayed? What would your reaction or response be to 

that finally tabled report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think I’m able to speculate on that 

at all. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I guess that was my concern again, that that 

report that’s been under an investigation — if there is 

something untoward, should it not be dealt with as quickly as 

possible, rather than be delayed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think these questions are quite properly 

or should quite properly be directed to the Chief Electoral 

Officer, who is doing the investigation. And my role has not 

been to be involved in any part of that at all. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thanks, Mr. Minister. So I take it that there 

would be no discussion with your officials to see if they would 

reconsider the direction that they gave the Chief Electoral 

Officer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I have to reiterate that my officials 

did not give a direction. And that’s I think the difficulty here, is 

that there’s some assumption that anybody can direct the Chief 

Electoral Officer. He’s an independent officer. He has the 

discretion to make a decision. All of the advice that my officials 

gave in this area was to say, look at the various factors involved 

when you make your decision. But in the final analysis, the 

Chief Electoral Officer has to make the decision. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And thank you to your 

officials. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Committee members, earlier this day 

under Minister of Finance, loans, advances and investments, we 

passed in the Estimates book but I forgot to read the “be it 

resolved.” Can we complete that portion of business? Agreed. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Vote 146 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 167 

 

Vote 167 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:29 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1690 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................1690 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

  Lorje .........................................................................................................................................................................................1691 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1691 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Farm Units in Saskatchewan Declining 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1691 

 Macklin’s Population Increase 

  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1691 

 Cameco Walk for MS 

  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................1691 

 Syttende Mai 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1692 

 Birthday Congratulations to Liberal House Leader 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1692 

 Terry Fox Foundation Fund-raising in Northern Communities 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1692 

 Grand Opening of Human Resources Centre for Students 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1692 

 Palliative Care Week 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1693 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Child Protection Services 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1693 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1693 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1694 

 Health Information Network 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1694 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1694 

 Apology for Remarks about Reform Leader 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1695 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1695 

 Government Pension Plans’ Investment in Bre-X 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1696 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1696 

 Chief Electoral Officer Report 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1697 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1697 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Prince Albert Site of Youth Futures Pilot Project 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1697 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1698 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1698 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 



 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1698 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Finance  Vote 18 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1699 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1699 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1699 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1701 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1702 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Finance — Servicing The Public Debt Government Share - Vote 12 .....................................................................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Agriculture and Food  Vote 146.............................................................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Economic and Co-operative Development  Vote 167 ...........................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advancements and Investments  Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation  Vote 154 ..................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Saskatchewan Housing Corporation  Vote 143 ....................................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Saskatchewan Telecommunications  Vote 153 .....................................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments  Debt Redemption  Vote 175 ...............................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments - Sinking Fund Payments - Government Share - Vote 176 .......1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

 Interest on Public Debt - Crown Enterprise Share - Vote 177 ...............................................................................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan ..................................................1707 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation ............................................................1707 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense  Finance  Vote 18 ..............................................................................................................................1707 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 2  The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1707 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1707 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1708 

 Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ............................................................................................................................................................................1709, 1713 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1709 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1710 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1711 

 Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1713 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1713 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 

 Bill No. 55 — The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1715 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1716 

 Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1717 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1717 

 Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1718 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1718 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1722 

 Bill No. 48 — The Highways and Transportation Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant modification 

corrélative á la loi intitulée The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 ............................................................................1724 



 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 2  The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

 Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

 Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

 Bill No. 55 — The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

 Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

 Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

 Bill No. 48 — The Highways and Transportation Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Labour  Vote 20 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1725 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1725 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1726 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1726 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1729 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Justice  Vote 3 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1729 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1730 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1733 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1740 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense  Justice  Vote 3 ..................................................................................................................................1742 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Agriculture and Food  Vote 146.............................................................................1742 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments  Economic and Co-operative Development  Vote 167 ...........................................1742 

 

 


