



















































Hansard: April 14, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 797 

 April 14, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers. 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise and 

present a petition on behalf of people from Fenwood, Melville, 

Saskatoon, Duff, Grayson, and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — The following petitions were presented for private 

Bills and are hereby laid on the Table. By Ms. Hamilton: 

 

Of the Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District, in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And by Mr. Wall: 

 

Of The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company, the Montreal 

Trust company of Canada, and the Montreal Trust 

company in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And by Ms. Murrell: 

 

For the TD Trust Company and the Central Guaranty Trust 

Company. 

 

According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 

and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

cause the construction of a new hospital in La Loche; 

 

And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program to provide reasonable 

compensation. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, the Crown corporations accountability Act. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I give notice that I shall on Wednesday 

next move first reading of a Bill, an Act respecting the property 

rights of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a 

Bill entitled, the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

amendment Act, 1997, sessional dates. 

 

And if I may, while I’m on my feet, I’ll read notice of two more 

companion Bills. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading 

of a Bill entitled, the Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council amendment Act, 1997, duration of Assembly. 

 

And I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first 

reading of a Bill entitled, the Legislative Assembly public 

presentations Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly, my nephew John Scott, from Indian Head, in 

your gallery who is an emergency medical technician at Indian 

Head, and he’s accompanied by former schoolmate, Scott 

Miller, from Indian Head, who is working in Regina. And I’d 

ask all members to join in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my real 

pleasure to introduce to you a guest who is visiting with us, here 

in the west gallery, from the province of Quebec. His name is 

Stephen Moran. 

 

Stephen Moran was here attending the very exciting New 

Democratic Party national convention which took place here on 

the weekend. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  And he has come to join us to observe 

how the Saskatchewan legislature does its business. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, would like to draw to the attention of the 

House — and I know the members opposite would be 

particularly interested — Stephen Moran is also the candidate 

for the New Democratic Party in the Montreal constituency of 

Ahuntsic in the province of Quebec. 

 

And I would like to ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Stephen to the House here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



798  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 

the beginning of a very special week across Canada — National 

Volunteer Week. Today has been designated as Volunteer Spirit 

Day in which all volunteers are encouraged to demonstrate their 

spirit of voluntarism. Those of us who live in Saskatchewan 

witness the spirit and drive of our volunteer traditions every 

day. Our province is well-known for its community spirit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much of that community spirit comes from the 

thousands of volunteers who give their time, energy, and most 

importantly, I think, their enthusiasm to events and causes that 

matter to them. Without volunteers many community events 

might not even take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone values their time, but everyone also 

values their community. And that’s why we volunteer — so that 

others can benefit. But by volunteering, we benefit too. 

Volunteers build strong communities. Saskatchewan has a 

strong tradition of volunteering and it would be very 

appropriate if all of us in this Assembly volunteered some time 

to a worthy cause this week. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 

to make a follow-up comment to the issue I raised the other day 

about the community of Grenfell hosting the Keystone Cup. 

Yesterday the Grenfell Play-It-Again Storm certainly showed 

Saskatchewan residents and individuals across western Canada 

what they’re made of. They indeed took home the award — 

won the award for their local community. And I want to 

congratulate them on that. 

 

I also want to make recognition of a couple of volunteer groups, 

and acknowledgement of Volunteer Week. Mr. Speaker, the . . . 

(inaudible) . . . as well down at Estevan, the South-east 

Volunteer Recognition Awards ceremony was held. And Mr. 

John Mansuy was given the Coach of the Year Award from 

Kipling, and also the Kennedy-Langbank’s senior girls soccer 

team was awarded the Team of the Year Award. I want to 

extend my congratulations to these individuals. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Gail Kozun and Fred Heal 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan lost two exceptionally talented, contributing 

citizens in the recent passing of Gail Kozun and Fred Heal. 

 

Gail Roach Kozun, executive director of Egadz downtown 

youth centre in Saskatoon, died last week at the age of 49. Gail 

was born in Swift Current, and I can attest to what a great 

cheerleader she was in high school. She’s been called 

tremendous, committed, and passionate. Gail saw something 

that had to be done to improve her community and she did it. 

She made certain the street outreach program got started. She 

made certain the funding for that program continued. She made 

certain a teen parenting program, a walk-in clinic, and a literacy 

program all got their start at the centre. And the list of boards of 

directors Gail served seemed endless, from Social Services 

appeal boards, Child Find, and the Children’s Health 

Foundation, and many, many others. 

 

I know I speak for all members of this Assembly in thanking 

her family for sharing her with us. And our hearts go out to 

Gail’s husband Al, daughter Amanda, and son Paul. 

 

And Fred Heal, as all of us know was former executive director 

of Meewasin Valley Authority, passed away also last week in 

Saskatoon. He was born in your town, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw. 

His post-graduate work was in biology and environmental 

studies and he took that forward in a visionary way to complete 

some fabulous work in our province. His legacy is going to live 

on in the wonderful Wanuskewin Park. 

 

And to his children, Sherry of Calgary, Christie and Patrick of 

Saskatoon, and his long companion, Lynne Salisbury of 

Saskatoon, I want us all to extend our deepest sympathies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Student Safety Training Program Receives Grant 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have heard many 

times that today’s youth are our most important commodity. 

They will be the business people, the leaders, and the workers 

of tomorrow. Providing our young people with access to 

affordable education and skills training is an important part of 

this government’s commitment to our youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday I had the privilege to demonstrate this 

government’s dedication to young people of this province — 

despite the federal cut-backs — when I presented an $8,000 

grant to the early safety training, student support program. This 

program is administrated by the Energy Training Institute and 

Southeast Regional College for the training of youth between 

the ages of 16 and 21 who are seeking new or summer 

employment in a variety of local industries. 

 

It was local industry who initiated the fund in 1996, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is the Department of Labour that provided the 

funds with this economic boost. This safety program will enable 

students to enrol in classes designed to teach them safety skills 

that are highly valued and recognized by most industries. 

 

Having successfully completed such a program, the student will 

have an advantage in obtaining employment in a particular 

industry. Students will benefit with increased knowledge and 

skills, and industry will benefit because they will have trained, 

safety-conscious employees. 

 

This is an excellent example of how a partnership between 

government and the private sector can benefit people as well as 

industry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as my 

colleague from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley has already 

indicated, it is National Volunteer Week, and what better 

province to recognize this than within Saskatchewan. 

 

We have a long and proud history of voluntarism, dating all the 

way back to the days when this province was first settled, with 

neighbours helping neighbours for everything from building 

barns to planting fields. 

 

Times have changed but, as we move towards a new 

millennium, the volunteer spirit continues to thrive and prosper 

in Saskatchewan. From tiny communities to larger centres, 

residents are committed to devoting the time and effort to 

support these communities. The work is long and hard and 

sometimes we forget just how important these volunteers are to 

the lifeblood of any community. Without these volunteers, 

communities, and the province on the whole, would suffer 

greatly because volunteer spirit propels many communities 

forward. 

 

Volunteers raise money for much needed hospital equipment, 

sports centres, playground equipment, and other community 

needs. The volunteer spirit in Saskatchewan shines through in 

many larger events, such as Telemiracle, the Big Valley 

Jamboree, the Grey Cup, and the Scott Tournament of Hearts. 

No matter what the event, this province can count on its 

residents to come through and volunteer their time and talents 

to make every project a success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I ask all 

members to join with me in recognizing and congratulating all 

the tireless volunteers which make this province great. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Democratic Party Convention 1997 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this past weekend the Regina tourism industry played 

host to a very successful New Democratic Party national 

convention. Now, Mr. Speaker, the event was made a success in 

part by the high-quality service that was provided by Regina’s 

hospitality industry, and on behalf of all who attended, I say to 

those people in the industry, our sincere thank you. 

 

I would also like to thank the New Democratic Party organizers 

for choosing Regina as the location to hold the convention, but I 

would also like to congratulate the service industry for their 

performance. They demonstrated through their efforts that 

organizers made the right decision when Regina was designated 

as the location for this important convention. 

 

I was also personally very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that at this 

convention, Mr. Speaker, there was clearly presented an 

alternative to the Liberal “red book” which has been recycled in 

the Tory blue box. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to say that our tourism industry benefited from this 

convention. But more importantly, the Canadian people 

benefited from this convention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motorist Offers Help During Snowstorm 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, spring has 

been a long time coming. However, the cold winter has not 

dampened the goodness of the people of the Humboldt 

constituency. A Saskatoon woman hit the ditch during the 

spring snowstorm on April 1, and a Humboldt woman went 

beyond the call of duty to help her. 

 

Christine Grimard of Saskatoon was driving home on Highway 

No. 5, a very narrow highway, when she ended up in the ditch. 

A few minutes later, Ann Berg of Humboldt stopped to see if 

she could help and ended up calling a tow truck. Despite 

assurances from Grimard that she would be safe, Berg stayed 

until the tow truck arrived and Grimard was safety on the road 

again. 

 

Ann Berg has a very busy schedule, yet she took the time to 

make sure that a complete stranger was safely on her way. This 

only goes to reinforce what I have always known about the 

exemplary goodness and volunteer spirit of the people of the 

Humboldt constituency. They do care. Thank you, Ann Berg. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Entrepreneurial Development Centre Opens 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 

are continually finding new ways of demonstrating that 

partnership and cooperation works. Our partnership for 

economic renewal and growth have given our province the 

lowest unemployment rate in the country. 

 

Saskatchewan has also been a leader in reforming the ways 

governments deliver services to people, making public services 

more integrated, more accessible, and more efficient. 

 

Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, the new Southwest Centre for 

Entrepreneurial Development opened in Swift Current. This 

centre brings together various economic development partners 

in the community of Swift Current and the south-west, 

including the Southwest Regional Economic Development 

Authority. 

 

As members of this House are aware, regional economic 

development authorities are a key element in Saskatchewan’s 

strategy for economic growth. Business people in the 

south-west can come to the centre for help in creating a 

business plan or marketing strategy or to access financing or 

educational opportunities. 

 

The centre will also make it easier for new businesses to get   



800  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

started. Entrepreneurs can rent office space or receive business 

development counselling. Best of all, the centre is working in 

partnership with schools in the region to help create awareness 

among students about entrepreneurship. 

 

Saskatchewan people have learned the value of partnership and 

cooperation over the years — partnership that will teach young 

people about the virtues of entrepreneurship; a partnership that 

will provide an incubator for new small businesses in the 

south-west; a partnership for economic renewal and growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the Saskatchewan way, and it works. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Auto Insurance Rates 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

March 12 in this House I questioned the minister in charge of 

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) about reports the 

people of Saskatchewan could be facing an increase in their 

auto insurance rates. The minister indicated that Saskatchewan 

drivers would know in one month’s time if they could expect 

higher car insurance rates or higher deductibles. 

 

One month has passed since the minister made that comment. 

Will he tell this House what decision has been made with 

respect to the SGI rate increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

the member from Kelvington in the report that she is reading 

from, in my discussion with the media they’d asked me what 

was happening with insurance rates across the province. And I 

of course described for them the kinds of issues that had been 

confronting the auto fund over the last two years. 

 

I also said in that interview, Mr. Speaker, that within a month’s 

time I would have some detail from my officials — not that I 

would be making a statement anywhere to the Saskatchewan 

people or to this House, but in fact would have some 

information from my officials. To date, I don’t have that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this 

province could expect . . . should expect an answer from this 

minister as soon as he gets his information. We know that this 

government’s profits has amounted to $123 million since 1991 

on SGI. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know why, 

when the Crown is receiving record profits, why a rate increase 

is even being considered. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment in this House today that 

the residents of Saskatchewan will not face a rate increase this 

year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that, first of all, 

the member should have been consulting with some of the 

members, her members, who sit at the Crown Corporations 

review because in the Crown Corporations review, a number of 

her members had asked me about the status of the auto fund. 

 

And I clearly indicated to the members opposite what was 

happening with our auto fund. And that is, it was experiencing a 

great deal of pressure over the last couple of years. And the 

reason why it was experiencing that kind of pressure is that 

we’ve had two consecutive winters in this province where 

we’ve had major, major accidents and high costs. I’ve also 

indicated to the member that there were a variety of other 

options that we would be giving consideration to; that we’ve yet 

not had the answer to what those considerations would be. 

 

Now if the member had have been paying attention at Crown 

Corporations, Mr. Speaker, this question was answered for her 

there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Jaws of Life Operational Costs 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Liberal opposition has received a number of calls from fire 

departments and emergency response teams from all throughout 

Saskatchewan. These groups have raised concerns about the 

fact that there is a cost each and every time the Jaws of Life 

team responds to the scene of an accident. SGI pays these 

charges only when the Jaws of Life is actually used, but does 

not pay when the apparatus is not used. Mr. Speaker, when SGI 

does not assume financial responsibility, it is left in the hands of 

municipal governments or other local bodies to absorb the costs 

— something they cannot afford. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SGI explain what he plans on 

doing to address these concerns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

a very significant appreciation for what the member from 

Canora talks about, because recently at the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention, of which I was at and I believe the member from 

Canora was also at, I indicated to one of the members, I believe 

it was from Hafford, Saskatchewan, who experienced exactly 

some of the same issues . . . as does I believe the volunteer fire 

department out of Canora or one of the smaller communities 

that the member represents. 

 

The issue, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that often when the Jaws of 

Life are being called out, when they arrive at the scene of an 

accident or at the scene of where they’ve been requested to 

attend, they aren’t being used. And as a result of that they arrive 

at the location and there’s cost associated with having made that 

trip. 

 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

What I’ve asked my officials from SGI, along with the senior 

representative of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) and SARM to look at is, who should it be that 

actually makes the request to have the Jaws of Life come out, 

who will manage it and monitor that issue. 

 

That discussion, Mr. Speaker, has already occurred. There’ll be 

another discussion of that type within the next month, between 

the SARM, SUMA and my members, officials from SGI. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister. We 

understand very well and so do all of the response teams, that 

when a call occurs, especially from the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police), there is no decision that is to be made whether 

or not they go. They must attend. And when they arrive, they 

will not necessarily know exactly what their duties may be. It 

may be to use the Jaws of Life and provide that emergency 

rescue. 

 

The problem that we’re facing, Mr. Minister, is that we need a 

commitment, we need a commitment that SGI will fully fund 

the costs that a team experiences. It doesn’t matter whether that 

emergency equipment is used, there is a cost. And we have to 

have a clear definition from your department, not who is going 

to make the call — whether or not your department will fund 

those costs. Simple question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated 

to the member that on all occasions that the Jaws of Life go out, 

there isn’t a payment on behalf of SGI because there are many 

occasions where in fact the Jaws of Life, first of all, has been 

described by some of the first responders who make the request, 

weren’t required. And secondly, when they do go out, the 

question is, who is it that authorized the call? 

 

Those are the two questions that haven’t been discussed and 

haven’t been decided yet, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the reason 

why SUMA and SARM and SGI are having discussions around 

who it is who should authorize the call. In fact who should be 

paying it is part of the other question that they’re being resolved 

— whether it should be SGI who should be paying that or 

whether municipalities of some sort should be paying that. 

That’s the discussion, Mr. Speaker, that are currently being 

undertaken right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Auto Lease Insurance Surcharges 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, the number of Saskatchewan 

residents who lease vehicles is increasing at a phenomenal rate. 

In 1995, there were 22,000 leased vehicles in this province. By 

1996, this figure had increased to 28,000 — a 30 per cent 

increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government places a 20 per cent surcharge on 

insuring leased automobiles in Saskatchewan which would 

obviously bring in this government millions of dollars in 

revenue. This tax — and that’s what we see it as — does not 

exist in B.C. (British Columbia), Alberta, Manitoba. And I 

guess what we’re asking is if the minister in charge would 

kindly explain to the people of Saskatchewan why this tax 

exists in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly it’s a real 

privilege today having SGI day — haven’t had one of those for 

awhile. 

 

Well I want to advise the members opposite that the 20 per cent 

surcharge has been around for a long time. It isn’t something 

that this administration has initiated. It’s been there for some 

time. And as the member opposite indicates, that it’s time for us 

to take a look at whether or not the 20 per cent surcharge still 

actually applies in the way in which it did in the past. 

 

And part of that review that we’re doing, which the member 

from Kelvington talks about, we have included in there the 

requirement, the necessity, whether or not we’re going to see 

the 20 per cent surcharge continue to have a life, or whether it’s 

going to have . . . or we’ll use a different process in terms of 

managing that. And we’re currently doing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we continue to hear how SGI 

may be forced to pass on higher insurance rates because of its 

financial situation. We continue to hear the minister cry poor. 

Yet the Liberal opposition continues to demonstrate that SGI 

has recorded a string of profits. And SGI places taxes on 

insurance for leased vehicles, unlike other western provinces, 

and collects millions of dollars as a result of this tax. 

 

Will the minister of SGI make a commitment in this House to 

eliminate this hidden tax, a tax that might have been imposed 

by the Sheriff of Rottingham? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well. Mr. Speaker, in my previous 

response to the member from Kelvington, I mentioned to her 

that they have people who sit on the Crown Corporations who 

have asked me these very same questions. And the truth of the 

matter is that the member from Melville happens to be one of 

the members who sits on the Crown Corporations and he asked 

me this very same question. 

 

And I say to the member from Melville that there is the auto 

fund and there’s SGI CANADA. And SGI CANADA — he’s 

correct — SGI CANADA has shown a surplus this year . . . will 

show a surplus this year. But the auto fund, Mr. Speaker, is in 

some difficulty, and I explained that slowly to the member from 

Melville at the Crown Corporations — slowly. 

 

And the issue today, Mr. Speaker, is in the review of the auto 

fund rates in the province, we will be taking into consideration 

the 20 per cent surcharge — we will be taking that into account.   



802  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

But the member has to have an appreciation and understands 

that the auto fund in this province is in some difficulty. And 

we’re going to review all of the options that are available to us 

to ensure that Saskatchewan continues to have the best auto 

funds anywhere in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporation Billing Systems 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, we have heard several 

ministers in charge of Crown corporations indicate in this 

House how financially conscious and responsible our Crown 

corporations are. Some might say that these suggestions aren’t 

worth 2 cents, and I’m inclined to agree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our office recently received a copy of a bill issued 

by SaskEnergy to a Saskatchewan resident. The amount owing 

is 2 cents. Obviously the cost of mailing such a bill is far more 

than the bill itself, so one has to question the logic of this 

practice. I would like to send a copy of the bill over to the 

minister in charge of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you throw in the fact that thousands of 

Saskatchewan residents are billed on a monthly basis by our 

family of Crown corporations, one also has to question how 

much money our Crowns spend in a total to collect such small 

bills. 

 

Will the minister in charge of Crown Investments Corporation 

explain the sense in paying postage to bill a customer for 2 

cents. And what does he intend to do to address this obvious 

waste of taxpayers’ dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me say the 

knowledge of the member with respect to the billing system in 

the Crowns is worth about 2 cents. The computer systems that 

are put in place serve hundreds of thousands of customers and 

are done on a computer. They aren’t individually scrutinized by 

staff within the corporation; it’s done through an automated 

system; the bills are put out monthly. 

 

I want to remind the member opposite that it was this 

government that took the initiative to put together the 

SaskEnergy and the SaskPower bill that was separated and we 

saved tens of thousands of dollars in doing that. 

 

If the member opposite is so concerned about the 2-cent bill, I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, if that is the biggest concern that he’s 

got with respect to the Crown Investments Corporation 

allowing and tabling all of the documents today, and a 2-cent 

bill is what’s foremost on that member’s mind, Mr. Speaker, it 

really does describe and display the incompetence of the 

research staff — Mr. Melenchuk one of them — hired by that 

caucus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gun Control Legislation 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s quite a convention the NDP (New Democratic Party) had 

over the weekend. By the time it was over, they were already 

conceding defeat. 

 

But apparently the NDP think they’re going to send the Liberals 

a message, Mr. Speaker. And what is that message? The NDP 

leader wants even stricter gun control. That means making sure 

people who use guns pay a stiffer penalty, the NDP leader said. 

Obviously the NDP leader thinks it’s some sort of a crime just 

to own a gun, even if it’s used for hunting or trapping or the 

protection of livestock. She says people should pay a penalty 

just for using a gun. 

 

To the Justice minister: how can you have any credibility in 

fighting the Liberal firearm legislation when your own federal 

leader is going to be fighting for even more attacks on gun 

owners in the upcoming federal election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I think I can take from the 

question that’s received from the hon. member that he’s 

extremely upset about how successful this convention was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  And I think it’s even more telling that one 

of their red Tories joined our party with much fanfare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, our position on gun control 

has not changed. We are involved in the reference to the 

Supreme Court of Canada. We have opted out of the 

registration. The federal party has taken a position which is 

supportive of a review of this Bill C-68 legislation, because we 

all know that it doesn’t recognize the regional differences of 

Canada and the perspective that we all have brought together 

from this party. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can only 

hope that the NDP Party has more conventions like this 

weekend that end in defeat. As for the Tory, one can only say 

that he lost his head. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I suppose sometimes you can say 

you simply have a difference of opinion with your federal party. 

However, that’s going to be a little tough for you to sell that 

when one of your own MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), the former deputy premier, is the federal campaign 

chairman and the party president. 

 

So you’d think he would have . . . Mr. Minister, you’d think 

he’d have some say in what the NDP’s firearm policy is. Yet 

the NDP leader thinks people should be penalized simply for 

owning guns. No wonder, no wonder she’s already conceding 

defeat. 

 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to formally let the NDP 

leader and the new party president know that their position on 

gun control is an insult to every law-abiding firearm owner in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it appears that this 

convention may smart for that member for a long time. 

 

But what I would say about the gun control issue is that our 

position is the same. The federal NDP position is supportive of 

our position; they are saying that this legislation needs to be 

reviewed. 

 

And all of us in this House support the provisions of the 

legislation that relate to the import of illegal firearms into 

Canada. We also support the provisions that relate to the use of 

firearms in various crimes. But what we do not support is the 

registration system, which has been totally fouled up by the 

federal Liberals, and we are going to be consistent in that 

position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Patient Confidentiality 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Health. Mr. Minister, the Moose Mountain Health District 

appears to be violating the important principle of patient 

confidentiality. 

 

Without the knowledge or consent of any of the doctors in the 

district, health district staff began photocopying out-patient 

records and forwarding them to the district office. And it was 

only by chance that the doctors found out. They immediately 

voiced their concerns as they see this as a serious breach of 

patient confidentiality. 

 

Mr. Minister, medical records are supposed to remain 

confidential. What right do health boards have to collect 

out-patient records from patient files without the knowledge of 

either the patients or their doctors? Mr. Minister, is this 

something the health district is doing on its own, or have they 

been ordered to compile these records by your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, each and every health 

district will fulfil its responsibilities to the best of its ability, as 

this health district is doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe the member is referring to the article that we’ve all 

seen in today’s press. I believe that’s where he’s getting his 

information from, Mr. Speaker. And if he reads the article he 

will note, he will note that all parties in this dispute, the district 

board and the medical doctors in that community, are agreed 

that the problem here is a communication issue. A 

communication issue. It’s here, Mr. Speaker, in today’s press. 

 

So I would encourage that district and those medical doctors to 

continue to talk, continue to work together, and find resolution 

to their concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 

Health’s designate, the doctors in the Moose Mountain Health 

District see this as a serious problem. In fact they see it as a 

breach of client confidentiality. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I did meet with staff this morning — Dr. 

Botha of the head of district’s medical association. No one had 

told him the reason . . . or has told him today the reasons these 

records are being collected. No one has given him any reason to 

believe that patient confidentiality is being protected. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is a serious breach of patient confidentiality. 

And for all we know, it may be going on in other districts as 

well. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you immediately inform health district 

offices that they have no right to demand these records without 

the consent of patients or their physicians? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that 

the member may have talked to one or more of the doctors from 

the community. I wonder if this afternoon he’ll be meeting with 

the district health board or some of their officials to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  That’s your job. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No. No, Mr. Leader of the Third Party, 

that is your job. As a responsible member of this legislature, I 

suggest it would be appropriate if you speak to the people in the 

district health board who will be more, I’m sure, than happy to 

speak to you this afternoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is indicated again, it is indicated in 

today’s press that the doctors involved here have been invited to 

district health board meetings. And it is indicated also that these 

doctors have turned that invitation down, for that opportunity to 

communicate. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the solution here is with communication, 

and I encourage the doctors and that district board to speak to 

one another. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a simple 

question to the minister: do you agree that this is a breach of 

confidentiality? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I agree that that member is 

making that accusation in this House without having talked to 

the district health board. I expect, Mr. Speaker, that all 

members would try and find out all of the information before 

coming into the House with this kind of accusation. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly indicated by both sides of this 

dispute that it is a communication issue. The solution is not to 

be found on the floor of the legislature. The solution is to be 

found in communication between those medical doctors and 

that district board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



804  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

Casino Promotion 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last time I 

checked, Casino Regina was neither a campground nor did it 

offer accommodations, but that is exactly what is inferred by 

featuring the casino on the cover of the “1997 Saskatchewan 

Accommodation and Campground Guide.” This is outrageous, 

Mr. Speaker. This guide is offered at tourism locations across 

the province. 

 

And this year instead of promoting the great outdoors available 

in Saskatchewan and our many accommodations, we are subject 

to a promotion for the casino — as far away from nature as you 

could possibly get. Even the catch phrase on the front of this 

guide is misleading, Mr. Speaker. It says “Saskatchewan, 

Naturally”. Again, Mr. Speaker, the last time I checked there 

was nothing natural about a casino. 

 

Is this is the image this government wants to present to the 

visitors of this province, and is the casino and gambling our 

biggest attraction? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

that the casino is finally getting the recognition it deserves as 

one of the tourism attractions in the province. Tourism 

Saskatchewan did an independent study of the casino. They 

decided that the 1,100 jobs, all the spin-off to the hotels, the 

restaurants, the downtown businesses, the 29.1 million to the 

GDP (gross domestic product) . . . I think all of the businesses 

agree that people on their holidays like to do a variety of things, 

and certainly one of the things that people travelling — not just 

to Saskatchewan but to many destinations in Canada and the 

United States — have illustrated, that this is one of the things 

they like to do. So I am pleased that they recognized our 

contribution to that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the tourism authorities out in the 

province were appalled that we have the casino on the front of 

the accommodation and campground guide. What has that got 

to do with accommodation and campgrounds? 

 

Last year the minister stood in front of the Assembly and 

congratulated himself for paving the way for the three tourism 

groups in the province to combine. The Tourism Board 

representing the areas weren’t even consulted on the decision 

on what to feature on the front page of this guide. 

 

Mr. Minister, who made the decision to feature the casino on 

the front cover? And as well, did the casino pay for the 

privilege, or is it another case of free advertising? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can just 

assure you that it wasn’t myself or anybody else on this side of 

the House that made that specific decision. We do have a 

partnership of tourism organizations that make decisions on 

these kinds of things, and I presume you could ask them that 

question. But it certainly wasn’t ourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to get an answer . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now hon. members will 

recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena is not located 

that far away and already I’m having difficulty hearing. And I’ll 

ask all hon. members to allow the question to be put. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve tried 

twice to get an answer today and I haven’t succeeded, so I’m 

going to try a third time. 

 

Last year in the House I called on the Minister of Health to 

support a private members’ Bill to raise the awareness of fetal 

alcohol syndrome. Among other things, this Bill would’ve 

required all liquor outlets and licensed premises in the province 

to post signs warning that drinking could be harmful to the 

health of an unborn child. 

 

The minister indicated that my proposal was too simplistic and 

later issued a press release indicating that his government would 

be leading the charge with an FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) 

prevention plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with great concern, I would like to bring to the 

attention of the House the fact that even with this 

announcement there has still been nothing tangible happening. 

 

Will the minister explain why this more comprehensive solution 

to this problem is taking so long in happening? What has 

happened to the $50,000 we budgeted for last year, and what’s 

he going to do with the $120,000 he’s got budgeted for this 

year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that 

the member from Kelvington has understated the kinds of work 

that’s been done in terms of this particular issue, when clearly 

the Minister of Health took under advisement, as well as been 

implemented in this province, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues 

that the member from Kelvington talked about, in partnership 

with the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 

 

In consultation with the industry across the province, a decision 

was made, with the social policy on health, that we would not 

implement the decision about putting in the fetal alcohol signs 

into all of the hotels across the province. But what we did 

indicate that we would do with the fetal alcohol syndrome is 

that on all of the packages, on all of the bags in the province, 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming would put that insignia on it, 

making sure that people who would in fact use those facilities 

or purchase liquor from our stores would have that in front of 

them first and foremost. That decision was made. 

 

The other issue, Mr. Speaker, is there’s additional money that’s 

gone into looking at the kinds of social impacts that alcohol has 

on fetal alcohol syndrome through the committee that the 

member is speaking about. That report will find its way further 

into this Assembly and into the Department of Health in the   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

next little while. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 48—The Highways and Transportation 

Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 48, The 

Highways and Transportation Consequential Amendment Act, 

1997, be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21—The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997. 

The Condominium Property Act, 1993, governs the formation 

and administration of condominiums. The Act establishes the 

rights and responsibilities of developers, owners, and boards. 

The legislation attempts to balance different and sometimes 

competing interests. 

 

Significant changes were made to the legislation in 1993; these 

changes have now been in force for over two years. We have 

had an opportunity to monitor the results of the changes. During 

that time, we have received comments and suggestions from the 

groups affected as to how the legislation can be improved. The 

amendments being proposed by the government at this time 

respond to those comments and suggestions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will enhance the consumer protection 

features of the legislation. For example, the existing Act 

requires a developer to disclose certain information to 

prospective buyers. The amendments I am introducing today 

state that this disclosure package must include information 

about any financing the developer has obtained to ensure the 

completion of the project. 

 

Information must also be provided about how the developer 

proposes to allot extra parking spaces. Another amendment will 

clarify when the first annual meeting must be held. 

 

There are also amendments to give the developer more 

flexibility when developing and selling condominium units. For 

example, the developer will no longer be required to provide the 

specified disclosure information after the condominium board, 

made up of owners, is administering the affairs of the 

condominium corporation. 

A new provision will allow the establishment of a condominium 

register. This will be similar to the business corporations 

register. At present, there is no central place for information to 

be registered respecting condominium corporations. 

Condominium plans are registered at Land Titles Office, but if 

someone wants to contract with the condominium corporation, 

it can be difficult to determine who is a member of the board of 

directors. The government has received several requests to 

establish a condominium register. The requirements and 

procedures associated with such a registry would be established 

by regulations. 

 

This Bill will also permit regulations to be made with respect to 

agricultural units. This change recognizes that the large grain 

terminals being built and operated in this province are being 

registered and sold as condominiums. Rather than have these 

condominiums comply in every respect with the existing 

condominium legislation, which is primarily designed for 

residential condominiums, these regulations will replace or 

modify certain provisions in the Act. 

 

The majority of amendments I am introducing today will clarify 

existing provisions, fill gaps in the legislation, and generally 

facilitate the administration of the Act. For example, the 

insurance provisions have been amended to specifically refer to 

bare land condominiums. 

 

We are also adding flexibility to the procedures for 

reapportioning property taxes among owners in a condominium 

complex. The 1993 Act introduced flexibility by allowing a 

significant majority of owners to apply to the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board for a reapportionment of taxes. This procedure 

was well received and has been used by a number of 

condominium corporations. We have been asked to consider 

additional changes to facilitate this process for condominium 

owners. The regulations will provide this flexibility. 

 

The previous Act required the owners in a condominium 

complex to unanimously agree to a number of administrative 

decisions including, for example, accepting or granting 

easements relating to the condominium common property. We 

were told that unanimous agreement is virtually impossible to 

obtain. Thus for several purposes, two-thirds of the owners will 

be able to approve a change. 

 

The previous Act allowed the condominium corporation to 

collect rent from a tenant where a unit owner has defaulted in 

paying his or her condominium fees. However, the Act did not 

provide a procedure for this purpose. Today’s amendments will 

specify that a written notice must be provided to the tenant in 

these circumstances. 

 

The problems addressed by these amendments were identified 

by condominium owners, board members, developers, lawyers, 

and others using this statute. The solutions to these problems 

were also developed by these same interested parties. 

 

Government played a role in facilitating the process for 

determining which areas needed amendment. We also assisted 

with the wording of the proposed amendments. However to an 

significant extent, the Act reflects the cooperation and   



806  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

assistance received from persons representing the different 

sectors that have an interest in condominiums. 

 

There were extensive consultations with representatives of the 

Saskatchewan Home Builders’ Association, the mortgage 

lenders’ association, the Insurance Brokers’ Association of 

Saskatchewan, and condominium experts representing the 

interests of condominium buyers, owners, and managers. This 

Bill only includes amendments for areas where significant 

consensus was achieved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Condominium Property Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my pleasure to respond to Bill No. 21, The Condominium 

Property Act. 

 

While this Bill contains many amendments that are necessary in 

order to update the structure of the condominium development 

and management, there are also proposed changes that will 

bring the survey requirements in line with today’s survey 

practices and will require developers to submit more and 

specific information about their plans to condominium 

corporations. 

 

Another amendment included in this Bill will hopefully allow 

municipal governments to reduce some of their administrative 

costs. By repealing the current section of the . . . that forces 

municipal councillors to review each and every condominium 

plan, even if they don’t have any major concerns or problems 

with the proposal. More elaborate condominium plans would 

still have to be considered by the council. 

 

I understand that the cities of Regina and Saskatoon have 

lobbied hard for a change to this section. And I certainly 

support a change that will reduce red tape for all concerned, and 

will ultimately save taxpayers money by freeing up councillors 

and city officials to do more important work than have to 

review something that they know will not change their minds. 

 

Bill No. 21 also contains a new section that would force 

condominium owners to hold an annual meeting with their new 

tenants. This meeting now must come within one year of the 

complex opening. It is extremely important that the 

management and owners of condominiums be accountable to 

their tenants. Legally requiring annual meetings is an important 

step in establishing accountability, and of course, direct 

communication, which we know is so very important. 

 

However, I am surprised to see that the minister would actually 

appear to be considering the needs and the protection of 

condominium owners when the same reassessment program his 

government is bringing in may be treating these very same 

people quite poorly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ever since reassessment categories were 

announced, our constituencies offices have heard, and I’m sure 

NDP members’ offices have also heard, that the condominium 

owners are very upset about this new plan. The new assessment 

categories put condominiums at a different level than other 

residential property. 

 

Condominiums are assessed at 85 per cent of their property 

value, while other residential property is assessed at 75 per cent 

of the value. That’s a 10 per cent differential, and that works 

out to be a lot of money for many of those condo owners who 

are living on a fixed income. 

 

Many of the residents in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are 

seniors that are in condos and they haven’t budgeted for that 

kind of a drastic assessment increase, and they feel that they are 

being treated unfairly by the government’s actions in that 

regard. In fact a few have called and said that reassessment 

category for condominiums is an out and out discrimination. So 

there’s very strong feelings in that regard. They view 

themselves simply as home-owners but this government’s 

property tax policies are not treating them as simple 

home-owners. 

 

When my colleague from North Battleford questioned the 

Minister of Municipal Government on the valuation system 

during the Committee of Finance, the minister explained that 

Saskatchewan cities have the ability to apply for subclasses if 

they feel that it is necessary in order to create more fairness. I 

view this as total negligence on behalf of the government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Once again, the ill-planned and poorly designed policies are 

creating more costly problems for Saskatchewan people. When 

you are asked how to fix those problems, government simply 

passes the buck down to the lower level of government. That 

means that your valuation system for condominiums will 

certainly cost condo residents more, or all local taxpayers will 

pay more by way of added paperwork, time, and expenses. It 

simply creates more hassles for city councils to apply for some 

developments to have different subclasses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think any way you look at it, the government is 

passing the buck once again. Unfortunately the Saskatchewan 

people are ultimately the ones faced with the cost of this 

government’s own mistakes. We see it in health care, we see it 

in education, deplorable highway conditions, and the extreme 

financial pressure that this government has placed on municipal 

governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess my point is that while Bill 21 appears to 

contain some amendments that would provide better service to 

condominium residents, this government is certainly not 

applying this same philosophy to its other major policies. 

 

I also see that once again, near the end of this piece of 

legislation, the minister has included his own power to change 

regulations as he sees fit. This is just one more example of this 

NDP government taking more power over legislation out of this 

public forum and in behind closed doors. So much for open and 

accountable government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I do have a few more concerns relating to 

Bill No. 21, I will be glad to put them forward to the minister at   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

a later date. Thank you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 

some beneficial portions to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, dealing with 

condominiums and their tenants, and some of their rights and 

privileges that they enjoy and how cities and towns will deal 

with these new properties or how they’re developed, Mr. 

Speaker, how they have access and how the property is dealt 

with. But there’s also some downsides to this particular piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that I think the government needs to 

take a serious look at. 

 

Therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 

adjourn debate on this issue. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory 

Reform Act), 1997. This Act and its companion piece, The 

Miscellaneous Statues Consequential Amendments Act, 1997, 

repeal six obsolete statutes. These Acts also make consequential 

amendments to other statutes to remove references to these 

statutes. The six statutes being repealed are no longer used. Mr. 

Speaker, I will briefly describe each of the statutes that are 

being repealed. 

 

Number one, The Home Care Act. This Act was passed in 

1986. It provided a legislative base for the establishment of 

home care districts and for the funding and operation of home 

care services. Now The Health Districts Act provides authority 

for district health boards to plan, administer, and deliver 

home-based services. Therefore The Home Care Act is 

redundant and can be repealed. 

 

Number two, The Hospital Revenue Act. Saskatchewan’s health 

system has traditionally been funded by the province and 

supplemented by some local funding. Property tax levies were 

used to provide funds to enhance hospital programs and 

services, to purchase equipment, and to construct or renovate 

facilities. As well, municipalities were responsible for a portion 

of public health funding. On September 26, 1996, the Minister 

of Municipal Government announced that health and social 

assistance levies would be eliminated from the property tax 

base, effective January 1, 1997. The repeal of The Hospital 

Revenue Act is consistent with the elimination of the health 

levy from property tax. The Act is therefore no longer required. 

 

Number three, The Medical Care Insurance Supplementary 

Provisions Act. This Act came into force in 1968 for the 

purposes of the federal Medical Care Act. It stipulated the 

provincial authority for administering the medical care plan of 

the province. The federal Medical Care Act has been repealed 

and replaced with the Canada Health Act. Therefore this statute 

is redundant. 

 

Number four, The Medical Scholarships and Bursaries Act. 

This Act was passed in 1963 to provide for financial assistance 

to individuals studying medicine. The Act also provided for 

some funding for short courses, refresher courses, or research 

projects directly related to the provision of insured services. All 

obligations pursuant to this Act have been fulfilled and the Act 

is no longer used. Regulations that provide bursaries for 

students in a variety of health professions are in place. 

Therefore this Act can be repealed. 

 

Number five, The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Act. 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was established 

pursuant to this Act. In 1989 The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act was passed. It provided 

authority for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to change the 

name of this corporation. Its name was changed to CIC Mineral 

Interests Corporation in 1990. 

 

CIC Mineral Interests Corporation has been administered by 

officials at the Crown Investments Corporation since its 

inception. The Mineral Interests Corporation has been virtually 

inactive for the past number of years. Its only activity has been 

to hold the province’s shares in the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc. All but two of these shares have been 

disposed of. 

 

To save the cost of an additional annual report, auditor fees, and 

additional administration, we are proposing that CIC Mineral 

Interests Corporation be wound up effective June 30, 1997. The 

method to accomplish the wind-up of CIC Mineral Interests 

Corporation is by repealing this Act. 

 

Number six, The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. This Act 

was passed in 1947 to provide for a province-wide plan for 

prepaid hospital care. The Health Districts Act passed in 1993 

provides for the funding of health services through grants made 

to district health boards on the basis of a 

population-needs-based funding formula. As a result of this new 

funding approach, hospitals are no longer funded through The 

Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. This statute can therefore be 

repealed. 

 

However the eligibility to receive hospital services pursuant to 

The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act has been used to 

determine eligibility criteria for other provincial programs and 

services. Consequent to the repeal of this Act, a number of 

amendments to other statutes are included in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to repeal 

miscellaneous obsolete Statutes and to enact transitional 

provisions and consequential amendments with respect to 

certain Statutes being repealed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

minister’s remarks with respect to what is basically a 

housekeeping Bill that’s being introduced here. I sometimes 

hesitate to even speak to matters of redundancy because it 

frightens me to think that one day each one of us here will 

become redundant as well. And somebody may be saying the   



808  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

same thing as the minister has said about some of these statutes 

that are no longer necessary or needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those comments, having spoken to our 

stakeholders, we feel we can move this on to committee. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

that the government has recognized that there are indeed too 

many laws on the books and too many old laws that no longer 

apply, and that it’s time that they be moved off. And perhaps if 

the government was to consider something like a sunset clause, 

a lot of these things would disappear on their own or the Bills 

that remain on the books would have to be justified as to why 

they should be carried on. It would give everyone an 

opportunity to evaluate the performance of every statute that we 

have. 

 

The way we do it today is that finally somebody looks through 

the book and says, this particular piece of legislation hasn’t 

been used for the last 70 years; maybe we should eliminate it. It 

takes a long time when you’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, because 

I suspect very strongly that the members of the government 

opposite and their drafting people don’t look through all the 

statutes all that often, to determine which ones are currently 

being used and which ones haven’t been used for a considerable 

period of time. 

 

But it is good to see that the government has recognized that 

there are some statutes, some laws, on the books, some portions 

of those, that are no longer valid. 

 

It’s interesting to note though, Mr. Speaker, that some of these 

that the government is repealing deal with some of the cuts that 

have happened in this province. The municipal tax sharing Act, 

dealing with the hospital Act, Mr. Speaker . . . the government 

has taken off that portion, that 2 per cent levy that was applied 

against all municipal property, and told the municipalities, even 

though the municipalities were not collecting this directly — 

they were facilitating the collection but not getting the money 

directly — the government said, we’re taking this off. You can 

have it, but we’re cutting $17 million further out of your 

budgets. Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of benefit that the people 

of Saskatchewan get out of this particular kind of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about repealing The Medical Scholarships and 

Bursaries Act. Well I just heard the minister responsible for 

Health talking the other day about how we need to put 

something in place to encourage doctors to study and practise in 

this province. Here we had a statute that dealt with that, Mr. 

Speaker, and now the government is repealing it. They say it 

hasn’t been used for a very long time. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

maybe we need to take a look at that and give some 

reconsideration to that, on how we can use that particular piece 

of legislation to encourage more doctors to stay in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The repeal of some of the Acts dealing with the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Yes indeed the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is no longer a Crown 

entity. It’s a very, very successful privatization, Mr. Speaker, 

extremely successful. 

 

This is a company that has gone from borrowing millions and 

millions of dollars in New York under Allan Blakeney when he 

was premier, to buying up a significant portion of the fertilizer 

production around the world, Mr. Speaker, creating for itself 

and making for itself the largest seller of fertilizer and potash in 

the world, Mr. Speaker. An extremely successful privatization 

that is paying immense rewards to the province in taxes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When we look at various other portions of this Act, Mr. 

Speaker, Automobile Accident Insurance Act, various ones 

dealing with . . . such as Hearing Aid Act, Mr. Speaker, there 

are a number of stakeholders here who should have an 

opportunity to be questioned and asked whether or not these 

Acts are not being used and how they affect their particular 

area, Mr. Speaker. So I move at this time that the debate be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à certaines lois 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 1997. This Act is a companion piece to The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997. 

 

One of the Acts repealed by that Bill is The Saskatchewan 

Hospitalization Act. However the eligibility to receive hospital 

services pursuant to The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act has 

been used to determine eligibility criteria for other provincial 

programs and services. This Bill includes two of the 

consequential amendments to other statutes required as a result 

of that repeal. This will accommodate their enactment in French 

and English as the changes are being made to bilingual Bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to make 

consequential amendments with respect to certain Statutes 

being repealed. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again in 

speaking to the Bill that’s been presented by the minister, as a 

Bill to complement the earlier one and of a housekeeping 

nature, we have no further comments at this time with respect to 

this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As also in case 

of the last Bill presented, we have some concerns. 

 

I note in this particular one — it was in the previous Bill also — 

they’re changing the definition of the word, hospital. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this particular government has certainly changed the 

meaning of the word, hospital, in a lot of communities across 

Saskatchewan — over 52 of them, Mr. Speaker, they have 

changed the definition of the word, hospital. 

 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

In some of the communities, those . . . that term is now used for 

a boarded-up building — plywood over the windows. When 

you drive through those communities, Mr. Speaker, they’ll say, 

that was the hospital. It certainly has a new meaning now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In other areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, the term . . . what 

used to be called a hospital is now basically called a first aid 

station. If you’re lucky enough to find somebody in there, you 

may get some service. If that doesn’t happen to be the case, you 

will try, Mr. Speaker — try — to get to a facility somewhere 

down the road. 

 

In the health care practice, Mr. Speaker, they talk in emergency 

situations of the “golden hour.” And, Mr. Speaker, there are a 

number of places across this province where that “golden hour” 

is extremely difficult to achieve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that we adjourn debate 

on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food continues to work to 

ensure the needs of the industry are being met. Ag 2000 directs 

the provincial government to work with the industry to 

undertake changes which contribute to the development of 

family farms, diversification, and value added production. 

 

We have a growing livestock sector and opportunities to 

diversify for the . . . for the diversify for the agriculture 

community. There is, however, need to ensure that programs 

which are in place are providing the financial support and 

security needed for the stability and growth of the industry. 

 

Two such programs are the breeder and feeder associations loan 

guarantee programs. These programs enable existing and 

beginning producers who form an association to expand and 

diversify their livestock operation by providing loan guarantees 

for associations for the purpose of purchasing cattle. The 

guarantees provide greater access to credit at favourable interest 

rates with a limit of collateral requirements. In consultation 

with the industry representatives, changes to the legislation are 

being made in order to help associations resolve some 

operational issues being experienced with the programs. 

 

The proposed amendment to the Act, 1997, will: number one, 

confirm that an association is the purchaser of cattle and clarify 

under which circumstances an animal keeper’s lien can be 

applied to the association cattle; number two, clarify provisions 

for extension of repayment dates, clarify requirements lenders 

must meet for payment to be made under the guarantee, provide 

for the right of associations to enter facilities where 

associations’ cattle are kept; and finally, extend the period for 

prosecuting individuals under The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act. 

 

I ask members of the Assembly to support this Act, and 

therefore I move second reading of The Farm Financial 

Stability Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to speak on behalf of my colleagues on Bill 12, The Farm 

Financial Stability Amendment Act, especially when 

Saskatchewan’s farming communities have reached a historic 

time in terms of . . . well in fact terms of their financial stability 

or otherwise. 

 

Our communities are being pulled apart by increasing 

centralization because rural schools close, elevators and branch 

lines close. The people grapple with a whole litany of social ills 

that are brought on by this government’s administration. 

 

Under the NDP government, we are turning into a province that 

relies on gambling and liquor money to buy our way out of 

debt. We’re experiencing a division and frustration as we 

grapple with the mess the NDP made out of reassessment, 

health care, and education — all contributing factors, I might 

add, to farm financial stability or otherwise, Mr. Speaker. Rural 

municipalities are struggling under the burden of severe 

cut-backs that will leave communities in disrepair. 

 

How are the people of this province dealing with these 

changing times? Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual, we’re adapting. 

We’re dealing with them by returning to our roots of 

cooperation and initiative; I might add it’s in the true way of a 

true Canadian. We’re exercising a good deal of patience, 

compromise and understanding with the NDP government in 

this province in this regard. 

 

Farmers are coming together, just as an example, to establish 

grain terminals and to propose a short-line rail operation. 

Communities are banding together to save their schools and 

prevent the further decimation of health care in rural 

Saskatchewan. There’s a new generation of co-ops that are 

developing as global market forces make it difficult for an 

individual farmer to compete. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, 

and still be able to maintain farm financial stability as well. 

 

There’s a lot of talk about the growing economy and changing 

times. Saskatchewan’s hog industry is a prime example. The 

global pork market is growing by 6 per cent annually, and the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is moving aggressively in a 

ConAgra-like fashion into the hog business. 

 

In the midst of industry development and expanding livestock 

markets, it is necessary to re-evaluate our legislation. It is a time 

in which to clarify the rules that govern livestock production, 

but only if our objective is to enhance livestock production 

opportunities for producers in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 12 in some ways removes some existing 

uncertainty. It’s designed to sort out the rights and obligations 

of government-producer associations, lenders, and animal   



810  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

keepers, or custom operators. In other ways there’s the potential 

here for some additional confusion and red tape and could 

possibly lead to some hardship as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the legislation stands now, if a producer association has an 

agreement with a custom operator, the association cannot 

legally enter the premises where their cattle are kept. And this 

Bill will change that. But there are some custom operators who 

have some concerns that they’ve expressed with respect to the 

access provisions of the Act. 

 

With respect to the lawful access provisions under the new 

legislation, it may become possible for the provincial official or 

provincial supervisor to seize any property where the livestock 

are kept to make up for a bad debt of the producer association. 

The government, by clarifying the responsibilities under the 

guarantee, I might add the government’s responsibilities, is in a 

way protecting lenders, which are the banks, Mr. Speaker, in 

this case. But in exchange they’re placing additional 

responsibilities onto the custom operators to have to prove the 

terms of an agreement with the producer association. 

 

We have some other concerns that have been expressed to us, 

and one is related to the government’s extended jurisdiction 

with respect to this piece of legislation. In this new Bill the 

government has the final decision on approving custom 

operators. Well that could lead to the government having a veto 

power essentially over a producer association decision to deal 

with a particular custom operator. 

 

And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that goes against the 

notion of trying to expand a producer base, trying to expand 

livestock in the province, when you’re trying to regulate an 

industry to that extent. And I do add, because this government 

seems to like to govern by regulation as much as they do by 

legislation, it does become a concern for all of us. 

 

There’s no qualification in this legislation that the custom 

operator know or ought to have known he was dealing with a 

producers association’s animals. This again potentially places 

the custom operator at risk. If the Bill becomes law, custom 

operators will have to provide the province and the association 

with a written agreement, a written statement. 

 

We’d like to know: what are the guidelines for these sorts of 

arrangements? How does the government intend to inform the 

custom operators that they lose their lien rights if they don’t 

provide such a written statement pursuant to the Act and 

pre-register a lien as described pursuant to the Act? 

 

So there are a number of unanswered questions with respect to 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And we do need some additional 

time to consult further with stakeholders on these sorts of 

matters, particularly the custom operators in the province. And I 

think as official opposition it’s our duty to scrutinize the 

government Bills very closely and I think it’s in the best interest 

of these custom operators, as well as the public at large, to have 

some additional time to look into matters pertaining to this Bill. 

 

So I’d ask at this time that we would adjourn debate on this 

Bill. I would move at this time, Mr. Speaker, that we do adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 29 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan landlords have been waiting a very long time for 

this particular piece of legislation. The security deposit that 

landlords can lawfully charge tenants has not increased in our 

province since the early 1980s. Simply stated, landlords have 

been telling the government for years that $125 is simply not 

enough to cover the damage that is left behind after some 

irresponsible tenants make their getaway. These people leave 

behind a sometimes very unspeakable mess and very extensive 

damage to their rental property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s damage deposit is currently by far 

the lowest in the country. Increasing the security deposit to one 

month’s rent brings Saskatchewan in line with many other 

provinces in the country. A full month’s rent will in some cases 

still not cover the damage a small number of tenants leave. 

Seeing some of the pictures on television about some of the 

horrific sights that landlords are greeted with on occasion tells 

me that they are still carrying a high amount of risk whenever 

they rent to a tenant. 

 

However we have to be fair and equitable with the security 

deposit. We can’t have a deposit that will cover all 

circumstances, such as those when the amount of damage 

exceeds one month’s rent. That would be unfair to the vast 

majority of tenants who are reasonable and responsible people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been some in Saskatchewan who aren’t 

in agreement with raising the security deposit. They say that it 

will put too large of a burden on low income families and 

seniors who will have trouble covering a security deposit that is 

equal to one month’s rent. And to certain extent I do 

sympathize with that viewpoint. 

 

This is a large increase for some people. However the Bill will 

allow new tenants to pay the damage deposit in instalments. I 

believe this will relieve some of the increased burden all 

Saskatchewan renters will feel under this amended legislation. 

Instead of paying the full amount up front, tenants will have the 

option of paying half the deposit at the start and the other half 

within 60 days. 

 

Now there are some concerns about this. Some landlords feel 

that this will still leave them on the hook for some damages. 

Some say if they don’t get the full amount up front and there   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

are some problems with the tenant within the next 60 days, 

they’re not likely to see that second instalment. Some landlords 

feel that this instalment plan should perhaps be phased out over 

time once Saskatchewan residents are used to the larger security 

deposit. 

 

However the system as proposed in this legislation does try to 

strike a balance between the rights of the landlord and the 

monetary situation of many tenants. And despite some very 

legitimate reservations on the part of landlords about the 

instalment plan, it is still a vast improvement over the current 

inadequate deposit. 

 

I understand as well the serious reservations of those advocates 

for low income people. They say that despite this compromise, 

many will still have trouble coming up with the money to pay 

the increased deposit. Mr. Speaker, no matter how you cut it, 

tenants, low income and otherwise, will have to pay more. 

 

But let’s look at the other side of the coin. There is a terrible 

lack of rental property available in some centres in 

Saskatchewan. Both Regina and Saskatoon have very, very low 

vacancy rates for rental property. 

 

In particular, people looking for satisfactory accommodations in 

Saskatoon over the last number of years have had difficulty 

acquiring it. With vacancy rates below 1 per cent, much of the 

time apartments are becoming increasingly hard to come by. 

This puts a difficult burden on many young families, and it also 

puts a strain on the thousands of students that attend 

universities, who tell us it’s getting harder and harder to find a 

good, affordable apartment to stay in while they attend 

university. 

 

Part of the reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is that very few rental 

properties are being built in either Regina or Saskatoon. 

Entrepreneurs have not seen the rental property business as a 

good one in some time, Mr. Speaker. The return on their 

investment is simply too low to build any new units. If 

anything, this situation places more of a burden on potential 

renters than an increase in the damage deposit. 

 

As the competition for available units becomes more keen in 

our larger centres and beyond, there is a good chance that 

monthly rents will go up. For the most part, people who rent 

apartments in Saskatchewan have faced very reasonable rents 

over the years. Compare the price of a two-bedroom apartment 

in Regina or Saskatoon to that in larger centres such as 

Vancouver or Toronto. On the average one pays around $500 in 

Saskatchewan, while in our larger cities in other parts of the 

country you’re going to be paying double of that. 

 

That’s what happens when there are too few rental properties 

available to a growing number of renters. And rents are starting 

to move up in Saskatchewan as well, and they will continue to 

move up unless more apartment buildings are being built. 

 

(1500) 

 

Saskatchewan residents have been spared for a long time from 

huge increases in rent. But I’m afraid unless the atmosphere in 

Saskatchewan changes and property owners are encouraged to 

develop more rental properties, our rents will begin to become 

unaffordable to too many people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increasing the damage deposit is only one piece of 

the puzzle in encouraging more development in this area. Like 

all small-business people in Saskatchewan, landlords have seen 

many increased costs under this government. Whenever utilities 

are increased in our province, it is often the landlords that bear 

the burden. And in the coming years, landlords, like all property 

owners, will face increases in their property taxes. Some 

landlords tell us that under the government’s property 

reassessment scheme that they’re facing staggering property tax 

increases. 

 

And let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite 

continues to cut transfers to municipalities. This year both 

transfers have been cut by another 25 to 30 per cent. Since 1991 

local governments have seen millions and millions of dollars 

taken away from them by the NDP government — a 

government that decries any cuts they receive from the federal 

government but think nothing of abdicating their own 

responsibility to taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these constant cuts to Saskatchewan 

municipalities will not only mean severe service reductions at 

the local government level, but will also necessitate many of 

those municipal governments to raise their mill rates. We who 

own our homes know what that will mean for our families. But 

it’ll also have a severe impact on all those who own rental 

properties. These people will face thousands of dollars in 

increases with increased mill rates. Couple that with 

reassessment, and the financial burden will be too much for 

many would-be landlords. 

 

Increased taxes for landlords will not only mean some of their 

increased expenses will be passed along to current tenants, it’ll 

mean fewer people will be willing to develop new properties. It 

may even necessitate some current landlords taking their 

property off the market because it just doesn’t pay for them to 

continue renting. Mr. Speaker, unless the atmosphere in 

Saskatchewan changes, our very low vacancy rate will continue. 

That undoubtedly will hurt would-be renters more than the 

increase in the security deposit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we support the increase to the damage 

deposit, there are some aspects of the Bill that do give us some 

cause for concern. It’s becoming readily apparent for the last 

number of years that this government really doesn’t have much 

in the way of sympathy for landlords. The government and the 

Minister of Justice have been pulled, kicking and screaming, 

towards raising the security deposit to a reasonable and realistic 

level. And in return, they have exacted a high price from 

landlords, the vast majority of whom are upstanding members 

of the business community and very honest in their dealings 

with tenants. 

 

That price has come in a shortened turnaround time for 

refunding damage deposits and an increased bureaucratic tangle 

for landlords. Mr. Speaker, currently property owners have 10 

days to return the deposit to a tenant or return part of it with a   



812  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

detailed explanation for any part of the deposit that has been 

kept in order to pay for cleaning or repairs necessary after the 

tenant vacates an apartment or rental property. 

 

Under this legislation before us the burden on landlords has 

increased greatly. Instead of 10 days, the property owner will 

now have only 5 days following the tenant vacating to return 

the entire damage deposit. And this is not 5 working days, Mr. 

Speaker. It appears under this legislation the landlord will have 

5 calendar days to physically have that deposit back in the hand 

of their former tenant. In many cases this will simply be an 

impossibility. 

 

Landlords usually rely on a caretaker to conduct an inspection 

after the tenant has left. After that inspection is conducted, the 

caretaker must then report to the landlord. After this, there is an 

administrative process with paperwork and other details that 

must be worked out. In the case where a landlord or a company 

owns many rental units, the administrative process is all the 

more complicated. Many landlords are telling us that to have all 

of this done and then get a cheque in the mail in time for it to 

reach the ex-tenant within that 5-day period will simply be an 

impossibility. 

 

So I question whether the 10-day waiting period is in fact too 

long. Given the period of time needed for efficient mail service 

and all the other work that must be done, 10 days doesn’t seem 

out of line. Legislating a 5-day period does seem to be asking a 

little much of some, if not all, landlords in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget that the bureaucratic web 

landlords will have to go through to claim any of the damage 

deposit will become more burdensome under the legislation 

proposed as well. Not only will landlords have to do quick 

inspections in order to attempt to meet the five-day limit, within 

that time frame, they’ll now have to make application to the 

Rentalsman if they want to keep any or all of the deposit. And I 

doubt very much if the Office of the Rentalsman will be 

working weekends in order to facilitate landlords meeting this 

five-day limit. This provision just doesn’t make any sense. 

 

I agree that landlords should return the damage deposit in a 

reasonable period, but I don’t believe five days is reasonable to 

them, Mr. Speaker. Not when the onus is now on the landlord to 

make application to the Rentalsman. 

 

Some landlords tell me that what will happen in the end, if this 

five-day period does go ahead, is that they’ll have to begin 

making automatic applications to the Rentalsman for all 

vacating tenants just to ensure that they get in under the 

five-day period in case they do need to keep some of the 

deposit. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, each application to the Rentalsman that 

the landlord makes comes with a fee. If they now have to make 

application for every tenant in order to beat the five-day 

deadline, that will mean another increased cost for them in the 

terms of these fees. I question whether this is just another 

unique way the government has devised to wring in more 

dollars out of the people of Saskatchewan in the form of hidden 

taxes. 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a concern for those on Social Services. 

Many landlords are currently very leery about renting to those 

on Social Services because they’ve had trouble being 

reimbursed for damages in the past. Of course most tenants who 

are on Social Services are responsible, but again there are those 

few bad apples that do hurt the rest. 

 

While this legislation provides that the government will 

reimburse landlords for damages left behind by those on Social 

Services, again it sets up a bureaucratic tangle for many 

landlords. 

 

Unlike other people, damage deposits for people on Social 

Services will not be paid up front but rather after the tenant 

vacates and application is made to the Rentalsman. And I am 

quite confident there is no way the government will do 

landlords the courtesy of making good on the damages within 

five days. Anyone who has dealt with this government knows 

this. 

 

I am afraid this could leave Social Service people out in the 

cold. Many landlords, if given a choice between a person on 

Social Services and a person not on Social Services, will most 

likely take the person who has a job and is not dependent on the 

government. This will ensure the landlord will not have to battle 

the government for his or her rightful money somewhere down 

the line. This may make it very hard indeed for Social Service 

recipients to find decent accommodations. 

 

I don’t think this is what the government had in mind when they 

set out this rule, but I’m afraid it will be one of the side-effects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal in this piece of legislation is to find a 

compromise in terms of the interests of the landlord and the 

welfare of the tenant. I think the government has done that in 

terms of the level of damage deposit and the new instalment 

plan. 

 

However as I have outlined, I am concerned about several other 

aspects of the Bill. I believe they may do more harm than good, 

and in the end, tenants will be the losers if they are unable to 

find a suitable place to call home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be advisable for government to think 

further about the implications of certain aspects of this Bill, as it 

contains the potential for further problems to both landlords and 

tenants. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy today to have an opportunity to make some comments on 

this particular piece of legislation. 

 

We generally, Mr. Speaker, favour this legislation in our 

caucus. Obviously we should, because we’ve lobbied to try to 

get this legislation on behalf of the Saskatchewan landlords’ 

association for the past five years. In fact they were probably 

one of the first groups that attended my office after my first 

election back in 1991-92, and they wanted of course to have 

some of their problems addressed. 

 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

It has taken a long time to get their issues to the forefront of this 

government’s agenda, and so we have to say that we are happy 

at last to see that it is here. 

 

Clearly this legislation is long overdue, and we sometimes 

wonder why the government would have avoided this particular 

piece of legislation when obviously the changes that are made 

now must be good, in their opinion. Why wouldn’t they have 

been good four years ago? And obviously therefore you have to 

wonder what the agenda of the government really is. Is it to 

help the people to solve the problems or is it simply an agenda 

to try and help themselves be re-elected each time? And of 

course the latter is understandable but not necessarily justifiable 

in all actions of government. 

 

And so we would use this as a clear indication of what 

government should not be about, which is reactionary only to 

the need to be re-elected. And what a government I think 

sometimes should do is be reactionary towards the needs of the 

people and the needs of the province so that it can grow and 

expand. 

 

Clearly what has happened here is that we have zero people in 

Saskatoon . . . the tenancy rates of the building up there have 

been down to zero for a long time. Automatically economists 

would tell you that that should trigger an investment from the 

investment community, building more of those kinds of 

buildings — apartment blocks, condominiums, and that sort of 

thing. That hasn’t happened. Why hasn’t it happened? Clearly 

because there must be an investment opportunity for those 

dollars that go into that type of facility somewhere else. 

 

So when we did our research, when we were attempting to 

lobby the government on behalf of these organizations, we 

found clearly that we were once again out of sync with our 

neighbours and in fact there was a flight of capital from 

Saskatchewan into Alberta. Those dollars that normally are 

spent in this kind of living accommodation were of course 

fleeing to Calgary, Edmonton, and places like that. And then we 

asked the question, why? And obviously the answer had to 

come back that it was a better investment climate for them. 

 

And the reason was that the particular kind of legislation that 

we’re looking at here today was already in place in Alberta. 

And the landlords of course clearly had that opportunity to 

invest in an atmosphere where they could have their dollars 

treated with some dignity. And we have said to the government 

for a long time, if you can clearly see that the province is out of 

sync, why not get at it and get it done? 

 

The underlying current here is that it takes time for this kind of 

legislation to affect society. It takes time in that, even though 

you now are on a level playing-field and you get this province 

in sync with Alberta, investors are a wary bunch and of course 

they’re a little slow to move. And so it’s going to take some 

time for them to accept the fact that these changes are real. 

 

It’ll take some time for it to get through the system so that they 

will understand that it’s there. And it will also take some time 

for them to line up contractors and to get land development and 

that sort of thing into place. And realistically what you’re 

looking at here is an improvement in the housing numbers only 

happening probably two years from now in a place like 

Saskatoon where you have the zero rate. 

 

So that is one of the things that makes us wonder, is this timed 

only for the next election so that we suddenly start to have a bit 

of job boom in Saskatoon about the time of the next election 

being called, or was this a genuine need to try to help people? 

And so we question the government’s motives. But we don’t 

question the need for this legislation and we do encourage the 

government to complete this task and to continue with it. 

 

It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that things had to go so far that 

we had to have a landlords’ strike in order to demonstrate the 

need for this kind of legislation. We believe that this problem 

could have been addressed without those kinds of drastic 

measures having had to be taken. 

 

And we do endorse the Bill and we congratulate the 

government for at last having done this particular job that needs 

to be done here. We feel that it is a fair Bill that will provide 

balance to all of the parties involved. 

 

We feel that it will provide a balance for landlords who have 

faced the results of damaged properties. We’ve seen all kinds of 

accounts on television, some in the newspapers, over the last 

few years. We don’t think that those kinds of extreme measures 

were necessary in order to demonstrate the need for this 

legislation. However they did happen; they were a reality. 

 

And we are happy though that the government has seen the 

other side of the issue, which of course is that the tenants also 

need to have some protection in society as well. We believe that 

there is some of that balance in the legislation. 

 

We are of course going to ask questions of the minister as we 

get into the discussions later on in the democratic process here. 

As we get to ask questions, get answers on a back-and-forth 

basis, we will be making sure that what we assume to be there 

is there. And we want to have both sides obviously protected in 

both of these situations. 

 

(1515) 

 

So we were particularly worried about the social assistance 

aspect of this problem. Naturally Social Services has a great 

burden in terms of providing housing for a lot of people in our 

province, people who don’t have the wherewithal to find their 

own housing or to build their own. Social Services assists 

greatly in that area — that’s a need in our society that we accept 

as the role of society. 

 

Unfortunately there were some areas there where there wasn’t 

accountability on the part of those tenants that fell into that 

group; that some of that is being addressed and Social Services 

is taking on some of the responsibility. That responsibility, we 

believe, will be transferred back to the tenants who are in some 

cases — not all obviously — but in some cases they are not 

good corporate citizens, not good citizens in society. I guess not 

corporate, but not good citizens in society. They have a 

tendency to be destructive of other people’s property. And   



814  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

while that’s probably less than 1 per cent of that total 

population, the reality is that we have to cope with that. 

 

And if business people are faced with those kind of extra losses, 

often they will seal off that availability to all of the people in 

that particular group. And that wasn’t fair either. But it was a 

natural . . . it’s a human thing to have happen. And we are glad 

that that is being addressed, because it needed to be a thing 

that’s straightened out in order to provide good housing for all 

of the people involved in our society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I guess in conclusion we will say that we are 

satisfied with this Bill being in the right direction, and as we ask 

our questions, we’ll reinforce that. If we find a problem, we will 

attempt to correct it through amendments at that time, or 

whatever else is necessary. But we don’t think that’s going to 

happen. It looks like it’s not too bad. 

 

So we think we will let this go on to second readings and . . . or 

it won’t have to stay in second readings any longer; it can 

progress. And so we will not move to adjourn or anything, and 

we will do nothing more to hold this up. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 23 — The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act/Loi sur 

l’exécution des jugements canadiens be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll only speak briefly 

to Bill 23 today as it appears to be quite a non-controversial 

piece of legislation regarding our justice system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 23 appears to do some work towards getting 

all provinces on the same page in terms of the enforcement of 

civil judgements from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. I understand 

the changes that are proposed in the Bill stem from a 

nationwide conference which had as one of its main purposes, 

crafting some rules that would make it easier to enforce civil 

judgements between different provinces and territories. 

 

A Bill like this does seem to make sense, Mr. Speaker, in that it 

seems ludicrous that it would be possible for some people to 

escape their duties under civil judgements against them, simply 

by going to another province. And if they can’t escape from 

their obligations under the law completely, they can certainly 

slow down the process to a crawl, forcing new hearings to take 

place in their new province of residence. It’s ridiculous to think 

that in one nation such a thing is possible. 

 

The issue of provincial jurisdiction is an important one. 

Provinces do have rights and responsibilities separate and apart 

from the federal system and other provinces and territories. And 

we must respect those powers. However, it’s positive that these 

10 different provinces and 2 territories can get together from 

time to time to hammer out a system like the one proposed 

before us today. 

 

It is a better system for Canadians. And the fact the legislation 

was crafted under the terms of this conference and will be 

basically identical in every province, is a good thing in my 

estimation. We are, after all, one country. Simply moving to 

another province should not be available to a person to get out 

from under the ruling of any civil court in the country. But the 

positive effects of this Bill will not be fully realized until all the 

provinces get on board. I understand Saskatchewan is only the 

third or fourth province so far, to bring this Bill before its 

legislature. Others hopefully will follow suit shortly. 

 

Under the legislation that was produced by the uniform law 

conference, judgements are recognized from province to 

province, and sets out terms to avoid having to actually re-try a 

case in another jurisdiction. This helps to streamline our 

overburdened legal system. Mr. Speaker, anything we can do to 

speed up the legal processes in our country should be done, be it 

civil law, as is the case here, or criminal law. 

 

We have to ensure our legal system keeps moving ahead and I 

think this piece of legislation will help accomplish that. It will 

allow civil judgements to be registered in different provinces. 

That’s not really the case at the present time, where 

enforcement of judgements in different jurisdictions is difficult 

and unreliable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of limits placed on the 

enforcement of judgements from province to province however. 

According to the minister, one of those reasons is public policy. 

We’ll want to know just what those public policy reasons could 

be. The minister’s words do seem to be a little hazy on this 

count and we’ll have some questions regarding that and some 

other aspects of the Bill. 

 

The Bill, like most others brought in by the government, also 

sets out provisions for regulations. We’ll want some assurances 

from the government that the government public policy reasons 

and its right to make certain regulations pursuant to the Bill will 

also be done in consultation with other provinces. After all, 

what good is a Bill like this if government policy and differing 

regulations undermine its effectiveness. So we will also have a 

number of questions in this area as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly simple piece of legislation, but it’s 

also a very important piece of legislation. It’s also a piece of 

legislation that sooner or later will be in place in all provinces 

of Canada, and we hopefully believe that will happen. This will 

make our legal system more sensible and will work more 

effectively for more people. And once again, any time we can 

accomplish this, it can only be a good thing, Mr. Speaker. Any 

further clarifications we will be able to follow through during 

the normal process. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

make a few comments as well to Bill No. 23, The Enforcement 

of Canadian Judgments Act, before we allow this Bill to move 

into committee. Some of the other members have already 

indicated that there are a number of issues that I think when you 

take a clear look at it, the fact that we’re looking at   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

interprovincial — I guess if you will I’m going to use the word, 

trade . . . but the fact that interprovincial boundaries are coming 

down is certainly something that’s quite important. 

 

While this is a non-controversial Bill which improves the way 

in which legal judgements are enforced between Canadian 

jurisdictions, it’s taken a time to arrive at this point. And I 

understand that to date the somewhat . . . this Bill as such, has 

passed in the legislatures of British Columbia and Prince 

Edward Island. It’s a Bill that has been recommended by the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada. And as has been 

indicated, it’s a Bill and a piece of legislation that other 

provinces will be bringing forward and certainly will be 

implemented across Canada. 

 

I think it shows the cooperation that can be achieved between 

provinces. And I think that’s very important, especially when it 

comes to a Bill of this nature dealing with justice. It’s a piece of 

legislation that improves the administration of justice either on 

the criminal or civil side, and it’s certainly of interest to our 

caucus. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think as well we’re mindful today of the 

young people from this community that have put their heads 

together, concerned about the way that they feel society may 

look at young people as a result of the Young Offenders Act 

and a number of the problems that have arisen in this city, and 

the fact that they’re in Ottawa today dealing with . . . or hoping 

to meet with the federal minister or certainly federal members 

of parliament regarding some of the suggestions and views they 

have regarding the Young Offenders Act. 

 

I think that a Bill like this will certainly open up the door for 

better dialogue, if you will, between jurisdictions in Canada to 

arrive at a more fair means of addressing criminality in our 

country, to addressing judicial issues, and making sure that the 

interests of individuals, be they innocent individuals 

specifically, are certainly adhered to and everyone is treated 

fairly. 

 

So I would see by the Bill, Mr. Speaker, that while it’s quite 

non-controversial, that I don’t believe there’s any point in 

slow-walking or slowing the movement of the Bill, and not 

proceeding with it, I think it’s important that we get into further 

debate and address some questions in committee. And I just 

want to thank you for having had a moment just to raise the 

issues that I’ve raised and we look forward to further debate and 

discussion as we enter the stage of debate on this piece of 

legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 

Today I’m joined by Ernie Lawton, the acting secretary of the 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat; Donavon Young, the 

assistant secretary of Metis Affairs; and John Reid, the 

executive director of policy and planning. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 

minister and her officials. It’s certainly a pleasure to enter into 

debate on Indian and Metis Affairs estimates and the number of 

issues and concerns that are certainly in the works right now. 

 

And I guess I’m going to bear right down on one of the main 

issues that arises out of my area, and it’s probably an issue 

that’s throughout the province. And it’s regarding a recent court 

ruling that has given the Metis the same hunting privileges as 

the aboriginal community across the province of Saskatchewan. 

And I know that a number of people are quite concerned about 

this. 

 

I think in some ways the concern arises from the fact of the 

process that is being used and whether or not some of the Metis 

community may be, if you will, abusing their rights at this time 

versus what the aboriginal community has shown through the 

years and how they’ve . . . Well people would complain about 

aboriginal hunting and the fact that they can hunt basically all 

year, and some of the styles. I think in most cases most 

individuals in the aboriginal community, and I would suggest 

even the Metis community, certainly have a lot of respect for 

wildlife and give serious thought and consideration to hunting 

privileges. 

 

But first of all I guess what I would like to ask, Madam 

Minister, is: the government had earlier on, when the laws had 

changed and the law had been struck down that allowed . . . 

opened the door actually to Metis hunting, the government had 

indicated that they were going to appeal the ruling. And I’m 

wondering, Madam Minister, if you can indicate to us today 

where you are regarding this current ruling — whether it is 

under appeal and what’s being done. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you. Yes it is under appeal at the 

moment. I just want to clarify that the only hunting and fishing 

rights that are in question here are subsistence rights — that’s 

essentially for food. And I just wanted to clarify that. But it is 

under appeal and we’re going to continue along that path until 

we get a more definitive legal opinion. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Madam Minister. And, Madam 

Minister, while you may be clarifying that with you and I, and I 

think a lot of people may be aware of that, I believe in the 

aboriginal community that has been the reason they have been 

given and were granted that right to hunt, was for food. 

 

The concern that many people have though is they . . . When 

you have people, especially I note towards the Manitoba-side of 

my constituency . . . there’s been some complaints that have 

come to my office about the number of hunters . . . or the 

number of shots that have been fired. And people have, I guess, 

had even some fear of the fact that there just seems to be some   



816  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

indiscriminatory hunting at times, and they’re wondering 

whether or not they should allow even children out into yards 

because of the fact that when the door was opened . . . The fact 

is we were probably dealing with individuals who weren’t 

really from the area. 

 

(1530) 

 

And I think most people when they go hunting, most hunters 

when they go hunting like to take note of the surroundings that 

they’re working in, that they’re hunting in, to make sure that 

they’re not putting individuals at risk — say there’s a farmyard 

over here or there’s one 2 miles over and it’s that direction. And 

I think the feeling that I got from a number of callers is that in 

some cases they weren’t quite sure, or felt that individuals that 

were out hunting were not familiar with the surroundings and 

shots would be fired. There was a fear that there was quite an 

indiscriminate — I don’t want to use abuse — but 

indiscriminate use of firearms and the feeling for their safety. 

 

And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what the department is 

doing to address these concerns and to make sure that indeed 

the hunting that is taking place at the current time by Metis, is 

following the rules that are in place, and that they are hunting 

for subsistence or to provide food for themselves. What’s the 

department doing in that matter? And how is the department 

also monitoring to make sure that Metis hunters are quite well 

aware of the surroundings and are making sure that they’re 

keeping the safety of other individuals in mind as they go out 

hunting. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The involvement of Indian and Metis 

Affairs in this issue is really only as it pertains to questions of 

rights. Issues of hunting safety and those kinds of issues are all 

matters that the Department of SERM (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management) is responsible for. So 

it might be best to raise those questions again with them. 

 

But all I can say is that the rights question does not negate the 

safety issue, and all the safety provisions that normally apply in 

the province should be in effect on this. But again, like I say, 

our only involvement in this issue is on the rights issue and on 

the appeal. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think, Madam 

Minister, we should also acknowledge the fact the Metis 

association of Saskatchewan have come out, they’ve raised 

some questions and I firmly believe that indeed when leadership 

in any community, whether it’s the aboriginal community or the 

Metis association, would question how individuals use their 

rights in hunting laws, that they would certainly want to pass on 

to them that those rights do not give them an open season if you 

will; that they have to follow certain rules and guidelines. 

 

And I guess what I would like to say is I certainly commend the 

Metis association for their stand and for coming out and 

pointing out the fact that they didn’t want to see abuses, 

because certainly it then would be reflected upon their 

community. And I think they want to build a good working 

relationship with other people across this province. 

There has been a rumour floating around as well, Madam 

Minister, and whether this comes under your department or 

whether it comes under SERM I’m not sure, but the fact that 

there may be even out-of-province hunters coming in, hunting 

under the privileges of Metis hunting. And I’m wondering, 

Madam Minister, whether indeed there might be some truth to 

this, whether or not there has been cases of out-of-province, and 

what is being done. Like I say, this may fall and move into the 

SERM as well, but I’m wondering if you can give a response to 

that, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Two things really: I’ll clarify first of all 

that the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan is concerned also about 

these issues that you raise and I think is meeting on a regular 

basis with SERM on these issues. But under the Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement, the rights provision does 

include cross-border rights. So if people are doing this, it would 

certainly be within the present ruling that the court has laid out. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister, because I wasn’t 

totally aware of that — so I appreciate that. So when the 

question is raised, I can indicate that this is an area where we do 

have some agreement in cross-border shopping or, if you will, 

cross-border whatever, and that indeed if someone were to 

come and . . . Being as I’m on a border community and border 

constituency, we tend to see that more than you would in the 

central part. And I certainly can inform individuals that that 

person would certainly have that right and that privilege based 

on the interprovincial agreements. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m just wondering where we’re at with 

regards to specific land entitlements. And is there . . . have we 

seen a number of land transactions over the past year regarding 

specific land entitlements? How many pieces of property? At 

what value? And at the same time, the question out there is the 

problem regarding taxation, and I would like to know what your 

department has been doing to address this concern that’s been 

raised by SARM over the last few years. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  First of all I’ll give you an update on 

the specific claim settlements. There’s currently nine in 

Saskatchewan, providing first nations with approximately 61 

million to purchase 121,472 acres of land to attain reserve 

status. Now of that amount, 43,011 acres have attained reserve 

status. So we’re about a third of the way completed on that 

particular package. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Okay. Did you want to respond to the last 

question? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Sorry about that, I knew you’d asked 

another question. It’s on the tax loss compensation. Well you 

were at the SARM convention, so you would know that that 

was certainly a matter that they were raising both directly with 

the federal government and in cooperation with people like 

yourself, the members of the opposition, and our own 

government. 

 

Now one of the, I guess, complicating features is there’s really 

two parts to the discussion. Part is the part that affects SARM 

directly and the other part is the part that affects schools and   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

school divisions. And really the only part of the discussion that 

SARM has been involved in has been the part that’s particular 

to concerns of rural municipalities. 

 

I do believe there have been discussions very recently and that 

there have been some improvements in the offer, certainly not 

as good yet as we were hoping, but there still is some 

unresolved loose ends as far as how it would affect other people 

like the school boards. 

 

So we’re still working on it. We’re hoping to achieve a 

resolution, at minimum a compromise, if not being able to get 

everything that we had hoped for. And I’m just hopeful we can 

resolve this within the next few weeks. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, am I correct in stating that the 

whole tax question basically is something that falls under 

federal jurisdiction and that your role as far as the province, is 

basically standing and supporting SARM and the problems 

they’re having and trying to address it to make sure that there is 

a fair settlement, that the federal government is aware of the 

problems. 

 

Because I think, Madam Minister, you’re aware — or you will 

be aware and I know the Minister of Highways is going to be 

aware — of the fact that it’s not just the educational component, 

but certainly it’s the fact that there’s more goods going to be 

travelling on our roads. And as more and more land acres are 

swallowed up through treaty entitlements and specific land and 

claim entitlements and these roads are going to have to be 

maintained and there isn’t a dollar value there, it’s an issue 

which down the road may fall into the lap of the provincial 

government. 

 

And so I think it’s quite imperative that your department, 

working in conjunction with other departments in the province, 

certainly work, do the best you can in making certain that the 

federal government is aware of the multiple problems that will 

and can arise as a result of more land being eaten up through 

these entitlements and agreements. 

 

And I would just like to know, Madam Minister, exactly what 

has been done to date. I know you’ve mentioned you’ve been in 

discussion, but maybe you could give us a little more of a 

background as to where you’re going, where you hope to be at 

the end of the day. And I think you made a comment just a 

moment ago, you’re working for the best that you possibly can. 

 

From the last I’ve heard, it seems to me the federal government 

is backing off some of the original commitments as to where 

they thought they might be regarding settlements as far as dollar 

values; so that there’d be some appropriate funds available to 

address the questions and concerns out there. 

 

So I’m wondering if you could update us, Madam Minister, on 

what has transpired to date, where we are today, whether or not 

there are any meetings coming up in the immediate future to 

address the ongoing problems. 

 

Certainly the upcoming federal election may put that off for 

awhile, but I think it’s an issue that certainly can be raised 

during the federal election. I’d be surprised if political parties 

don’t grab that and don’t — especially in areas like 

Saskatchewan and Alberta; I think Manitoba to a degree as well 

— don’t raise that issue because it is something that, as 

taxpayers, is going to end up becoming a responsibility for us if 

the federal government certainly doesn’t address its 

responsibility in this area. 

 

So I wonder if you could just bring us up to date on that, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess I would just start by saying our 

whole goal in the treaty land entitlement process and the 

specific claims that Ottawa, as you characterize it correctly, are 

directly responsible for specific claims; they’re not a 

responsibility of the province. What our goal has been in this is 

to resolve a lot of historic and long-standing issues about 

agreements that were made, I guess a long time before any of us 

were on the scene, but certainly they were agreements between 

governments existing at the time. 

 

The other comment I want to make is when you look at the total 

amount of land involved, at the end of the day it’ll represent 

about 2 per cent of the land mass of Saskatchewan. And I say 

that just to put it in perspective a bit because people, when they 

hear these acreages and what not, who aren’t used to thinking in 

terms of acres, may think this is a great deal more land than it 

is. And it is a significant amount of land, but it is about . . . it 

will at the end of the day be about 2 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

land base. 

 

We’ve certainly been concerned about this issue because, while 

we all live together, and reserves of course border on RMs 

(rural municipality) and on other communities, and we just feel 

that it’s going to set a very bad tone for community relations if 

the federal government does not follow through with its 

responsibility to make up this tax loss. 

 

So again, we work very closely with SARM on this. We would 

not take any unilateral action without their involvement. And I 

certainly have been working closely, keeping everybody 

informed, and at the end of day we’ll tend to go with their 

wishes regarding whether they consider this to be an adequate 

compensation. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I certainly 

would also like to commend the SARM delegates and certainly 

their board of directors for the initiatives they’ve taken as well 

in addressing this question because it’s . . . like I say, it’s an 

issue that basically hits them directly to start off with, but down 

the road, if it isn’t . . . if there isn’t a proper resolve, it certainly 

can affect all of us as taxpayers. 

 

Madam Minister, you also mentioned that if you put the land 

base into perspective, and it represents roughly about 2 per cent 

of the actual land base of the province, the facts are, even in the 

area that I represent — and I look at a number of sales that have 

taken place over the last two years — I would think people 

would say that 2 per cent is awful low compared to the number   



818  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

of acres. Because we’ve seen it in parcels around and there 

aren’t a lot of other free acres. The problem is it’s a parcel over 

here, and then there’s maybe a 4- or 5-mile stretch and then it’s 

another parcel over here. 

 

And that’s where the problem is starting to arise for 

municipalities, is that you . . . In building roads you’ve got an 

area that may run through what eventually is going to have 

reserve status on it and then you’ve got areas that have 4 or 5 or 

6 miles of road that is municipal road and then you’re into 

another reserve base. 

 

And I think even in the . . . Along the Qu’Appelle some of the 

reserves are now looking at even looking a lot more — if I can 

use the word, seriously — at trying to actually buy properties 

that are right adjacent to the reserve, which makes it a lot easier 

to work with. And certainly makes it, I think as far as the public 

out there and even RMs, is a lot more compatible for people to 

swallow and accept the fact. And there isn’t anyone that I’m 

aware of that would certainly feel that the aboriginal 

community should not have their treaties finally resolved and 

recognized and that they should not have access to property. 

 

So I think the more that the reserves and the leadership within 

the reserves looks and takes a serious look at buying property 

adjacent to the reserve rather than 10 miles away, 20 miles 

away, 5 miles away, and little small parcels all over, I think it’s 

certainly . . . it speaks well to the local community. And I think 

they create even a better love relationship — I guess if I can use 

that term — between communities, amongst communities, just 

by the fact that they have consolidated their reserve and looked 

at ways in which they can utilize their reserve or this funding 

more appropriately and basically meet the needs of individuals. 

 

I think at the end of the day as well, Madam Minister, if I 

understand correctly in chatting with some of the aboriginal 

community that I have over the past few years, there are 

certainly a lot of . . . A lot of the local reserves are taking a lot 

of incentives and initiatives to try and address some of the 

problems, especially in the area of unemployment; especially in 

the area of poverty, and I see some of the initiatives being taken 

on some of the local reserves. 

 

I know the White Bear Reserve, while someone might look at 

White Bear and say well it’s a casino, it’s their . . . it’s the 

means to provide all the funding they need to look after their 

community. But I think I look beyond that. I look at an issue 

that basically came to play about even seven or eight years ago 

and the development of oil on the reserve; that, from talking to 

some of the leadership, I can see where the leadership 

themselves are looking at ways and alternative methods of 

providing for their people rather than relying on governments 

per se well on to the near future and expecting someone else to 

also to look after them. 

 

I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what your department is 

doing in talking to local leadership or leadership within the 

province about assisting them in trying to meet some of the 

needs they perceive out there as to how they look after . . . how 

they provide. I think for far too long too many people see the 

welfare system as a means that’s been the only way that many 

people in the aboriginal community could subsist. 

 

I would suggest to you that even amongst the aboriginal 

community, there are people who would like to get off the 

welfare system, welfare rolls. And I’m wondering if your 

department is looking into or working with or even offering 

suggestions whereby many of the reserves could find other 

methods of, say, deriving income and providing for themselves 

rather than looking to either the provincial or the federal 

government, through government programs, to provide for the 

needs of their community. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well that’s a big bunch of stuff all in 

one question, but I’ll try to give a bit of an overview, and then if 

you have more specific questions, we could get into those. 

 

I guess first of all, just some of the problems you alluded to that 

are created by a patchwork quilt of communities, and what 

we’re finding around Saskatchewan is that necessity is indeed 

the mother of invention, and that as these kinds of situations 

develop communities are finding ways to come together and 

come up with servicing agreements and other types of 

agreements that are resolving some of these problems. 

 

I mean we’ve dealt with things like road issues, occupants on 

Crown land, Forest Management Licence Agreement, water 

rights projects; there’s conservation and development area 

authorities, school divisions. So there’s a large number of 

interests that have to be considered, and one of the roles that 

SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat) 

plays in some of the agreements is to facilitate the discussion, to 

make sure that we’ve got the appropriate people to be able to 

solve the problem. 

 

But if we do encounter problems that seem insurmountable 

under the current processes, we then have to look, I guess, at 

what we need to do to improve the processes to continue to 

have a harmonious state of affairs in Saskatchewan. 

 

As far as the White Bear example that you use, my recollection 

is that they had a golf course before they had a casino, and a 

number of other businesses on White Bear. And I certainly see 

a very positive development recently being the establishment of 

the First Nations Bank, because of course probably in any small 

town the two first buildings that would have gone up probably 

would have been the bank and the church. And certainly the 

ability for people to access banking services and investment 

advice are an important part of the development of an area. 

 

So I think as first nations people have more access to these 

kinds of professional services, we’re going to see I think, a very 

rapid improvement in the whole investment activity that’s going 

on in that community, especially as more dollars become 

available through the TLE (treaty land entitlements) process. 

 

Also if you look at how people are moving forward in the first 

nations area with various government departments, as well as 

having a relationship with SIMAS, the first nations also have 

relationships with every department of government. So whether 

it’s mining, or forestry, or curriculum, or the tourism agreement 

with Economic Development, or the service delivery   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

agreements with the Department of Social Services, health care, 

other areas, I would say there’s such rapid movement going on 

on all fronts that really our biggest concern should be education 

and how we’re going to make sure that everybody’s got the 

skills they need in order to keep up with this very rapid 

movement in the area of jobs and economic development and 

service delivery.  

 

To me that’s a bigger concern at the moment than the 

development side. They seem to be coming. The problem is 

making sure there’s enough people in place with all the 

particular skills. 

 

In aid of that, SIMAS has an employment development 

program where we’re actually going in directly and working 

with employers to make the links to both Indian and Metis 

educational institutions, but as well to the community colleges 

and the universities to help get the training in place to make 

sure that people have access to the jobs that are being created 

and the jobs that exist already in large workforces like the 

health sector. 

 

But also under those agreements, one of the side bar things 

that’s going on is they’re sitting with their procurement officers 

for the health districts and looking at what some of the 

procurement opportunities might be as far as providing goods 

and services to health districts that are normally . . . now some 

of them are purchased out of province and in other places. 

 

So it’s really looking at opportunities for jobs, for economic 

development, and then making sure that the corresponding 

education is in place to make that a successful experience in 

whichever particular sector the agreement’s signed with. Most 

of our agreements at the moment are in the health sector, but 

we’re also developing agreements with other major industries in 

the province which, because we’re in a partnership, I don’t feel 

free to announce until we’ve both signed our name to the paper. 

But it’s something that’s been working very well as far as 

accessing people to the existing jobs and economy. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

you’re quite right, White Bear’s golf course was there long 

before the casino. And while I haven’t been able to have the 

privilege of golfing on it since they’ve completed the back nine, 

I understand it’s . . . from what I saw of the front nine, if the 

back nine is anywhere as interesting a course, it’s an interesting 

course to certainly golf on. But it’s the . . . Sounds like the 

Labour minister’s been out there and has enjoyed golfing there 

as well. 

 

And there are other initiatives. Certainly north of Broadview we 

have Last Oak, we have the ski hill, we have a golf course out 

there as well. And what I find interesting, Ochapowace Reserve 

I believe is involved in a hotel development in town here. They 

are getting into Wagu cattle — working with a Japanese firm to 

see if they can develop the grazing of Wagu beef in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I find it interesting. 

 

I haven’t had the privilege of actually taking a look at it yet. It 

seems to me, I’m not sure, Madam Minister, if you’ve even had 

the privilege of having some barbecued Wagu beef, but I 

understand it’s actually pretty good. And one of these days I’ll 

get out there and hopefully they’ll have some available. 

 

But I guess what I was really wondering, Madam Minister, 

what role your department takes when it comes to economic 

development initiatives reserves may come with. Or do you 

leave that strictly to the Department of Economic Development, 

or as a ministry do you get involved in trying to give reserves 

some information that . . . and put them in touch with 

individuals or departments that would certainly assist them as 

they would look to design or develop ideas that may have been 

brought to their attention or they’ve been working on? Ideas 

which, in the future, will develop into job opportunities for the 

young people. 

 

And I’m just going to, before I sit down, just mention I think 

just recently there was a signing of a document, or not a 

document but an agreement, that I believe it opens an avenue 

for post-secondary education. I’m not sure — correct me if I’m 

wrong — but it seems to me, and I’m just going by what I 

remember of the news regarding, I think it was the aboriginal or 

was it the Metis community on an educational program, I 

believe through SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology), to open up the doors for other 

educational opportunities. And I just don’t have all the details 

but I . . . (inaudible) . . . remember seeing that. 

 

So I guess what I’m saying is, Madam Minister, what does your 

department do to facilitate areas in which reserves feel they can 

certainly not only educate their young people but also provide 

job opportunities through economic development programs or 

initiatives that they feel would be workable on the reserves? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well again this is a big question. We do 

largely work in a facilitative role, making sure people get in 

contact with the right people. For example, in discussions 

around telephones, making sure that the right people have met 

with people at SaskTel. You know, they’ve opened their first 

nations call centre. So largely our role is just facilitative, and 

once they’re hooked up with the professionals in a particular 

area, then that’s the relationship that counts, is the one where 

they’re hooked up to the appropriate place in government to get 

their work done. But we sometimes operate as a window into 

government for those discussions. 

 

The other thing is working with INAC (Indian and Northern 

Affairs Canada). And of course one of the difficult questions for 

the province always is to keep in perspective those things which 

the federal government is responsible for funding and those 

things which the province is responsible for funding. Because 

when you’re trying to play catch-up, it’s a bit of an expensive 

proposition and we want to make sure that the federal 

government stays an active participant in the process going on 

in economic development. 

 

But again I would reiterate that I think kind of the end of the 

problem we’re on right now is not that things aren’t happening, 

it’s that they’re happening so quickly we have to make sure we 

move in to facilitate the education and training supports and 

other things to make sure that these many projects that are 

getting off the ground have as much chance for success as   



820  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

possible. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, just another thought that 

crossed my mind, and I was just at the opening of the Keystone 

Cup last week, last Thursday evening to be exact, in Grenfell. 

And I happened to have the privilege of chatting with a couple 

of women from one of the local reserves, and this question of 

gaming and casinos was raised. 

 

I remember talking to this particular lady, I believe about 3 or 4 

years ago when they opened up their school on the Ochapowace 

Reserve, the Kahkewistakaw School. And at that time the talk 

of VLTs (video lottery terminal), that was just in its infancy, 

and casinos, and the concern that was raised by a number of 

women who were at that meeting and at that opening, they were 

quite concerned about the fact that casinos would maybe 

become a reality in Saskatchewan, certainly the availability of 

VLTs in the community. 

 

And I guess I just have to bring forth the point that this very 

person did mention again that since they have come to fruition, 

they have seen . . . they have worked and been, I guess, quite 

diligent in trying to educate their people as to some of the 

problems that can arise if there aren’t some controls. And I 

might add as well that they’re not really all that pleased with the 

casino development and I think they just reiterate some of the 

concerns that other individuals have. But I just wanted to bring 

that to your attention since you are the minister responsible for 

Gaming and will probably get into some questions on that a 

little later. 

 

But it is a concern out there and it creates a problem not only in 

the aboriginal community; it creates a problem in the white 

community. It creates a problem for a lot of people. 

 

The thing I wanted to bring up right now, Madam Minister, was 

the fact that I believe the federal government has offloaded a 

number of its responsibility when it comes to welfare rolls. And 

I’m wondering, does that have a problem . . . or is that 

something that your department deals with or is that strictly an 

issue that is handled by the department of welfare? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well that’s a very timely question 

because next . . . well actually this week, Thursday evening, 

we’re beginning a meeting of ministers from across Canada 

responsible for Indian and Metis affairs on those very questions 

— the federal offloading and the input by first nations and 

Metis people into the social policy renewal process in Canada. 

 

Because of the conditions of both benign and active neglect that 

took place over many years, and some of the very oppressive, 

early conditions with Indian agents and what not on reserves, 

we’ve really created a situation here that governments can’t just 

walk away from because governments were very instrumental 

in creating some of the conditions that have ended us up where 

we are now. 

 

Again one of the problems — and it was reflected in the report 

of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal People — that if 

you’re going to be playing catch-up the cost savings will not be 

immediate. In fact it may be a little more expensive for awhile 

and then the cost savings will start to become apparent a little 

bit down the road. 

 

But what we’re hoping to do at the meetings Thursday and 

Friday is to figure out as provinces what the best way to 

approach this situation is with Ottawa. And then with the 

participation of the national Indian and Metis men’s and 

women’s organizations and representatives that will be coming 

to that meeting, to understand clearly their view of the social 

policy renewal process and how they feel we can maximize the 

opportunities within that process to deal with some of the 

long-standing poverty and underdevelopment issues in those 

communities. 

 

So this will be, I’m sure, quite an interesting meeting. You 

don’t have long to wait to see what happens because it will be 

this week. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I think, Madam Minister, you use the word 

quite right — timely. And it would seem with a federal election 

in the offing you couldn’t ask for better timing for a meeting of 

this nature, especially when there are a number of concerns. 

And I’m sure that other provinces across Canada have a lot of 

the same concerns that the province of Saskatchewan has, and 

hopefully, Madam Minister, at the end of the day, there are 

some issues that there’s agreements on. Or certainly if not total 

resolve, but a commitment to resolve, with a commitment from 

the federal government that indeed they are going to certainly 

make sure that they live up to many of the treaties that they 

entered into years ago — treaties that provinces didn’t enter 

into; they were entered into at the federal level. And as they 

offload their responsibility on provincial governments, while 

the Minister of Finance federally can suggest that they’re on 

their way to meeting their targets, I guess as they offload onto 

the provinces, it’s a lot easier to meet targets in that manner. 

 

I would also be remiss if I didn’t mention the fact I think the 

provincial Finance minister as well talks about meeting targets. 

But it’s easy when you can offload some of those problems onto 

other, third parties. So it just seems to be an ongoing process. 

 

But I certainly would wish you well. And I would trust, Madam 

Minister, that when you meet with your counterparts from 

across Canada with the federal government on Thursday and 

Friday, that indeed some of the issues that have been raised 

today are issues that are going to be pursued at length and 

pursued quite vigorously; so that down the road Finance 

ministers and governments in the province of Saskatchewan 

aren’t going to have to be always dealing with it, but we can 

work towards a final resolve. 

 

And I don’t anticipate you’ll be able to come to that final 

resolve in a two-day meeting, but it certainly, I think, opens the 

door for these issues to be discussed and certainly pursued, and 

indeed the federal government be made aware of its 

commitment and its responsibility. 

 

So with that, Madam Minister, I’ll certainly wait for a response   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

and allow other members to get into the debate. And I’ll just say 

right now I would expect, Madam Minister, that you will pursue 

some of the concerns with all the vigour that is available. And 

what I’ve seen in the past in your actions, I think, Madam 

Minister, you can certainly hold your place with any minister 

across Canada. 

 

And so I wish you well, and I’ll allow some other members in 

and certainly bring up some other questions later. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. First of all, 

Madam Minister, I want to welcome you and your officials to 

this portion of the estimates. As an opening comment, I just 

want to illustrate some of the problems we’re having in 

northern Saskatchewan when it comes to the Indian and the 

Metis people. 

 

A huge majority of my discussions and conversations in past 

estimates has been with the Metis people. And specifically the 

reason why I do this, Madam Minister, is basically with the 

strength and the dollars and the organization behind the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations representing the 

first nations, or treaty people as they’re known, they have a 

fairly well-organized approach to presenting some of their 

concerns and dealing with some of their problems. 

 

That’s not to say that the first nations of course aren’t given 

priority with the Indian and Metis Affairs critic with the Liberal 

caucus. What we’re saying is that they have the resources and 

they have the technical ability and certainly the experience to 

come and bring some of the concerns right to your doorstep. 

 

The second part of the equation and the reason why we’re 

focusing on the Metis, in the past and also this year, is the 

simple fact that the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and the 

Metis people of Saskatchewan as a whole don’t have the 

resources available to them to continue to build a strong lobby. 

They’re certainly a very gifted bunch of people that are working 

within the organization, and they do have a number of 

challenges in terms of the size of the province and of course the 

number of people that they’re able to employ because of their 

meagre amount of funding. 

 

So really a lot of the questions that we have today will be based 

on the Metis part of your budget for that simple reason, is they 

haven’t got the money nor the technical assistance nor the 

proper support packages in place to really mount the challenge. 

 

Now every time we start talking about aboriginal people in 

general, a lot of people right away in their minds begin thinking 

about hunting violations. And they start thinking welfare rates 

and they start talking about mismanagement of funds. They 

start talking about crime. They start talking about all the 

different problems associated with the aboriginal community. 

 

And I think a very important thing, Madam Minister, here is 

that . . . the key thing is you must dispel all those myths. We 

must start, as you mentioned a number of times, a fresh start in 

looking at the aboriginal people in Saskatchewan. And the 

example I’m using today are the Metis. 

 

To begin to understand what we need to do for the Metis, 

Madam Minister, we have to take the time to understand the 

Metis, what this is all about. And on many occasions, on many 

occasions in northern Saskatchewan, we hear of many fine 

families, Metis families, that have done very, very well because 

they had a strong family unit, they had strong support, and they 

went on and done things on their own. Very, very successful 

Metis people. We never hear of those people. 

 

And when you pick up a paper, in many papers . . . and I’ll give 

you an example of some of the headlines in this document here. 

It talks about victims, it talks about violence, and it talks about 

death. And who are the people involved, Madam Minister? — 

is our aboriginal people. Now whether they’re Metis or first 

nations, I have no idea. And this is how the media portray a lot 

of aboriginal people, because the huge majority of our problem 

amongst the aboriginal people is directly related to some of our 

problems when it comes to governmental support, recognition 

of our challenges, and above all else a lack of understanding by 

all governments. 

 

Now when I hear the member from Moosomin speak about 

hunting violations, you know, it’s unfair — it’s unfair of us to 

focus on the Metis. When the Metis got their hunting rights it 

was constitutionally valid that they had their rights, they enjoy 

these rights. Today now as soon as the Metis get these hunting 

rights, all of a sudden there is headlines again — Metis hunting 

rights being exploited, Metis hunting rights being abused. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, there’s been 200, 300, 400 Metis people 

approach me. And they’ve been telling me that the abuse is not 

caused all by us. Yes, there are abusers out there in every race, 

colour, and creed; there are abusers out there. But why, Madam 

Minister, all the problems with the hunting problems, why are 

the Metis being singled out? How do you know it’s a Metis 

bullet that killed that moose or that deer? 

 

Now I’m not here to argue about whether the Metis are abusing 

the system or not. What I’m here to do today is to explain to 

you that if you wish to begin to address the problems that are 

perceived by a lot of Saskatchewan people and the media and 

perhaps by governments, that the Metis people are creating a 

problem amongst the management of our resources and in 

particular our wildlife, then what do we do about it? We don’t 

have rallies condemning the Metis hunting rights, we don’t 

challenge the Metis hunting rights in courts. 

 

Madam Minister, we begin to work with the Metis community 

to set up policies, to set up ways in which we can deal with this 

problem. We begin to enter into good co-management deals and 

negotiations. We begin to take the time to truly understand what 

is meant by Metis rights. If these individuals have Metis rights 

granted to them by the Constitution of Canada, who is 

Saskatchewan and who are we to challenge that right through 

negative media press and through unfair labelling? 

 

So it’s very, very important today that we get that atmosphere 

within government, or the environment within government, to 

look at the Metis people as a proud, successful, determined 

group of people. There are no . . . not without a doubt, Madam 

Minister, a very proud and capable people. We’ve said that   



822  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

many, many times. 

 

There are many people we can talk about here: Jack Janvier, for 

example — bright young student. We can talk about Colin 

McColl III, another bright young Metis student. All these 

people, I’m just thinking in my mind, very, very successful 

Metis people. 

 

Do they ever get the press, Madam Minister? Do you ever see a 

very positive story of the Metis in the press? No, Madam 

Minister, all we get is the negative press. And all we get is the 

court challenges and all we get is the rallies condemning Metis 

hunting rights. 

 

(1615) 

 

So, Madam Minister, if we’re going to begin to understand 

what the problem with Metis is, we have to understand what the 

Metis are about. And that’s a challenge that I give to all the 

members across, especially the member yelling across there, the 

member from Regina South. You know, he’s going to save the 

plains. Maybe perhaps he should do another cause and start 

saving grace when it comes to the Metis people. 

 

I want to comment on an article from last June, Madam 

Minister, and the commentary is by a well-known columnist, 

Dale Eisler. And the headline says, “Facing a kind of aboriginal 

limbo.” That explains the Metis — facing a kind of aboriginal 

limbo. And I quote from the correspondence: 

 

Accepting that we identify people as members of . . . 

(different) groups and believe the group rights of some . . . 

(are different) from others, it’s possible to reach some 

general conclusions. One is that aboriginal people are, by 

far, the most disadvantaged group in Saskatchewan. 

 

And then he goes on to add, quote: 

 

But you can take it one step further. Of the aboriginal 

people, those who face the greatest social and economic 

problems are the Metis. 

 

And the disadvantaged and sometimes disorganized Metis, what 

do they get? They get a negative press, they get the rallies 

against them, and they get an indifferent government 

responding to some of their needs. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, the Metis people are not going to quit. 

Through a series of problems, through heartache and headache, 

financial hardship — some of their own doing — and certainly 

changes in the style of leadership and the people, they will not 

quit. They are more determined as each day goes by. 

 

And yes, Madam Minister, there are problems. No question 

about that. But the thing is, I want to make a point at this stage 

of the game is when you talk about this provincial 

government’s support for the Metis, at this point in time you 

have given the Metis Nation $175,000 in project-specific 

funding. This money will go to areas like economic 

development and land and resource management. 

 

What the Metis Nations wanted, Madam Minister, and what 

they believed they were going to get was core funding. Without 

adequate, stable funding, the Metis Nation government is 

hamstrung. But on the other hand, for the member from Regina 

South’s information, the federal government provides $360,000 

in core funding each year — 360,000, Madam Minister. 

 

Why won’t the province make the same commitment to the 

Metis people as the federal government has? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Oh my gosh, I’m a bit shocked actually 

that I would have to answer this question for you, because you 

know as well as I do that the MNS (Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan) agree 100 per cent with the position that Metis 

are Indians under section 91(24) of the constitution and as such 

are a federal responsibility. And if you want to know where that 

core funding is, I suggest you give Ron Irwin and Anne 

McLellan a call in Ottawa and ask them where it is. 

 

Dollar for dollar the province provides the same money to the 

first nations’ organizations as to the Metis organizations, even 

in consideration of the fact that there are three to five times as 

many first nations people in Saskatchewan to perform exactly 

the same functions. The only place where the first nations get 

any additional resources from the province that the Metis 

Nation doesn’t get are in the TLE process, which is a process by 

which the provincial government is legally bound through the 

previous agreements with the federal government to fulfil those 

outstanding treaty entitlement obligations. 

 

So we actually fund dollar for dollar exactly the same to first 

nations as we do to Metis, even considering the differences in 

population — dollar for dollar. 

 

The gap in the funding is all federal. The federal government 

core funds Indians but as a matter of their policy, do not accept 

that Metis are Indians for the purposes of section 91(24). And 

I’ve checked with the Metis Nation several times — is that your 

position? And time and time again they agree that yes it is. 

 

And as soon as the provincial government touches that, we put 

it in a position of eroding that argument for that relationship 

with Ottawa. Now that hasn’t stopped us from putting $327,500 

into MNS and its affiliates through a variety of different 

vehicles. And the money we added this year will certainly move 

us further along that road. 

 

But I’ve been in Ottawa on several occasions and had this 

discussion with Ron Irwin and with Anne McLellan saying, 

look you guys, what you’re doing here isn’t fair; you’re creating 

huge differences in the resource levels and the poverty levels 

between communities, particularly in the North, that are side by 

side. I think it’s highly irresponsible of them. And in fact I’d 

never thought of this before, but maybe you and I should go 

together to talk to them about it. There’s no point before the 

election because obviously their mind is on other things at the 

moment. 

 

But this is a huge injustice that needs to be rectified. But I 

would say that even while recognizing that the Metis Nation 

needs additional resources and I do believe it is at the core of   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

some of their difficulties in getting the work done that they need 

to get done, the fact is that we have increased funding this year 

and have other funding that will be released pending the 

agreement on work plans. And again we sit down at the 

tripartite table with the federal government and we’ll try to get 

them to come up with more money. 

 

But I refer you back again to section 91(24) and ask you what is 

your answer to that. Because you know as well as I do what the 

issue is that we’re dealing with here. However we do recognize 

certainly the good intent and all the accomplishments and the 

many good people in that community who are trying to get 

things done. And we certainly have a number of bilateral and 

tripartite processes by which we meet. We agree to work plans. 

We proceed on getting those things done. 

 

On the issue of the hunting, a provincial government has to 

represent all the citizens of the province, and when you’re 

talking about giving differentiated rights, it’s important to have 

legal certainty in that. Because you have to be able to justify 

likewise to the rest of the province’s population that this is a 

true and legitimate right founded in history, and because of that 

we’re taking it the next step to get that legal certainty on that. 

 

And we certainly have no problem with whatever the outcome 

of the court ruling is, but the notion is because we represent all 

the people of the province, we need that legal certainty. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 

quote that I’m going to keep using from your response is dollar 

for dollar, and we’ve got a few programs here we want to 

compare the dollar for dollar argument on. But first of all the 

invitation that you offered to me today to go to Ottawa and talk 

about some of these things, any day of the week, any month of 

the year you wish me to accompany you to Ottawa and talk 

about these things, I certainly will. 

 

And I think the key thing is we’re going to talk about the 

situation facing not only the Metis people of Saskatchewan, but 

right across this country. And I just wanted to point out your 

dollar for dollar theory. I just wanted to bring up one other point 

in this commentary talking about aboriginal limbo, because they 

are in aboriginal limbo right now in terms of the Metis. 

 

And it says here that, quote: 

 

One other example of how the Metis are treated unequally 

within the framework of aboriginal rights and government 

is the handling of the gambling issue. The Romanow 

government’s public policy idea behind expanded casino 

gambling is as a source of revenue and a tool for . . . 

economic development. 

 

But what’s happened is that the Metis have been treated as 

second-class aboriginal people in terms of profit-sharing 

and control of the government-run . . . casino. 

 

In a May 14 letter to Durocher, Indian and Metis Affairs 

Minister . . . proposes that the Metis will receive “up to 25 

per cent” of gambling revenues that go to what’s called the 

Associated Entities Fund, AEF. The financial breakdown 

would then have 50 per cent of the revenues from Casino 

Regina going to the government, 25 per cent to the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and 25 per cent 

to the AEF, which is made up of various charities and the 

Metis. 

 

The idea of the Metis being lumped in with (a) charitable 

organization deeply irks Durocher. “It upsets me they 

consider us just another charitable organization. I’m very 

concerned about it because they (should see) . . . the Metis 

people as a nation, with the right to self-government,” 

Durocher says. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, what’s your dollar-for-dollar theory on 

this deal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This is an issue that’s a bit complicated 

by the fact that as you know, the first nations do have an 

established land base and the Metis don’t. And of course the 

issue goes back on the one hand to a debate over jurisdiction on 

a land base. So that right away differentiates part of the 

discussion because the Metis don’t have a land base on which to 

exercise jurisdiction. So this is part of the issue. 

 

The second part of the issue is the first nations are the people 

who approached us with the gaming business as being one of 

their major areas that they wanted to get into. We never had 

similar approaches at that time from the Metis Nation. I guess I 

might liken it to, they literally spent millions on developing 

their proposals in gaming and there was no similar investment, 

partly because they didn’t have it but partly because it hadn’t 

been an area that they had focused on and decided to work on as 

a nation as the first nations had. They had identified gaming as 

a sector of economic development that they wanted to get into. 

 

And I can only liken it to when the TD (Toronto Dominion) 

approaches us with a business development proposal. We don’t 

then automatically offer part of it to the CIBC (Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce). This is a business agreement. 

This is not a racial agreement. It’s a business agreement. 

 

The only part that starts to veer into other issues has to do with 

the land-based jurisdiction over gaming debate. And again on 

the Metis Nation end of it, there isn’t a land-based jurisdiction 

parallel question there. And so it’s a little more complicated 

than that. But I will mention as a positive note that even despite 

all that, we recognize that they’re very deserving participants in 

that agreement, and for ’97-98 the amount of money they’ll 

receive through that has doubled to about 600,000. So they will 

be receiving a substantial portion of money without having to 

have made the investment that first nations made in the building 

and everything else. They will receive that money without 

having had to make the investment, all of which you have to 

deduct from the balance sheet, and without having to manage 

any of those operations; and are still also benefiting from the 

employment because our agreement to employ Indian and Metis 

people at Casino Regina, for example, includes Metis people as 

well as Indian. So you can’t just take it as a straight 

apples-to-apples equation; it’s a bit apples and oranges in the   



824  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

discussion of this. 

 

And to really get to the point you’re talking about, you’d have 

to consider huge amounts of costs, even that went into a lot of 

the legal debates that took place on the jurisdictional issues at 

the beginning of this agreement. 

 

So all I would say is that we’ve made an attempt to be fair and 

there certainly will be money flowing to a board of directors 

that will make sure that that money’s used for the benefit of the 

community. And that will be a very sizeable amount of money 

that will start flowing in this budget year. And I see that 

actually improving over time. 

 

So I guess that’s all I can say on that, but it’s a little more 

complicated than just dollar for dollar on that issue. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess 

I’m getting some confusing signals from you in terms of on one 

hand you say we’re dealing with the first nations on a 

business-to-business arrangement, but we recognize the Metis 

because of their problems so we allowed them in to the 

associated entities fund so we could help them out a bit. They 

haven’t got a land base the same that the treaty Indians have in 

terms of jurisdiction and land rights and what not. And we 

know we do have a land settlement case before Saskatchewan 

as well. But it’s all very confusing in terms of what you mean 

when you talk about comparing oranges to apples here. 

 

The clear situation . . . The reason why the first nations were 

allowed into the gaming situation is they had dollars, they had 

organization, they had the ability to participate in this 

development — because they were organized. But did the Metis 

have that same opportunity? The answer is no. And whether 

you and I sit here all day and argue whether it’s a federal 

jurisdiction issue or whether it’s a provincial responsibility, 

that’s not the point. In the meantime, the Metis people are still 

being left out. 

 

The reason why the first nations are involved with gaming is 

because they had the money. And they got the money from the 

federal Liberal government, or from the federal government, 

period. So the key thing here is that if the Metis had the same 

opportunity, Madam Minister, would you not agree the same 

opportunity should have been provided to them by this 

provincial government? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well I mean, you’re essentially asking 

us to resolve a hundred years of federal neglect and 

underfunding in one agreement. And you can’t achieve that. It’s 

not realistic. What we did do is recognize that they had a real 

and legitimate need and that it was a real and legitimate 

objective to include them as a recipient of revenues under that 

agreement. 

 

So I don’t know what I can say other than the chronic 

underfunding of the Metis Nation goes back to the federal 

government’s contention that they aren’t Indian people for the 

section in 91(24) of the constitution and the province’s 

agreement with the Metis Nation that the federal government 

has not fulfilled a responsibility there. 

 

So again that’s not one that I can solve for you, other than to 

say that over time we are certainly working closely with them to 

improve circumstances as much as we can on every front. But 

we can’t solve that particular problem. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The second 

part of the question I guess is in essence to determining what a 

Metis person is. Is it fair to say that the federal government has 

offered dollars to do up a list of all the Metis people in terms of 

how many Metis people do we have in Saskatchewan? 

 

And from what I understand is the federal government has 

offered that commitment to the province to do a enumeration of 

all the Metis people in Saskatchewan, to know what number are 

we dealing with here. All we want to know is what number are 

we dealing with here, Madam Minister? 

 

And if we know what number we’re dealing with here, whether 

it’s 50, 60, or 70,000 people, would that not help the province 

enter into co-management agreements with these people once 

they’re identified? Would that not alleviate some of our 

problems with hunting abuse? Because many people out there 

are self-claiming that they’re Metis. 

 

Would that not help us with identifying specific people within a 

disadvantaged group? As you say, these are the people we’re 

dealing with, these 70,000 people, so we’re able to determine 

and to mark which people have been helped in terms of 

percentages, which direction we’re going in terms of some of 

the educational program dollars, the housing dollars. And this 

goes on and on. 

 

Would a complete list of all those people that are qualified as 

Metis for Saskatchewan, would that not help out this 

government, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you for that question because 

it’s certainly something we’ve been working on and a matter I 

think that the whole hunting and fishing issue helped to 

accelerate I guess the understanding of what it is we really need 

to get out of a process like that. 

 

Now again I know you’re not going to like this part of the 

answer but I have to say it anyway. The federal government are 

the ones who identify who’s a treaty Indian person and they 

certainly . . . the provincial government doesn’t deliver its 

funding on a head- count basis. If it did, in some cases the Metis 

would be worse off because there’s less Metis by most people’s 

calculations than first nations. But there’s several issues. 

 

One of them is we know with a treaty card, who issues it, who 

maintains it, what the legal qualifications are to have it. And as 

you know, none of those questions have quite been answered to 

everybody’s satisfaction yet in this other process. We’ve got the 

issue of definition, the issue of who can verify, and then we 

need to know what the purpose is of this enumeration. Is it for 

cultural purposes? Is it for voting purposes within the MNS? Or   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

is it for rights purposes? 

 

Because the kind of enumeration you would want for rights 

purposes would be much more thorough than an enumeration 

that you would need for cultural purposes, of organizational 

membership versus rights administration. And so before we 

rush headlong into this, we have to decide that what we’re 

going to spend money on is going to serve the purposes, not just 

for today but into the future on this particular matter. 

 

And then there’s the whole issue of upkeep of the records. I 

mean it’s no different than a provincial or federal voters’ list. 

Records are only as good as how well they’re kept up. So the 

funding would not simply be one time. It would be a necessity 

to provide long-term support to the upkeep of this type of a 

system. And then there’s also the issue of the security of the 

records because these then become very important records, that 

you have to make sure that there’s the appropriate number of 

copies stored in safe locations. 

 

And all of that can be worked out and all of that is under 

discussion. And we certainly have a very open mind on this one 

and are working in joint cooperation with the Metis Nation and 

the federal government to decide what’s the best way to do this, 

not for the short term but for the long-term purposes to which 

such an enumeration may be put. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just one quick question. Has the federal 

government offered any dollars to do this study of who is 

qualified as a Metis? And if yes or no, is there an amount? And 

if yes there is amount, has the provincial government agreed to 

come up with dollars on their own? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  My understanding, it’s part of the 

discussion, but no final amount has been agreed to. They 

certainly, again for their purposes, would like to do it because 

they do deliver some of their funding on the basis of head 

count. Again I say the province doesn’t . . . we don’t fund 

people that way; we fund them as citizens of the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Have you got any numbers as to what you 

estimate the number of Metis people living in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The only tool that exists at the moment 

is the 1991 census which says 33,000. And until we have a 

process by which an appropriate enumeration can be done that 

can be tested against census data for a particular area, we won’t 

know how accurate those figures are. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And I guess the other thing is, some of the 

figures that have been bounced around is that perhaps there are 

as many as 70,000 Metis people. Is that a figure that you find 

totally out of this world, or really is there some debate to which 

figure is correct — your figure of 35,000 or some other 

people’s figures of 70,000? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again, those aren’t our figures. The 

only figures we have are the figures generated by the 

government that is responsible for counting people. That’s the 

federal government, that’s the census data, and they say 33,000. 

Again I know they added a specific question in the last census. 

I don’t think we have the final information on that yet to see if 

it varies off the figures from the ’91 census. 

 

But again, this has always been a federal responsibility, the 

counting of people in Canada. And no other province has 

agreed to participate at all. Saskatchewan is the only province 

that’s even considered participating, because it has clearly 

always been a federal responsibility to do enumeration. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, I guess the second part of the question 

is again, are you going to have a definite date in which you’re 

going to determine yes, we will participate in this process or no, 

we will not? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We see this question being resolved by 

the fall. There’s no doubt the federal election, as you know 

having been around in this world through several elections, 

things tend to grind to a bit of halt in the month and a half or 

two preceding an election, and then with the appointment of 

new ministers and what not, that usually takes them awhile to 

get wound up again after the election. So we’ll have a little bit 

of delay. 

 

And it is a partnership. It’s all three parties at the table. Given 

no substantive changes in federal bureaucrats in the process and 

others, we see it being within the realm of three months or so to 

get this thing decided. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you again, and I guess, you know, in 

terms of the first nations, you know, they certainly are . . . And 

we have no choice but to recognize their accomplishments, and 

there’s numerous first nations out there doing just a tremendous 

amount of work. And we looked at some of my own northern 

Indian bands, example of the Kitaski Development Corporation; 

some of the work that the Peter Ballantyne Band is doing, the 

Montreal Lake Band. Just an incredible amount of work. 

 

And that shows the vitality and energy and enthusiasm and the 

dedication as well as the intelligence of the aboriginal people. 

And the Metis people want to be part of that picture. That’s the 

whole message we’re trying to get here, Madam Minister. 

 

And so when we talk about the treaty and the Metis, we’re not 

trying to differentiate the two groups. We’re not trying to split 

them up. But what we see is a number of policies that kind of 

confuse me and disturb us. 

 

When the government and the first nations were negotiating 

gaming, the government gave the first nations, I believe it’s 

$1.3 million signing bonus. This signing bonus was intended to 

cover the cost of negotiations. The Metis nations also incurred 

expenses during these negotiations, and negotiations which are 

being dragged out by the government and not conducted in 

good faith. Why won’t your department cover the expenses of 

the Metis Nation for these negotiations when it covered the 

expenses for the first nations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We certainly want them to be able to 

cover their expenses and certainly we’re looking at how it’s 

possible to do that. So without announcing a decision before   



826  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

it’s made, I would just say that that decision is . . . could be 

anticipated in very short order, and I should be able to report to 

you on that within a very short while, within this month, I 

would hope. 

 

The other point I’ll mention though, is part of the difficulty 

hasn’t just been the relations between the Metis Nation and 

other citizens of the province; it’s been between the Metis 

Nation and first nations. And I was very encouraged. The 

Saskatoon REDA (regional economic development authority) 

had a reception for MLAs in Regina and I was speaking with 

one Lester Lafond who is a first nations’ representative on the 

REDA board in Saskatoon. And they’re actually working with 

the MNS to have a joint economic development conference, I 

think towards the end of June, in Saskatoon. 

 

And I see this as a very positive accomplishment, because this 

has not necessarily been a relationship that’s existed in the past. 

And being that many people are related, in the same families, 

and certainly working and experiencing some of the same 

issues, I think it’s very positive that they would join forces in 

having a common economic development strategy and 

cooperating on creating those opportunities. 

 

So as far as I’m concerned, this has been one of the most 

optimistic activities that I’ve heard about in a long time, is this 

joint effort that’s taking place in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Again, Madam Minister, the reason why that 

there’s been all that effort and you’re positive and happy about 

it, I’m positive and happy about it . . . But the reason why it 

happens, because the Metis and the first nations got together. 

 

Now what happens if one group gets X amount of dollars and 

the other group gets a significant amount? And we don’t expect 

these two groups to get along but again they rose above the 

challenge and they seen that as long as they were split as 

aboriginal people, that they wouldn’t get anywhere. So they 

rose above all the problems and the discrepancy and the unfair 

treatment that the Metis received and they still made an effort to 

come along and say look, listen, let’s work together. 

 

So that is really a commitment — not to how we fund them as a 

province and how we support the Metis or the first nations as a 

province — really that’s a commitment to them. Again, they’ve 

rose above the challenge. And that’s the whole thing we’re 

talking about here today. In spite of the problems and the 

shortcomings, the Metis people have done a tremendous amount 

of work. 

 

So my question to you: would that not have been handled five 

or six years ago if this government would have got up and said, 

yes we believe that you guys are a distinct people; we believe 

you’re a disadvantaged people, as many other Saskatchewan 

people believe; we know you guys do not want hand-outs and 

do not want welfare; you guys want to have an equal piece of 

pie. And that’s what they’re talking about — equal recognition 

and treatment. 

 

And do we give them that? Six years later we’re talking about 

how well they’re working together in economic development. 

Well, Madam Minister, they can’t work together well if one 

partner has got a dollar and the other partner has got a hundred 

thousand. 

 

So my question to you is, can you make a difference as the 

Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs to the people of the Metis 

Nation in terms of giving them that equal playing-field to begin 

to negotiate, if not first nations but the other business 

communities as well; so that they could become an 

independent, proud people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, all I can say is we have, I think, 

been pretty consistent in our support. As you will know and 

which I won’t elaborate on, there was some internal troubles 

that caused everything to go off the rails a couple of years back 

that were fairly high profile, and that certainly we put a lot of 

support into getting those matters cleared up so that the 

organization could get back on track again, and doing the things 

that it was intended to do. 

 

But certainly on this issue of the projects like the economic 

development conference in Saskatoon that’s upcoming, 

certainly the first nations and the Metis got together, but we 

also supported it. The province has put 7,500 directly towards 

MNS to help in the organizing of this, matched by the federal 

government’s 7,500, and this funding has gone only to the MNS 

The FSIN is getting it out of their core funding. 

 

But we have designated funds to this activity, to help them get 

this conference together, so they are cooperating in partnership 

and we’re supporting it. But we cannot and we will not support 

the role, or replace the role of the federal government as 

dictated by section 91(24). And we can’t, because as soon as we 

do, that will for ever take the federal government off the hook 

to be responsible for that. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And although I 

sometimes wish I can take that bait and talk about the federal 

Liberal government, I simply am not a federal Liberal person. 

I’m a provincial Liberal MLA. And the problems in reference to 

the accountability and certainly the allegations flying back and 

forth about the Metis Nation, that doesn’t help matters any. 

We’ve seen the Tories go through that mess here three or four 

years. And I guess in terms of the president, and I quote again 

that Mr. Durocher is, again from the same article, quote: 

 

“I’m a Roman Catholic. If I commit a sin, I go to 

confession, do my penance and receive forgiveness. What 

we need is some recognition from this government but 

instead they treat us as just another interest group,” 

Durocher says. 

 

So, Madam Minister, there’s no question that the Metis Nation 

has gone through some troubling times, and maybe the light at 

the end of the tunnel still can’t been seen for awhile. But 

certainly, Madam Minister, there are numerous people that 

make all kinds of mistakes. And when you get a new bunch 

people in there, trying to make a difference, would you not say 

that it’s not fair of us to continue to create problems for them?   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

Is it not fair for us to say, look, listen, let’s work together; let’s 

work together and let’s build from here on in. The past, there 

was some mistakes in the past, but let’s start being true and 

equal partners. We will treat you as true and equal partners. 

Let’s work from here on in. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I’ll say it publicly, if there’s any 

mismanagement of any place then we should look at that and 

try and address it. But certainly we cannot simply refuse to deal 

with these guys because it’s either a federal issue or they have 

mismanagement problems or they’re taking us to court on this. 

It’s just all confusing, and at the end nothing gets done. 

 

So, Madam Minister, would you respond to some of the 

challenges needed, that I addressed. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well I’ll just say that whenever I’ve 

talked to the Metis leadership about this I say, basically this is 

no different than what the province went through. When we 

inherited our big debt and all the mismanagement that had taken 

place with the previous government, we couldn’t just forget 

about it because we had financial obligations. We had to meet 

them as a province, as a government. 

 

So what they need to do is no different than what we had to do. 

We had to figure out how to come to grips with that situation — 

how to restore accountability, how to restore the province’s 

finances. And here we are six years later with all the resources 

at the command of a provincial government, just now being 

able to see the daylight at the end of the tunnel. 

 

So it does take time, when damage occurs, to repair things. And 

it does take a whole bunch of commitment on behalf of new 

leadership who wasn’t part of the problem, to restore the 

situation and to repair the damage. 

 

And so I would say in that, their experience is no different than 

ours as a provincial government. They’re having to do exactly 

what we had to do when we were elected in ’91. And that’s 

what new leadership has to do. It not only starts afresh but it 

also has to deal with whatever it inherited from the previous 

administration. 

 

So I share their pain on that one, let me put it that way. But also 

I’m very optimistic for the future. I do think there are very good 

leaders and more young people like the kind you mentioned 

coming up all the time. It’s these folks that you can work with 

and you can make great strides with. Certainly everything 

they’ve put on the table with us, we are considering all of it, 

moving on some of it, very close to moving on other parts of it. 

And I’m just very optimistic that the next while will be a time 

for great improvement. 

 

One of the areas where the Metis Nation and some of the Metis 

members are involved which is very positive are these 

partnership agreements with health boards that include jobs, 

that include economic development opportunities and that 

include education, and certainly working with the Metis 

educational institutions to create more targeted training for 

improved job success for people in that area. 

 

One of the things that you do have to recognize I think, is that 

this province as a province, and certainly started under NDP 

governments, has the only self-governing Metis educational 

institutions anywhere in Canada. If that’s not a commitment, I 

don’t know what its. The only ones anywhere in Canada. 

 

We’re hand in hand with tripartite agreement on looking at land 

issues with the Metis Nation, the federal government, and 

ourselves. That’s a cooperative effort going on. We’ve got 

justice initiatives under way. We’ve got economic development 

initiatives under way. So I think as soon as all of these activities 

come forward with work plans, then we’re in a very good 

position to take those things through the budget process. And I 

just think we’ll see very steady improvement. 

 

So I hope people don’t get discouraged, but government is a 

process of accountability and you have to first of all outline 

what you’re going to do and how you’re going to do it 

accountably and then you’re able to get the resources to do it. 

And I’m sure if we weren’t doing it that way, you would be 

challenging us. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As the Minister 

of Indian and Metis Affairs in terms of your term in this 

session, what are some of the immediate things that you wish to 

get accomplished alongside with the Metis organization? Is 

there time lines for some of these things? We’re talking about 

steady and consistent funding. We’re talking about some of the 

Metis land base questions. As the minister, what are some of the 

objectives that you hope to accomplish in your tenure as 

Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  One of the things that I think is really 

significant that’s happened in this year is rather than a grant 

here and a grant there and chucking a bit of money at this or a 

bit of politics at that, what we’ve done is we’ve developed a 

Metis strategy. And this was not easy because again we’re 

developing this strategy in the absence of having issues on land 

base resolved and in the absence of having issues on section 

91(24) resolved. So what we had to do was come up with a 

practical strategy, that in the absence of those big questions 

being resolved, what can we do? What can we get done? And 

all of our objective in this has been how to facilitate more 

self-sufficiency and more self-determination in the Metis 

community. 

 

Now the things we’ve been working on have been particular 

areas that within the current framework could be considered 

areas for Metis aboriginal rights. To look at this Grumbo case 

as you’re aware of; to work with the Metis on an organizational 

Act. Because we recognize that the functions of an organization 

like the Metis Nation does not fit well within The Non-Profit 

Corporations Act; so we want to work with them to give them 

an appropriate tool for being able to govern the Metis Nation as 

it exists as an organization in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have started to provide an ongoing body of funding to 

support those processes. We’re working on the enumeration 

project; certainly involved in the discussions with northern local 

governments on their very ambitious plan to have   



828  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

enhanced participation of Northerners in the service delivery. 

 

We’re also looking at some important cultural sites. As was 

done at Batoche, we’re also looking at what other sites in the 

province have that kind of importance and could be turned over 

as, I guess, part of good faith of the recognition of the 

importance of those lands to the Metis Nation. 

 

And also to support throughout all our departments an expanded 

role for Metis and service delivery and possibly some new areas 

that we could consider new institutional development, as we did 

in the case of Gabriel Dumont and Dumont Technical and those 

kinds of areas. 

 

So every department in the government is currently now 

examining those questions in a very systematic way. And it’s 

the first time I think, in the history of government that there’s 

been a strategic approach in this area, not merely an ad hoc 

approach. So I’m fairly optimistic that we’ll see the water line 

rise in terms of our coming to grips with this very important 

portion of our community, right across government. 

 

And it’s been a bit of an exercise to get the full government 

engaged in this discussion because often these discussions have 

been relegated to secretariats or to other people. And so instead 

of us becoming, in the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, the 

total repository of this discussion, we have been engaged in a 

process of engaging all of government and its departments and 

agencies and Crowns in this discussion. And I think that only 

good will come of this. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think the key 

thing here as well in terms of the northern local governments 

that you speak to and you also allude to in terms of some of the 

comments that have made, but there is no question that in 

northern Saskatchewan there’s a lot of housing problems, road 

problems. And it’s a very, very challenging place to live. And 

in spite of some of the challenges that we face as northern 

people — and a great majority being Metis — they have 

continued to survive and they’ll continue to survive and they’re 

also really trying to build. 

 

So I think some of the partnerships that are developing in 

northern Saskatchewan deserve merit that your department 

should look at. When you have northern local governments 

working alongside the Metis organizations . . . most of the 

northern local governments that I’m aware of consist of Metis 

people. So in essence, they may be 10, 15 years away from 

self-government as they see it, but at this point in time they are 

certainly practising, to a large extent, Metis government at 

many local communities. 

 

And I can list you off some names of some communities: 

Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, 

Pinehouse. All these people are largely administered . . . or all 

these communities are administered by local people. And most 

of these people are Metis people. So they are capable, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Now what the Metis people have to do is they have to get 

organized and they have to start building. And that’s the whole 

challenge here — is we want to be part of the picture, that’s the 

overwhelming message. And we need exciting, innovative 

government. 

 

We can’t have a government that says, well it’s Ottawa’s fault. 

We can’t have a government that says, well we . . . this is a 

business arrangement, not a first nations-government deal. 

We’ve got to say, what can we do to address some of these 

problems 5, 10, 15 years down the road — in partnership. 

 

Now many people in my constituency, they’ll say at this point 

in time, no we don’t want Metis Nation to push 

self-government. It simply will not work because of the 

structure of the Metis Nation. They have 12 regions in the 

province, and some regions have a tremendous amount of Metis 

while other regions don’t. 

 

And we can talk about some of the problems that Metis Nation 

had in the past. And you can talk about some of the problems in 

northern Saskatchewan not seeing the light of day. 

 

So some of the natural partnerships that are forming out there, 

the local municipal governments and the Metis locals, what’s 

your government doing to enhance that atmosphere, to 

encourage a new wave or a new strategy dealing with the Metis 

Nation and Metis people of this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I would agree with the member 

opposite that there is a lot of innovation coming out of northern 

Saskatchewan, and that’s what always makes it, I guess, such an 

exciting place to visit, and for many years for myself, an 

exciting place to live. As you still live there, so you would 

know better than anyone. 

 

But I think the main difference between the northern 

communities and southern communities is, in the North, 

because communities are a little more isolated, they really pull 

closer together as far as trying to bring together all the different 

kinds of services that exist or could exist in their communities. 

And in that way, I think, have a desire to do a bit more than 

municipalities in the south have a desire to do because they are 

much more dependent on their own resources there. 

 

Now I know that the Minister of Municipal Government and the 

Minister of Northern Affairs are more directly involved in these 

discussions than I am, although I’m certainly very supportive of 

us doing more as far as helping to create the — what would you 

say? — the appropriate mechanisms in the North to really build 

on the momentum that’s developing up there for development, 

for self-determination, for more of a community development 

model of dealing with communities in the North. And I 

certainly recognize that many Metis people have been the 

leaders in those communities for a long time and have been 

elected as the mayors and the councillors and what not. So 

there’s a very strong base of support there. 

 

What this discussion has reminded me of is that — and I just 

mentioned it to one of our officials here — is that they should 

meet with you to gain a better understanding of your view of 

this relationship in the North; so that as we do move forward 

with legislation or with other approaches, that we do it with a   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

practical understanding of some of the issues that you’re 

raising. So I just make that commitment to you again today that 

we’ll meet and go over those things with you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair, in order that we can get into 

Energy and Mines after supper and perhaps some other 

estimates, I would now move that we report progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 797 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 797 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 

  Tchorzewski .............................................................................................................................................................................. 797 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 798 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 798 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 799 

 Passing of Gail Kozun and Fred Heal 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 798 

 Student Safety Training Program Receives Grant 

  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 798 

 New Democratic Party Convention 1997 

  Tchorzewski .............................................................................................................................................................................. 799 

 Motorist Offers Help During Snowstorm 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 799 

 Entrepreneurial Development Centre Opens 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 799 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Auto Insurance Rates 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 800 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 800 

 Jaws of Life Operational Costs 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 800 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 800 

 Auto Lease Insurance Surcharges 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 801 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 801 

 Crown Corporation Billing Systems 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 802 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 802 

 Gun Control Legislation 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 802 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 802 

 Patient Confidentiality 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 803 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 803 

 Casino Promotion 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 804 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 804 

 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 804 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 804 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 48—The Highways and Transportation Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 805 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 21—The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 805 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 806 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 807 



 

 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 807 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 807 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 808 

 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à certaines lois 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 808 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 808 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 808 

 Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 809 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 809 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 1997 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 810 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 813 

 Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 814 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 814 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat Vote 25 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 815 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 815 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 821 

 

 


