



















































Hansard: December 17, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1997 

 December 17, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

here this afternoon. The prayer is as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the Glentworth, Fir 

Mountain, McCord areas of Saskatchewan and I am pleased to 

present on their behalf. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 

to present. The prayer says: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

This petition was signed by people from Indian Head and 

Vibank. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 

as well on behalf on people concerned about the Saskatchewan 

film library. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

The signatures on this petition are mainly from the community 

of Assiniboia, Mr. Speaker, and I am pleased to present on their 

behalf. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

a petition and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan  

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that films will be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And these all come from Regina. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition to present to do with the problems caused by night 

hunting. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The community involved in this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from the town of Togo. I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward a 

petition today on behalf of the people in Saskatchewan. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1, and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than allocating 

these funds towards capital construction projects in the 

province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 

the Shaunavon, Consul, Eastend areas of the province. I so 

submit. 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions on behalf of citizens concerned over the safety of the 

No. 1 Highway. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1, and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than allocating 

these funds toward capital construction projects in the 

province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions are from 

the communities of Shaunavon and Frontier. I so present. 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Hague, Laird, 

Saskatoon, Turtleford, Lloydminster, and Goodsoil area of the 

province. I so submit. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 

present to this Assembly and I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

films be destroyed; rather the films will be given away to 

schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from the 

Edenwold, Carnduff, Pierson areas of this province. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf of 

concerned citizens with respect to the endangerment of lives 

and long-term survival of wildlife, and the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on the petition are from Melfort and 

Pleasantdale. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition, 

the prayer of relief which reads as follows: 

 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 

may be pleased to enact legislation to ban the practice of 

night hunting in Saskatchewan. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens of the town of Kamsack. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present the 

following petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No l., and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than 

allocating these funds towards capital construction projects 

in the province. 

As in duty bound, your petitioner every pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re from Shaunavon; they’re from Dollard and Frontier, 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens regarding the allocation of adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 

 

Various petitions that have been tabled as addenda to 

sessional papers 241, 242, and 243. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I 

introduce to you and to the others members of the Assembly, 

seated in your gallery, my Member of Parliament for Churchill 

River, Rick LaLiberte. If you’d just stand please, Rick, and let’s 

welcome Rick here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — May I say, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on 

my feet, that we may think that we have large constituencies, 

but Rick’s constituency, Churchill River, covers 57 per cent of 

this province, if you can believe it. 

 

Also I would like to take the opportunity . . . There are also, 

observing here today, two of my office employees here in the 

legislature. Natalie Bourgeois and Joy Strueby are here 

observing the proceedings today. So if you’d welcome them as 

well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the 

member in regards to welcoming Rick LaLiberte as the 

representative. Part of that 57 per cent, of course, is in my 

riding and I would like to give him first, a good northern 

Saskatchewan welcome. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

Liberal caucus, I too would like to welcome Rick to the 

Assembly today, and certainly point out that he’s a fellow 

hockey player — he plays left wing while I play centre. So it’s 

always nice to see a fellow hockey player join us today. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to welcome to the Assembly someone who really needs 

no introduction — Lorne Nystrom, who’s my Member of 

Parliament back in Ottawa. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Qualified Workers Needed in Hog Industry 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan consistently has the lowest unemployment rate in 

the country, and that’s even, Mr. Speaker, as our labour force 

continues to grow. More jobs are being created and more people 

are working in Saskatchewan than ever before, Mr. Speaker. A 

dramatic example of this reality is the fact that hog producers in 

the Carlton Trail Regional Economic Development Authority 

area around Humboldt have gone to Newfoundland and even 

New Brunswick to find qualified workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Stomp Pork Farms near Leroy is expected to 

increase its sow production between 2,400 and 4,800 sows by 

next year. Mr. Stomp already employs 35 people and he 

indicates that he’ll need 40 additional workers by the end of 

next year. 

 

Another hog producer in the area, Florian Possberg, says he can 

use workers even before the end of this year in his operation. 

 

The expansion of hog barns in Saskatchewan has created a 

significant spin-off activity for construction firms, including 

lumber, cement, and structural steel companies. 

 

The expected 500,000 increase in the hog production over the 

next year will create from 250 to 300 new, full-time, permanent 

jobs for men and women in rural Saskatchewan. This is in 

addition to the jobs already created during the construction of 

these facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is good news for the Saskatchewan economy 

and especially for our rural communities, Mr. Speaker, even 

those communities in the constituencies of members opposite. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Awards for Aberdeen School Newspaper 

 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the Aberdeen School was recently 

awarded top honours in an annual Saskatchewan student 

newspaper competition. The awards were sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, and the Regina Leader-Post. 

 

In addition to being named best overall student newspaper and 

collecting the plaque and $200 in prize money, Aberdeen 

School, The Muse — the school paper rather, The Muse — was 

recognized as the best newspaper in the category for high 

schools with enrolments of 150 to 499 students. 

 

Judges said that Aberdeen came out on top because the  

newspaper was well laid out, nicely sectionalized, and showed a 

creative use of typography. It was well written, extremely 

informative, and showed excellent student participation. All 

this, Mr. Speaker, from a school with about 150 high school 

students. 

 

Congratulations to the Aberdeen School on a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Can-Oats Milling Products Inc. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, more people than ever before 

are working right now in Saskatchewan, and I would like to 

highlight to all members of the constituency that in the 

constituency of Rosthern, Can-Oat Milling Products Inc. is 

currently constructing an $18 million processing facility located 

north of Martensville that plans to open on December 19 of this 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Can-Oats is privately owned. It’s a Canadian 

company which purchased the Saskatoon North Pool elevator 

this year, and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool owns 34 per cent 

of the shares in Can-Oats Milling Inc. 

 

Hundreds of jobs have been created, with economic spin-offs 

benefiting all aspects of the construction industry during the 

construction of this facility. Grain farmers in the area are happy 

to know that this facility will need 75 tonnes of raw oats a year 

and will be producing oat products to be marketed mainly to 

South America and the southern U.S. (United States). That’s a 

lot of oats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Livestock producers will be happy to know that the oat hull 

by-product, which will be substantial, can be used for livestock 

feed pellets which will be sold locally. 

 

The grand opening for the milling operation will likely be held 

next spring and the general public will be invited to attend, and 

I would like to invite the member from Rosthern to put this on 

his calendar. So that in addition to his dead-of-the-night, secret 

meetings he . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 

expired. 

 

Member for Melfort-Tisdale Apologizes to His Wife 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

people in this House think that our most acute critics are 

members opposite. I’m here to tell you that that’s not true. 

 

Last night when I returned home for a meeting and I walked 

into my home, my daughter came to me and said, dad, do you 

realize what you’ve said? And unfortunately she knows how to 

use the Internet; and I quote,“ and when I was first dating my 

present wife”, and therein lies the faux pas. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, if I may apologize publicly to Carole, my 

past wife, my present wife, my future wife, my only wife — 

love you, hon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

Provincial Housing Boom 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

take you on a quick trip around our province to talk about the 

booming housing industry, so hang on to all three points of your 

hat. 

 

By way of preface, let me quote Paul Cayton, who’s a CMHC 

(Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) market analyst for 

Saskatchewan, who says, “job and wage growth are 

encouraging new family formations leading to demand for more 

housing”. That’s a bureaucratic way of saying things are really 

hopping. And it’s my way of saying more people are working in 

Saskatchewan than ever before. 

 

For example in my city of Regina, housing starts are up by 19 

per cent over 1996. Work has begun on 494 houses in the city, 

and this of course does not even include the resale of housing. 

Housing starts in the province’s nine cities have increased 2.7 

per cent in the first 11 months of 1997. 

 

Not to be left out, Saskatoon house construction will reach its 

highest level in 10 years in 1998 according to predictions by 

CMHC. And to meet the needs for housing caused by the 

increasing oil and gas activities, Swift Current has seen a 34 per 

cent increase in construction of single and multiple housing this 

year. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, growth is not just occurring in our cities. 

This spring our government announced $8 million over three 

years to provide housing programs in the North. This year 24 

homes will be built in remote northern communities — work, 

by the way, awarded for the most part to northern contractors 

and providing northern jobs. That was a quick trip . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time is expired. 

 

Tribute to Northern Leaders 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday, 

December 13, 1997, a group of northern people gathered in 

Prince Albert, and the purpose of the gathering in Prince Albert 

was to honour and tribute the many northern leaders that have 

come throughout our ranks to help build northern Saskatchewan 

and to help present some of the many northern Saskatchewan’s 

problems. 

 

I’d like to take a few minutes to recognize some of those people 

in the Assembly today. One of course is Vital Morin, an elder 

who comes from Ile-a-la-Crosse and served as a former mayor. 

The other was Leonard Larson, a businessman from Buffalo 

Narrows who also was a former mayor. And the other is Nap 

Gardiner, a broadcaster, and now works with the MP (Member 

of Parliament) and is also a former mayor; and also Ms. Fitz of 

La Ronge; Allen Adam who is a former vice-chief of the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations). 

 

And of course the most important one, and certainly in our 

books, is Mr. Lawrence Yew, a former MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) who represented the Cumberland 

constituency. 

 

I think this is very fitting that we ask the Assembly to join me  

today in applauding and recognizing this very, very strong 

effort on behalf of the New North committee to recognize and 

to pay tribute to northern leadership. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CenAlta Well Services, Inc. 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We heard on Tuesday 

about the booming oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan in my 

area and in several others. One of the several others was the 

south-east part of the province. Regardless of where it happens, 

oil patch activity is good for the province and it is good for 

service industries in the communities where the services are 

located. 

 

One such example of this is the town of Carlyle in the 

constituency of my friend, the member from Cannington. He 

too has been busy at night and perhaps missed this daytime 

expansion of the economy in his area. CenAlta Well Services, 

Inc., a company that specializes in oil and gas well services, has 

announced that it will establish a branch office in Carlyle. 

CenAlta has been in operation for 31 years and has offices in 

Alberta, Saskatchewan, as well as Russia and China. 

 

Of particular note, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 16 employees 

and their families will be relocating to Carlyle — another 

indication that there are more people than ever before working 

in Saskatchewan. That is good news for Carlyle, for the 

merchants, the schools, and yes, the tax rolls of Carlyle — 

another rural town that is holding its own quite well because 

Saskatchewan is prospering under steady, good government. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

World Champion Tap Dancer 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 

many Saskatchewan residents know we are home to a world 

champion curling team, a speed skater, and a chamber choir, 

I’m pleased to inform this House that we have yet another 

world champion. Anita Herle Bauck recently finished as the top 

female tap dancer at a world championship competition in 

Germany. 

 

Anita presently resides with her husband in the community of 

Chaplin in my constituency and teaches at Doris Sitter School 

of Dance in Moose Jaw. Anita grew up on a farm north of 

Marquis in the Arm River constituency and attended Vanier 

Collegiate in your own constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Her success is a testimony to the importance of hard work and a 

demonstration of her passion for dance. Anita’s achievement is 

no doubt also a product of support from her husband, her 

parents, Marilyn and Gene, as well as the teaching skill of Doris 

Sitter and others. 

 

Culture is alive and well in Saskatchewan, and I’m sure all 

members join me in congratulating Anita on giving our 

province yet another world’s best. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Grain Transportation 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the minister of transport. 

Madam Minister, you and the member from Rosetown were 

happy the other day to be in Eston to cheer on the farmers there 

and try and horn in on the initiative of local producers who 

want to set up a short rail line operation. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m not surprised that in today’s paper the 

report is that less and less farmers are actively engaged in this 

province. I’m sure that that trend will continue and your 

government has done a lot with respect to hardships that 

farmers are faced with. Your government has had an all-out 

attack on producers for years, starting with the cancellation of 

the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts. You 

don’t fund highways properly. You don’t reduce regulations for 

producers. You don’t allow producers to market the products in 

a way they’d like to. And you don’t, period, do anything to help 

farmers. 

 

Madam Minister, how can you claim that you want to help 

farmers in this province when all you have done since your 

government formed office was hurt them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the hon. member opposite made a 

number of . . . or attempted to make a number of points in that 

speech, and I guess I can pick the one I want to answer. But 

overall I’ll tell you what we don’t do on this side of the House, 

Mr. Member, is we don’t advocate the end of the Canadian 

Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — That would take away over $300 million 

out of the pockets of farmers. I’ll tell you, if you wanted to be 

constructive and helpful to the farmers in your area you would 

get onside with this government — this Minister of Agriculture, 

the Minister of Transportation and the rest of the government 

— and help us lobby the Liberal friends in Ottawa to have a 

transportation policy instead of abandoning rail lines in this 

province, instead of trying to kill the Canadian Wheat Board, 

and instead of trying to just use your political gain. Because 

there’s a major cash flow crisis in this country right now, and 

I’d ask you to get onside with us and help make things better. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if you 

want, Mr. Minister, some suggestions on how to help farmers 

maybe we can help you out here a little bit. Your government is 

quick as usual to jump on everybody. Jump on the railways 

when they’re abandoning lines. You ask producers . . . you 

don’t ask producers for their help in any respect, you jump on 

the federal government if things aren’t going the way you 

would like them to. But that’s fine. But how about for a 

moment just looking in your own backyard. The number one 

hindrance to new companies taking on short rail line operations 

in this province, as was said at the conference that was held in  

Regina, is successor rights — your government’s legislation 

that makes it unaffordable for new companies to come in. The 

producers in Eston told the ministers that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member for 

Kindersley has the floor and is entitled to be able to put his 

question in a way that can be heard and understood, and I will 

ask all hon. members to cooperate with his right to present his 

question. The hon. member for . . . Order. Order from both 

sides. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you for your help, Mr. Speaker. The 

number one hindrance to companies taking over short rail line 

operations in this province is, as you know, Mr. Minister, 

successor rights. Your government’s legislation has made it 

unaffordable for new companies to start up here in this 

province. The producers in Eston told the ministers that that 

day; SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) has told you that; everybody says that in 

agriculture, Mr. Minister. Why don’t you do something for the 

farmers of this province and eliminate successor rights? Try and 

provide a little help in that area, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just finally . . . I 

just figured out this whole process. The member opposite is 

really trying hard to differentiate his politics of anti-unionism 

from the other guys that . . . (inaudible) . . . politics of 

anti-unionism. Nothing to do with the real question of helping 

farmers. 

 

If he knew . . . If he would read his papers he would know that 

Omni Trax has signed an agreement and it is not an issue. 

They’ve signed an agreement of labour. If he wanted to get on 

the issue of transportation and agriculture, he surely would be 

more positive in terms of working together to try to formulate a 

national transportation policy. Maybe he could get some of his 

Conservative cronies in Ottawa to lobby the Liberal 

government in Ottawa. And maybe he could reach across and 

try to differentiate . . . or even better . . . or even better, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now it seems the hon. members 

are just as enthusiastic about helping with the answer. And I’ll 

ask that the Hon. Minister of Agriculture be allowed to 

conclude his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the member, I 

asked the member . . . I understand that he’s got a little problem 

with the differentiation of politics on that side of the House. But 

maybe he could go one step further than asking his friends to 

the left of him; ask some of his friends, ask some of his former 

or his present Liberal colleagues in his own caucus to talk to the 

Liberals in Ottawa about transportation policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this is an indication of what this so-called new 

party with old clothes is all about — putting politics ahead of 

the goodness of the farmers of this country — I am sorely 

disappointed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

Night Hunting 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems the 

Minister of Agriculture has more political staff in his office 

than department staff. 

 

My question is to the Minister for the Environment. On Monday 

I gave notice of a Bill to ban all night hunting in the province of 

Saskatchewan and I’m certain supporting it would make your 

job a lot easier, Mr. Minister. 

 

Let’s just recap your comments on this issue over the past few 

days. Saturday’s Leader-Post reads, “No night hunting” and 

that “The province will ban night hunting in most of 

Saskatchewan by the end of February . . .” Yesterday you said 

in the House, “We are not saying we are banning anything at 

this time.” This is a very serious matter, Mr. Minister, a serious 

safety issue, not something you can flip-flop with on a daily 

basis. 

 

Mr. Minister, which ones is it going to be? Which ones, Mr. 

Minister? You’re banning spotlight hunting; you’re not banning 

spotlight hunting. Ban yes; ban no. Which one is it? Are you or 

are you not going to either support our Bill . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has been quite 

lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to put his — order — 

to put his question . . . Order. The hon. member has the 

opportunity and the right, and I’ll ask the hon. members to 

allow him, to put his question to the minister immediately now. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, are you or are you not 

going to support my Bill or ban night hunting in the province. 

Which is it, Mr. Minister? Give us a firm answer and a firm 

date. Will you ban night hunting in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not just sure 

how many times we have to repeat our position but I’ll read it 

verbatim from Friday. 

 

We are committed to end unsafe night hunting to meet the 

safety and security needs of Saskatchewan residents while 

respecting aboriginal treaty rights. 

 

In a nutshell, we are all opposed to unsafe night hunting, we all 

want to end unsafe night hunting, and we will end unsafe night 

hunting by February. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower’s Investment in Guyana 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Monday I questioned the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) about Guyana and 

received no answer. Yesterday again he chose to dodge the 

question, saying he was waiting for the Guyanese election 

results. And in this morning’s paper, he says he’s waiting on the 

Guyana decision because he’s too busy to discuss it in cabinet. 

Well more results are in and the present government is still in 

the lead. Cabinet has had information on the Guyana deal for 

months. There’s no sense waiting until next week to announce 

what you’re going to do. So my question is for the Premier. I’m 

going to make it simple. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you choose to listen to your political 

appointee, Jack Messer, and blow away $31 million of 

taxpayers’ money, or listen to the people of Saskatchewan and 

scrap the deal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 

member opposite we’re going backwards. Yesterday they had 

won the election, today they’re leading. I want to say to the 

member opposite that you should get your lines straight. 

 

But I have a quote here that I want to give to the member 

opposite. And I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . don’t get tired of 

them because I have a whole book of them. And it says, and I 

quote, “Rod Gantefoer said . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. And I’m sure 

having asked the question, the hon. members will want to listen 

for the answer. And that the whole House . . . order, order. 

Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

member had asked about the election in Guyana. Yesterday he 

said that the government had won. Today they’re leading. 

Tomorrow they may have lost the election. So we really want to 

wait until the final results are in. 

 

But on the issue of your credibility, I want to quote what you 

said about whether you are a Tory or a Liberal. You said, and I 

quote: 

 

No, absolutely no, not with the Tory party or any other 

party. I am a Liberal member of the legislature for 

Melfort-Tisdale, and that is what I will stay. 

 

Now I know why they’re yelling, I know why they’re yelling. 

 

The Speaker: — All hon. members on both sides of the House 

. . . I’ll give the minister just a few seconds to wrap up his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I know why the member’s yelling 

and hollering — so no one can hear what I’m going to say. But 

I’m going to say it anyway. I’m quoting the member, I’m 

quoting the member who says, “No, absolutely, no. Not with 

the Tory Party . . . “ not with the Tory Party. But more than 

that, no other party either. 

 

Now I want to say we need the branding iron and we need it 

quick for that boy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Channel Lake Petroleum 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my  



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

question was going to be to the CIC minister but so far he has 

failed to answer anything, so I’ll go to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, the whole Channel Lake has a pretty dark cloud 

hanging over it and there’s a lot you can do to clear things up. 

First, hold a review into the entire transaction from beginning to 

end so the public knows what happened; second, shed a little 

light on who was involved in the decision making. 

 

Mr. Premier, due diligence must be done. Normally, 

transactions of this size are put before two separate companies, 

like Watrous company or Kobiashi, to guarantee the best return 

for the seller — in this case, the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Premier, I would like to know who made the decision to 

sell Channel Lake, how many individuals were involved; we 

would like a copy of the minutes. Would you at least provide us 

with that information, sir? Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to give the 

same answer as I gave that member yesterday. Maybe if they’d 

quit yelling so much when I give the answers, they would be 

able to hear them. 

 

But the decision to sell Channel Lake was made on the 

recommendation from the management of SaskPower to the 

board of directors and the board of directors made the decision. 

And that’s how the decision was made and now that it’s quiet 

and you’ve heard the answer, maybe that will solve the 

mystery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Surgery Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it was almost two years ago that 

this NDP (New Democratic Party) government put a gun to the 

head of the Regina Health Board and forced them to vote to 

close the health centre, the Plains Health Centre. If this 

government has its way, the Plains will close its doors next fall. 

 

Of great concern to many people is how this closure will affect 

the level of health care for the people of southern 

Saskatchewan, and in particular, the impact it will have on 

waiting-lists, which are already unacceptably long. Something 

our former members supported as well, and now they’re 

heckling it. 

 

To the Minister of Health: sir, you’re predecessor wrote in a 

November, 1996, letter that work is under way to improve the 

current waiting-list system to make sure they don’t wait any 

longer than they should. What has been done to fulfil this 

promise or have you conveniently forgotten about this 

commitment, as the Premier did about personally looking into 

why a 79-year-old woman waited six days for hip surgery? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first I want to indicate 

to the member opposite that the decision around the 

consolidation of the hospitals in Regina was a decision that was 

made by the district health board after significant review of 

what would be the best system of delivering acute care, 

long-term care services in this community. 

And the recommendation by the Regina Health District was that 

they would consolidate the three operations into two. So today 

you’ll have the General hospital and the Pasqua Hospital 

providing a variety of services not only to the residents here in 

Regina, but across the piece of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Within the next year what you’ll see in this community is you’ll 

see a new MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). A new MRI is in 

the midst of being designed here and currently the funding is 

being put in place for this new piece of equipment that will not 

only serve people here in Regina, but will serve all of southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to that I want to say to the member that there will be 

an enrichment in the cardiovascular piece and there will be new 

equipment that will be added to that. Similarly, will serve not 

only the people in Regina, but will serve all of southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, at present we have a doctor 

shortage, we have a nursing shortage, we have a shortage of 

specialists, and a chronic bed shortage. The only thing we have 

an abundance of is patients who occupy waiting-lists, that need 

treatment seriously. The average wait for treatment has jumped 

from six and a half weeks to eight and a half weeks since 1993, 

and just yesterday the Minister of Health confirmed that surgery 

waiting-lists have lengthened because of increased demand. 

Unless this government has a proper plan in place to address 

this serious problem, the closure of the Plains Health Centre is 

premature. 

 

The Liberal opposition will be introducing a motion following 

question period, calling on this government to put the closure of 

the Plains on hold until a review of the health care services for 

Regina and southern Saskatchewan is completed and it can be 

established that a safe and reliable level of care can be provided. 

Will the minister support this motion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question on behalf of the government, and say in answering the 

question that it would be very helpful if the Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan acknowledged some basic facts, one of which at 

least has been acknowledged by their federal counterparts. 

 

I have here in front of me Leader-Post of August 21, 1997. The 

headline says, “Health cuts have hurt: Rock.” The story says, 

quote: 

 

Health Minister Allan Rock made a frank admission 

Wednesday that deep cuts to health care have hurt, causing 

anxiety which threatens confidence in the system. 

 

It is the most direct acknowledgement the Liberal 

government has made that the drastic cuts to money for 

health, education, and welfare in the 1995 budget (federal) 

have caused pain. 

 

He said: 

 

“I will not stand here and tell you that the cuts in transfer 

payments . . . were insignificant. They were not. Nor will I  



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

tell you that they have not had an impact. They have” (had 

an impact) . . . (Mr. Rock said.) 

 

Go talk to your Liberal counterparts about that problem. They 

created it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Channel Lake Petroleum 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Channel Lake is 

getting murkier and murkier. Documents obtained recently by 

the Liberal caucus show that Lawrence Portigal, while on staff 

at Channel Lake, was also a director of another company called 

Radisson Petroleum. Now this Radisson Petroleum merged with 

Channel Lake. Then later, of course, this same Mr. Portigal 

negotiates on behalf of the government the sale of Channel 

Lake to another company direct. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh, there’s an odour here. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And then a week later he emerges, he emerges 

as the president of the company he was negotiating with on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. All hon. members, all hon. 

members . . . All hon. members come to order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we had agreed in our caucus we 

should support each other, but you know with support like that 

. . . but anyway. How could Mr. Portigal have been acting in the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and SaskPower 

when he was, at the same time as negotiating supposedly on our 

behalf, lining up a job with the people he was selling our assets 

to. 

 

At what point did the minister know that Mr. Portigal was in 

what certainly appears to be a conflict of interest? What did you 

know and when did you know it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, not to bring any levity 

to the question period, but it gives new meaning to the call 

“Odour, odour” Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite rises. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that Mr. Portigal, in 

working for Channel Lake, did work on the negotiations. The 

company was sold. Mr. Portigal was then without work and the 

new company hired him. That’s about as devious as the plot 

was. 

 

Now as to who was the company that purchased Channel Lake, 

the holding company that owns the new company is a company 

called OPTUS Natural Gas Distribution. Now the plot thickens 

when you realize that one of the partners in this new company 

is the Hon. David Peterson. Now you will know who the Hon. 

David Peterson is, from Ontario. 

 

So when you talk about how thick the plot is, this was a deal 

where a company was purchased in 1993, was then 

subsequently sold in 1997 at a profit of $2 million to a company 

with a board of directors, one of whom is the former Liberal 

premier of Ontario. 

So I say to you, there couldn’t be a more open process. The 

board of directors made the decision. It will come to Crown 

Corporations . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I realize the minister is on record 

as saying this wasn’t a significant transaction, but the fact is he 

didn’t answer my question at all. When did he find out that Mr. 

Portigal had something else cooking besides looking after the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

If the sale of Channel Lake had been by public tender, then the 

people of Saskatchewan would have had some comfort that we 

got the best price possible. But that’s not what happened. We 

took the $5 million loss by what was a back-door, 

middle-of-the-night, un-tendered privatization — the sort of 

privatization this government says they’re opposed to — of a 

major Crown asset. 

 

Why was the sale un-tendered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I say to the member opposite, 

that when you say the significant transactions, that I decided it 

wasn’t required to take it there, that’s not accurate. The Crown 

Corporations Committee sets the limits of what’s a significant 

transaction. I didn’t make that decision; members of the Crown 

Corporations Committee did. 

 

Not one of you people in opposition who are raising this as an 

issue today has brought to the Crown Corporations Committee a 

concern that the transactions that are reported are too high or 

too low. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I wrote a letter, and you have it in your 

office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member from Shaunavon, or 

the member from Wood River, yelled from his seat that he sent 

me a letter this morning. Well . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Two days ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Two days ago. Oh, two days ago 

you made your mind up that it wasn’t the right level. So this is 

how concerned you have been about whether the limit for 

significant transactions are too high or too low. 

 

I say to you, if it isn’t the right level, bring it to the Crown 

Corporations Committee and offer up changes, and we’ll bring 

the report to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Infant Mortality 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Premier, yesterday, Mr. Premier, you eloquently addressed 

important issues facing Canada. You cited . . . You sir, quoted 

the Catholic bishops, who stated that it is, and I quote: “a 

damning indictment” that one in five children live in poverty in  



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

this country. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Premier, that it is a damning indictment 

that Saskatchewan holds first place in the rate of infant 

mortalities in the entire nation. Mr. Premier, tell us what your 

government is doing to address this very serious issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as that member and all 

members will well know, this province has been recognized 

across Canada as placing children at the very first of our 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not a claim that I or any 

member of government makes. That is the report of, for 

instance, Canada’s council on social development, who in a 

very recent report, and interestingly in the context of the unity 

discussions, in the context of Canada, has identified two 

provinces as showing leadership on issues regarding children, 

infants, and families — one of them being Quebec and the other 

being Saskatchewan. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the author of that 

very recent report, reported in The Globe and Mail, December 

9, says: “It’s not completely bleak. I think there are spots of 

light,” referring to Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, I say 

if this is as good as we can do in this province, it is a sad 

commentary for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Manitoba centre for health and policy 

evaluation study shows that Saskatchewan has the highest 

infant mortality rate in Canada, almost double that of every 

other province. In addition, the studies showed that 

Saskatchewan has the second lowest per capita health care 

spending in this country. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, these figures alarm me and I’m sure they do 

you as well. So would you please outline the actions that are 

going to be taken to save the lives of babies in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be more than happy to 

provide for the member a copy of the recently published review 

of the child action plan over its last four years. Mr. Speaker, this 

is a lengthy document that speaks to the many, many, many 

initiatives undertaken by this government in partnership with 

individuals and organizations and communities in this province 

to deal with the very serious issues affecting families and 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member asked, is there more we can do, more 

that we should do. The answer of course, is yes. With the 

cooperation of that member and hopefully all members and the 

community of Saskatchewan, we will address the needs of 

Saskatchewan children. But I say again that of all the provinces 

in Canada, this government and this province has been singled 

out for the efforts that we’re now taking. 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Yes, Mr. Minister, and of all the 

provinces in Canada, we have the most babies dying in this 

province. Mr. Minister, obviously the child action plan is not 

addressing this very serious issue. Now I brought this up in the 

past session, about child deaths. I’ve asked you for further 

investigations, and I’m sure that your government has collected 

statistics on this that can either support or refute the research 

from Manitoba. Would you provide that information to this 

House in writing, please, if you have it? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have provided to that 

member and all members, and are more than willing to provide, 

all of the information around infant mortality and child deaths 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know, and as members well know, an 

independent officer of our legislature, an officer who serves all 

members of this legislature and through this legislature the 

people of Saskatchewan, the Children’s Advocate, in our 

province is undergoing some specific reviews of individual 

child death circumstances and a broader review of that 

circumstance in our province. She’s working with the coroner. 

She’s working with a community-based group of individuals, 

highly qualified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re all concerned about these very significant 

and tragic deaths that occur within our province. And I can see, 

Mr. Speaker, us and we together, making progress. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 238  The Wildlife Amendment Act 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 

introduction of An Act to amend the Wildlife Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day . . . 

Order. Hon. members, before orders of the day, I have a 

message from the Lieutenant Governor and I would ask all hon. 

members to rise. Order. 

 

Pursuant to section 68.7 (order, please) of the Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy effective November 5, 1997: 

 

The Hon. Glenn Hagel, Chairperson/Speaker; the Hon. 

Eldon Lautermilch, Executive Council nominee; the Hon. 

Joanne Crofford, Executive Council nominee; Mr. Myron 

Kowalsky, MLA, government caucus nominee; Mr. Grant 

Whitmore, MLA, government caucus nominee; Mr. Bill 

Boyd, MLA, opposition caucus nominee; and Mr. Harvey 

McLane, MLA, third party caucus nominee. 

 

And it is signed by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Members may be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank you to the members. I would like to recognize a 

constituent of mine who I see has hobbled in on four legs, Mr. 

Louis Wolkowski, from Canora-Pelly. 

 

And I’d also like to extend my greetings to Mr. Rick Laliberte, 

MP. Rick and I had the pleasure of serving on the board of the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and I wish him well 

in his venture into federal politics. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I would like to request leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 

and to the members of the Assembly I’d like to introduce 

another great Saskatchewanian. Bob Long, is in your gallery. 

He’s had an honourable career in the House and in many public 

service roles beyond that we welcome here. And I want to also 

add our greetings, and welcome Louis Wolkowski, who’s been 

a respected municipal leader in Saskatchewan for years. 

Welcome, Louis. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — THIRD PARTY 

 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ll ask hon. members to come 

to order, please. Before recognizing the hon. member for North 

Battleford from the third party, I must first of all bring to the 

attention of the Assembly, that the motion as listed in the order 

papers is not in order. 

 

The matter of preamble was a matter about which I made a 

ruling in this House two days ago. And I won’t — order — and 

I won’t take the time of the Assembly to repeat what I said two 

days ago in bringing a ruling on this precise point. 

 

The offending portion of the motion is in fact in this case the 

final sentence: “. . . especially in view of the donations of 

money, grain, and other gifts received from the people of 

southern Saskatchewan” which in effect serves as a preamble in 

spite of its location within the motion. 

 

And for that reason I don’t find the motion in its current format 

to be in order, the problem being the preamble. I think it would 

be in order to pause for just a moment to allow the hon. member 

to determine whether he wishes to introduce the motion in . . . 

order . . . if he wishes to introduce the motion in proper format. 

And I will simply pause for a moment. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will so submit 

with that deletion of that phrase. 

The Speaker: — In that case I will find the motion in order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is with pride that I rise on behalf of the third party to 

bring forward this motion to save one of the key elements, one 

of the key facilities in health care for this province. And I might 

say how pleased I’ve been to this House that all members have 

put aside partisan politics in the support of larger issues. 

 

On Monday all members of this House rose as one to support 

the victims of hepatitis C infection. Yesterday we rose as one to 

support national unity and the initiative, on behalf of our 

Premier, to send a message to Quebec that they are a valued and 

integral member of the Canadian federation. Today we have 

another motion that it is my fervent hope all members of this 

House will join together as seeing the vital interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it was in that spirit that I invited my friend, the hon. 

member for Regina South, to join me in seconding this motion, 

because I know the member for Regina South is a man of 

conviction and a man of principles, and I also know that he 

campaigned in the last election saying, vote for me and I will 

save the Plains Health Centre. And I know that he is not 

someone to back away from promises and commitments, so I 

was sure that — and I am sure that — he is someone I can count 

on to support this motion. And I congratulate him for his 

support that I anticipate in that regard. 

 

If I may digress for just one moment however, Mr. Speaker, it is 

my understanding that in the early days of Confederation it was 

common for the nation’s politicians to run in both federal and 

provincial elections, and in fact many members of the House of 

Commons also sat in the provincial legislatures. Now that 

practice was abolished about a hundred years ago so that you 

could not sit in both Houses, or so I thought. 

 

So you can imagine my surprise when I read in the newspapers 

recently that there is a senator, a senator who hasn’t been seen 

for years and years. And this senator in fact hasn’t shown up for 

sittings of the Senate for so long his secretary wouldn’t know 

him if he walked in the office. Now imagine my surprise, Mr. 

Speaker, when I read in the newspaper that the name of this 

mysterious senator, who is more often to be seen on the Baja 

than the Rideau, is none other than Andrew Thompson. 

 

Probably just a coincidence, but I thought I would bring that to 

your attention, Mr. Speaker. Well I was hopeful that the 

member for Regina South would second the motion. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I can’t, I’m sorry. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But he says he can’t. So then I was thinking 

well, let’s stick to our non-partisan theme. What about the 

former minister of Health, the present Minister of Finance. The 

man who rose in this House, the man who assured us at budget 

time last year that the days of cuts and closures were over; 

enough hospitals had been closed, enough beds shut down, 

enough nurses fired, that he was going to put away his meat 

cleaver and from now on we were going to see a softer, kinder, 

gentler government. 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

And I want you to know how warmed I was to hear the then 

minister of Health tell us that the days of cuts and closures were 

. . . was over and we didn’t have to fear any further loss in 

health facilities and health care in this province. 

 

Well unfortunately that didn’t work out either. And then I 

thought, what about the present Minister of Health? He has the 

primary job of all citizens in this province, to look after the 

health care needs of the people of Saskatchewan. And I was 

hopeful that he would be able to second the motion. Certainly I 

look forward to his standing and fighting for health care in 

Saskatchewan and a key component in that health care. 

 

So I hope that those gentlemen and all learned and hon. 

members opposite will rise to say that the Plains Health Centre 

is a key facility which must be preserved. 

 

But I must advise, Mr. Speaker, that for purposes of today’s 

motion that it will be seconded by that great fighter on behalf of 

rural Saskatchewan citizens seeking health care, the hon. 

member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the Liberals are proposing is a responsible 

approach to health care management. Had the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) done its homework, they wouldn’t be in the 

embarrassing position now that . . . that I know they really want 

to go back on the closure of the Plains Health Centre. They 

realize it was a mistake, but unfortunately they’re worried about 

losing face if they go back on it and leave the Plains Health 

Centre open. 

 

Well I say, don’t worry about losing face; serving the people of 

Regina, the people of southern Saskatchewan, the people of the 

whole province, is more important. 

 

I know they’re concerned about balancing the books and 

rejigging the accounts, but I hope they’re also concerned about 

meeting the health care needs of the citizens of southern 

Saskatchewan. Unfortunately the government and its 

heavyweight approach to this issue has delivered a body-blow 

to knock the wind out of health care in the southern part of our 

province. 

 

We know that waiting-lists in this province are long — among 

the longest in Canada. We know that the closure of a major 

facility such as the Plains can only have a further negative 

impact on those waiting-lists. 

 

We know that out-of-town people, especially, will have a 

greater delay now as they are forced to fight through Regina 

traffic to try and find their way to one of the remaining 

downtown hospitals instead of the easy access they enjoyed, the 

easy access they enjoyed to the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the loyal opposition have a reasonable 

and a responsible and a rational approach. We want to consult 

with health care management rather than take the position that 

the way to build health care in this province is to amputate at 

the knees to prevent costs from running away. 

 

In their zeal to control the budget, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have 

cut in the wrong areas. The experience and expertise of the 

experts in the field has been ignored. Instead of consulting with  

those workers, front-care workers in health — the doctors, the 

nurses, the technicians — and all those people who have made 

the Plains Health Centre a facility of excellence, a facility the 

people of southern Saskatchewan can count on, the government 

bureaucrats have followed their own financial agenda which 

takes no account of any other considerations. 

 

It matters not what professional men and women in the health 

care field feel, government knows best. This, in spite of 

concerns that closure of the Plains would place emergency 

trauma patients at risk; reduce the likelihood of attracting 

specialists; eliminate a teaching hospital; jeopardize the health 

care of critical patients, for whom are the most acute patients, of 

all Regina hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rate of critical care has been reported to be 

higher at the Plains than at other Regina hospitals. Critical care 

at the Plains is over 95 per cent versus about 70 per cent at the 

General and just over half at the Pasqua. So the prime, key, 

critical care facility in Regina has been the Plains and that’s 

what the people of Regina and the people of southern 

Saskatchewan are about to lose. 

 

The Atkinson report recommended, as we know, that more 

support must be given to one-of-a-kind units in the province. 

Trauma and cardiac care and cardiac surgery at the Plains are 

cited in the Atkinson report as some of the components that we 

must be eager to save. 

 

The general surgery is higher, much higher, at the Plains than at 

the other facilities; over 90 per cent at the Plains. Indeed from 

the figures we see, it would make more sense to move some of 

these facilities to the Plains and consolidate at the Plains rather 

than to shut it down altogether with the forced consolidation 

into the remaining hospitals in Regina. 

 

Services have been consolidated in Saskatoon as we know. In 

Saskatoon they have the Royal University Hospital, which 

serves as the teaching hospital, and the acute hospital, and the 

centre for excellence and care for all the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. Now Saskatoon and the northern part of the 

province is about the same size of city; same size of population. 

If it qualifies for a base hospital such as Royal University, does 

it not make sense that Regina should also have a base hospital? 

 

The health load for the two cities is about the same. The health 

load for the hospitals in the two centres is about the same. One 

change though, Mr. Speaker, one serious, serious difference is 

that Saskatoon has approximately 100 more specialists than 

Regina. So we know that Regina already has a serious problem 

attracting specialists to this city and for southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the removal of the Plains assist in that problem or make it 

worse? I think we all know the answer. If the Plains is lost, the 

discrepancy between specialists in Regina versus Saskatoon, as 

I say presently running at 100, can only increase. We are going 

to have far more problem attracting and holding specialists at 

the Plains for southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Furthermore, it’s been recognized that general surgery or 

orthopedics can be moved to any hospital because that’s not as 

stressful or as difficult for an institution. Some departments can 

be effectively moved; others cannot be moved effectively from  



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

one facility to another. 

 

How does, Mr. Speaker, this government expect to attract 

specialists to Regina, to southern Saskatchewan, without the 

Plains hospital? What is the plan of the government to address 

the fact that Regina has so far fewer specialists than does 

Saskatoon? What will happen when the city’s only standing 

trauma centre closes in October of this coming year, less than a 

year away? 

 

For example, with the trauma unit at the Plains, it would be 

important to maintain its ties to support units like neurosurgery, 

cardiovascular and thoracic surgery, cardiac catheterization, and 

the CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Plains is the key component in the health care 

team of southern Saskatchewan facilities. It’s like taking the 

quarterback off the football team. What do you have left of a 

football team without the quarterback? And yet that is what this 

government is proposing. The Plains Health Centre is part of 

that team; it’s an important part of that team. It was designed in 

the ’60s under a Liberal government to be the base hospital for 

health care in southern Saskatchewan. And I do hope — I do 

hope — that the fact that the Liberals and Ross Thatcher wanted 

the base hospital in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted, and I’ll ask that the clock be 

stopped while this is being done as well. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — My apologies to the hon. member from 

Battleford. A friend and journalist, freelance journalist, and 

former school trustee and member of the Saskatchewan Safety 

Council, Helga Fellehner, is in the gallery opposite. I would ask 

through you and to mall members, to introduce Helga to the 

House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — THIRD PARTY 

 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I say, the whole 

point of this special session is to put partisan politics aside, so I 

certainly hope that the fact that the Liberals and Ross Thatcher 

wanted a base hospital in Regina to serve the people of southern 

Saskatchewan is not a factor in the decision of saying that we 

shouldn’t have the Plains Health Centre. I do hope that’s not on 

anyone’s mind, and we will just think about what’s good for 

patients in Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 

 

The lack of recognition being given presently to the teamwork 

approach in trauma, cardiac care, cardiac surgery, is puzzling  

because it runs contrary to what the Atkinson report 

recommended. The Atkinson report, accepted by this 

government, says that acute care is valueless without 

ambulatory care. So if the various components of health care 

have to link up and be cooperative, and each playing its own 

role so that there is not duplication but there is service for all 

people, surely closing the Plains simply does not advance this 

agenda. 

 

Well I know the government will say there is the question of 

budget and of money, and that is always a concern, but let’s 

look at what alternatives, what alternatives will there be? 

 

(1445) 

 

Well the government says that they can save about $10 million 

a year. But, Mr. Speaker, both the Regina General and the 

Pasqua are older hospitals. How much is it going to cost to 

expand and renovate and fix up those facilities? The Plains is 

actually the newest facility and the one in the best condition. 

 

And what are we going to do? Simply cram all of the patients 

into the two remaining hospitals or, or do you say that these 

beds aren’t needed and we can have further closures. Is the 

position of the government that these beds, this care, is not 

required? 

 

Furthermore, let’s look at that $10 million figure — $10 million 

will be saved in health care. But we all know, we all know that 

of that $10 million, about 7 or 8 million of that represents staff 

component, wages. In other words, in order to save to $10 

million, the vast majority, somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

three-quarters, will have to come out of cancelled positions, 

laid-off nurses, fired health care workers. That’s the money 

that’s being saved. Let no one be in any illusion. The savings 

come from firing nurses. That’s where the government plans on 

saving the money. 

 

How many nurses have been fired already? How many 

thousands of nurses have lost their jobs in this province? But 

there’s 10 million more yet to go, and that 10 million represents 

. . . approximately three-quarters of that amount comes out of 

nursing salaries and other front-care health workers. 

 

So, so make no mistake. If we’re going to save $10 million, 

we’re going to have further closures, further cut-backs, further 

firings. As my learned colleague pointed out, we blew $16 

million on a cable company in Illinois. So we’re going to save 

10 million bucks, we’re going to save 10 million bucks by 

closing the Plains and firing a bunch of nurses, but we lost 

nearly double that on a cable company in Chicago. 

 

And of course, and of course we’re proposing to ship three 

times that amount to Guyana. So there’s, you know, cut out 

Guyana, there’s $31 million. That’s more than three times of 

course, 31 million we’re going to ship to Guyana; there’s three 

more years of the Plains hospital. And there we have it for 

longer than this government’s going to be in place anyway, 

because all they have to worry about is how we finance the 

Plains Health Centre till 1999. 

 

Well another point on the Plains. A helicopter pad is at the 

Plains Health Centre. Now that’s very important when we talk  



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

about ambulatory care and the Atkinson report. If we . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I hear my colleague across the 

floor saying, used every day, very needed, essential. And yet, so 

why are we going to dynamite it? Why are we going to do away 

with this helicopter pad, which means that people in rural 

Saskatchewan can get to the facility quickly, and hopefully on 

time, to meet their health crises? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the one facility, the one facility in southern 

Saskatchewan, the only facility in southern Saskatchewan that 

has a helicopter pad to bring patients there, to bring patients to 

the Plains Health Centre, is going to be lost. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’m sure the hon. member from Regina 

South will welcome the opportunity to get into debate, and I’ll 

urge him to save his remarks until he can put them on the 

record. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t take offence at all. I 

understand how members opposite are anxious to express their 

support for this motion, to show that they are going to join with 

the Liberals to keep the Plains open. And I want, I want to be 

on record that I appreciate that anticipated support. 

 

We have a proud tradition of health care in this province and 

one of the miracle stories from this province that made 

headlines around the world was the Karlee Kosolofski story, the 

little girl who made medical history from low body 

temperature, and her survival. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

members. I’d like to introduce to you and through you a former 

member and former cabinet minister in this House and a friend 

of mine from my constituency, Bob Long, and I’d like you to 

welcome him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — THIRD PARTY 

 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So we were proud in Saskatchewan, and of 

course so happy for this little girl and her family, to think that 

medical history was made in this province because of the Plains 

Health Centre. How could anyone possibly think of losing that, 

of doing away with that? 

 

I can only assume that members opposite get the same phone 

calls that we get all the time saying, thank heavens for the 

Plains Health Centre; mother or grandpa or whoever had a heart 

attack, rushed in to the Plains, and he or she is alive today 

because of the care they were able to receive at the Plains  

Health Centre. For heaven’s sake, don’t close it. 

 

I assume members opposite are getting those same calls as I and 

my colleagues are receiving. 

 

In closing the Plains Health Centre, are we considering 

population increases? Are we considering, are we considering 

the ageing of our population which will bring — even without 

an increase in the population — it will bring more pressures on 

health care services as our population ages? 

 

What consideration has been given to the fact that demographic 

projections say that first nations will be an ever-increasing part 

of the configuration of our population? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the savings, the $10 million a year, are going to 

require 10 years in order to be realized because part of closing 

the Plains Health Centre down, part of mothballing it and trying 

to get the remaining hospitals ready for the influx of cramming 

in the patients from the Plains centre, give or take, we’re in 

about the 100 million range. 

 

So again, we’re going to save 10 million a year, but we lose 100 

million by closing the Plains. So there’s at least 10 years to get 

to the break-even point. Why, Mr. Speaker, are they worried 

about 10 years from now? They’re not going to be around 10 

years from now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, my fear though, my fear is that there are many sick and 

elderly patients in southern Saskatchewan who also aren’t going 

to be around in 10 years if the government gets away with their 

projected closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Well I know that the government and the government ministers 

follow what’s going on in other provinces and maybe we 

shouldn’t be surprised that as disciples of the Ralph Klein/Mike 

Harris approach, they’re taking a leaf of his book and saying 

that we can balance, we can balance the books by cutting the 

service. No service, no problem, end of problem. And the 

money has been saved. 

 

But in this case, Mr. Speaker, the 10 million a year they are 

going to save is so minor compared to the 100 million it costs to 

close the Plains, or even, as I say, the 16 million that’s lost on 

some loopy cable company project in Chicago. Well when you 

think of the tax windfalls this province has received in the last 

few years, we really can’t see why this closure is necessary. 

 

As we know — as we know, Mr. Speaker — the federal 

government reduced about 281 million from two years in health 

and social transfers. We hear about that on a daily basis in this 

House. What we are not told however, is during that same 

period that we lost about 280 million from Ottawa, the revenues 

of this province increased by nearly 700 million. 

 

And that’s not including record sales of oil leases that have 

reached record revenues for the last several years. So while we 

talk about this 281 million, we don’t talk about the 700 million 

in increased tax revenue. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well I know the members opposite are anxious  



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

to get in here so they can express their dedication to health care 

and I will be glad if this is another example where we stand 

together for the needs of the people instead of the needs of the 

balance sheet. 

 

Because I was saddened when the Provincial Auditor this year 

wrote in his report and I quote, Mr. Speaker, when health 

districts set priorities, they are related to the department’s 

expectations of financial restraint rather than the district’s 

priority health care needs. 

 

The financial restraints were in my parentheses. What the 

Provincial Auditor has told us, very clearly, is that health 

districts set their budgets according to the budgets . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Needs-based assessment, you’re 

right. My colleague over there is absolutely right. But what 

needs-based? The needs of the Finance department as opposed 

to the needs of the patients. That’s what the Provincial Auditor 

said, that’s on the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s not my 

statement. Needs-based funding. 

 

That’s what we’ve got, needs-based on the bottom line, on the 

cash line, not needs-based on patient services. That’s what we 

have in Saskatchewan. Is it possible — is it possible, Mr. 

Speaker — that we can get back to the needs of the patients? 

 

Well I know that . . . I know the friends opposite will say that 

this was after all a health district decision, this wasn’t a 

government decision. But you know, the health district had a 

gun pointed to its head. They were told in a letter, a letter from 

the Health department to Dick Chinn, dated January 12, 1996 

— a day before the board was to vote on whether or not the 

Plains Health Centre was to remain open — and they were 

advised in a letter at that time that the funding they would be 

receiving was on the basis that the Plains Health Centre was to 

be closed. 

 

So the funding from the provincial government was on the basis 

that the Plains Health Centre will be gone. You will not be 

funded for the Plains Health Centre. 

 

So the next day the board really had no decision to make and 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — An unregistered gun held to their head. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I wonder what’s going to happen to the 

Health department when we’ve got gun registration. Will they 

be able to hold the guns to the head of our health districts quite 

as effectively and quite as quickly as they have before? 

 

But the board of the health district had no decision to make 

because they had already been advised by the provincial 

government that the funding for the health district . . . for the 

Plains Health Centre was being removed. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, the decision of the board was strictly and solely on the 

basis that the funding for Plains Health Centre had been 

withdrawn by this government. 

 

Now a group of nurses, group of nurses . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who’s doing your research over there? 

Mr. Hillson: — Well, okay, Mr. Speaker, my friend and 

colleague over there wants to know where we got our research. 

Well I learned about the importance of the Plains Health Centre 

by reading his campaign literature, and it was there that I first 

realized how important it was to fight for the Plains Health 

Centre when I . . . and I was moved, I was moved when I picked 

up his campaign brochure and read there: “Andrew Thomson 

and Roy Romanow — leadership that’s working, leadership that 

will keep the Plains Health Centre open.” 

 

Now those are stirring words, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Table it. Table it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well a group of . . . Well if my learned friend, 

if he wants his campaign literature tabled, I won’t object to that. 

 

But I will say, a study of nurses from the Plains made two 

proposals for consolidation. One suggested converting the 

Regina General into a geriatric hospital and another said the 

Plains should become the acute care speciality centre. In this 

way we wouldn’t have to close anything if the Regina General, 

if the Regina General became a geriatric centre and the Plains 

became the speciality acute care centre. 

 

Now that’s what the nurses, the front-care health workers said. I 

think that those are the people who know as good or better than 

anyone and we should listen to the health care workers, the 

health care professionals. 

 

Well I don’t think that the needs of southern Saskatchewan 

really came into account here. It wasn’t a question of them 

deciding that there were too many beds. It wasn’t a question 

that they sat down and said, there’s an excess of nurses in 

southern Saskatchewan, there’s an excess of specialists, there’s 

an excess of hospital beds — we’ve got too many; we’ve got to 

get rid of some. 

 

(1500) 

 

That was not what happened. What happened was the 

provincial government said, your funding is gone. If you keep 

open the Plains Health Centre, you will receive no funding for 

it. 

 

Well the Fraser Institute . . . And I know that’s not the favourite 

think-tank of some friends opposite. And they certainly won’t 

like this one because the Fraser Institute says that our 

waiting-lists are among the highest in Canada. And I have to 

ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will those waiting-lists shorten when 

we close the Plains Health Centre? Are we going to get in for 

treatment quicker when the Plains Health Centre is gone? Or do 

you think those lists are going to grow? 

 

We know there’s a serious problem attracting specialists to 

Regina — 100 fewer than Saskatoon. Is it going to become 

easier to attract specialists to Regina when we close the Plains? 

Or is it likely to become more difficult? 

 

Now I ask the Hon. Minister of Education to bear with me 

because there’s lots of interesting and important material here 

that I’m sure will be for her edification. 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

Now between 1993 and 1996 the median wait for an 

appointment with a specialist in this province has grown nearly 

two weeks. We’ve gone from about six and a half to eight and a 

half weeks. This put Saskatchewan as the second worst in 

Canada. 

 

So there we had, 1993 to 1996 — this is what wellness did for 

Saskatchewan — two weeks onto our waiting-lists. Well what’s 

going to happen to that two weeks in southern Saskatchewan 

after we’ve gotten rid of the Plains? 

 

Well the median time between a GP (general practitioner) 

referral to a specialist in this province has now grown about 

three weeks under wellness. We’ve gone from about nine and a 

half to twelve and a half. 

 

So there’s a three-week increase in a wait to get a referral to a 

specialist. So there’s wellness — there’s what wellness has 

done. And I simply say, will the closure of the Plains increase 

this or make it worse? 

 

With the destruction of health care facilities in rural 

Saskatchewan, the importance of a base hospital following the 

Thatcher dream in the ‘60s is even more important as people 

can’t get health care in our smaller communities. And the 

government has told us that they’re working on 911. We hope 

they get it up and running. But there doesn’t seem to be any 

great speed there. 

 

Well we’ve also heard that health board members are not 

supposed to be open with their discussions, to tell us, the 

people, how they really feel about the health board closure. But 

we do know, we do know that, we do know that they have done 

this because, simply because they cannot get heath care, they 

cannot get health care in their communities, they need to get 

health care at a base hospital such as the Plains. 

 

So I say to my friends opposite, please, please do not tell us, do 

not tell us that this decision is because of a decision by a board. 

You know that’s not so. The board made a decision because the 

Health department said your funding is gone. If the board’s 

funding is put back into place, the Plains Health Centre will be 

saved. 

 

Let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, that about two-thirds of the 

projected savings from the Plains closure will come from 

salaries, will come from fired nurses. We all know what that 

means, Mr. Speaker. The projected savings come at the cost of 

more laid-off health care workers and patient care will again 

decline in a province where we have lost thousands of nurses. 

 

Already in this province, Mr. Speaker, health care workers have 

a high claim on workers’ compensation and a sick-time claim 

nearly double the national average. Now that is a direct cost of 

wellness. Wellness isn’t working for health care workers, Mr. 

Speaker. Wellness has resulted in burn-out and lost staff time 

because our nurses have seen their colleagues gone; they’re 

trying to cope with a crumbling system. They’re trying to cope 

with fewer and fewer nurses handling more and more patients, 

and that has resulted in now sick-loss time nearly double the 

national average. 

 

Burn-out is already a problem with health care workers. If we 

close yet another facility and lay off a bunch more nurses — we 

cram those patients into the existing facilities in Regina — is 

burn-out of our health care professionals going to get better and 

easier or is it going to get worse? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have great trust in the NDP. I believe they 

will not be so mealy-mouthed as to suggest that they’ll just sit 

on their hands and allow the Plains to be closed and shove all 

the blame off on the Regina Health District and say they have 

no responsibility in this matter. The health district voted for 

closure for one and only one reason alone: they had no funding. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government tells us they set up health 

districts to allow for local control, to allow local residents to 

determine their needs and their priorities. This sounds great. But 

what we see in practice is that health districts have been set up 

as the fall guys. You know when the health district in my area 

didn’t receive adequate funding they had to close the Rabbit 

Lake Health Centre. It’s now been privatized in a province that 

says it’s opposed to the privatization of health facilities. 

 

If health districts are to have a role in health deliverance they 

have to have some role to play other than being the fall guys — 

the fall guys for inadequate funding by the provincial 

government. They can’t be used just so the Health minister can 

pass the buck and say he’s not responsible for health care in a 

province . . . in the province and that cuts are due to board 

decisions and nothing to do with him. 

 

So I say to members opposite, please, please don’t make the 

people of southern Saskatchewan have to sit and listen to you 

say that you really want the Plains to remain open, but you’re 

going to stand by and let it happen because an underfunded 

health board was forced by you to make this unfortunate 

decision. Don’t pass the buck that way. That won’t wash with 

the people of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we passed a unity resolution, again 

reaffirming that the framers of our constitution were right in 

establishing a federal form of government in which some things 

would be handled by the national government and some things 

by the provinces. Under that constitution, responsibility for 

health care was given to the provinces. 

 

In a different time and age, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was a 

responsibility our provincial government was proud to 

discharge, whether when we became the first province to 

provide public funding for cancer treatment and the first 

province to establish a comprehensive tuberculosis program — 

as we did in the early days under the Liberals — or when we 

established the first hospitalization and medicare programs, as 

occurred under the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation). 

 

Surely this is a tradition worth preserving. Surely this is a proud 

heritage we will not allow to be killed by a provincial 

government which denies it has any responsibility for health, 

and instead tells angry and perplexed patients that they should 

forward their complaints either to the health district or to 

Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province was not built by leaders . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I assume the members are just too anxious to get in  



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

here and say they also believe in the Plains Health Centre. Just 

provide adequate funding to it and it will remain open. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province was not 

built by leaders who said, don’t look at me; blame somebody 

else. I’m not responsible. I’d love to help out but circumstances 

prevent me from doing more than sitting on my duff and 

offering my heartfelt sympathy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province was built by men and women of 

vision who, when they saw a need, they dealt with it. They were 

not buck passers and blame assignors like this crew. When this 

province was formed, there were almost no roads, no schools, 

no hospitals. And what did the government do? Did it say, 

phone the RM (rural municipality) office? Well of course they 

couldn’t do that because there were no phones and no RM 

offices. 

 

Did they say, blame Ottawa? No. They said, we’re a new 

province; we’re taking responsibility. We’re building those 

schools, we’re building those hospitals, we’re building those 

roads, we’re building a province. Let us remain true to their 

heritage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was not built on excuses. It was 

built on action. And I don’t think, I don’t think the excuse 

makers and the blame assignors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot 

think, I cannot think that the excuse makers and the blame 

assignors of the present generation will leave the same, will 

leave the same heritage, the same monuments behind that the 

people who created this province have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are a province of doers, not of whiners. Let us 

return to our heritage. Let us be a province of doers and not 

whiners. 

 

Well Saskatoon has its Royal University Hospital. This serves 

as a centre of excellence and quality health care for all of the 

people of northern Saskatchewan. And coming from North 

Battleford, I certainly personally appreciate that, as do my 

constituents. 

 

However, as someone who was originally raised near Rouleau 

where that little Karlee Kosolofski was saved, I feel for the 

needs of my friends and relatives who live in the southern part 

of the province. And I personally think that a base hospital in 

northern Saskatchewan, a base hospital in southern 

Saskatchewan, makes sense. 

 

And I actually think that the people of southern Saskatchewan, I 

actually think the people of southern Saskatchewan are just as 

good and just as fine a people and deserve just as much 

consideration as the people of northern Saskatchewan. The 

people of Regina, the people of Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the people of Regina deserve the same consideration in health 

care as the people of Saskatoon, even if the people of Regina 

don’t have the Premier and the Finance minister representing 

their city. 

 

Well the auditor told us very eloquently in his report this fall 

that health district budgets were not based on the health needs 

of the people but on the . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Pursuant to special 

order, the time allocated for debate on this motion is out and I 

would be obliged to ask the member to put the motion now. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I didn’t know I’d gone on quite that long, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. If I may . . . Well, Mr. Deputy . . . If I may 

read the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The time is allocated and I 

would ask the member to read the motion now. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to move, 

seconded by the hon. member for Wood River: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the provincial government to 

save the Plains Health Centre from closure by providing 

adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that the 

Plains Health Centre may continue meeting the health care 

needs of the people in the Regina district and all of 

southern Saskatchewan as the area’s only single standing 

trauma centre, and so that the unacceptable delays in 

surgery now being suffered by Saskatchewan citizens may 

be reduced, and so that the hospital may serve as a centre 

for cardiovascular care, surgery, neurology, pediatrics, 

obstetrics, gynecology, and urology for the people of 

southern Saskatchewan, including Regina, as it was 

intended. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:15 p.m. until 3:24 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 15 

 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 

D’Autremont Draude Gantefoer 

Heppner Osika Hillson 

McPherson Aldridge Belanger 

Haverstock Julé Goohsen 

 

Nays — 22 

 

Tchorzewski Johnson Goulet 

Lautermilch Kowalsky Calvert 

Teichrob Pringle Trew 

Lorje Nilson Serby 

Hamilton Stanger Sonntag 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Jess Langford Murrell 

Thomson   

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 

 

Saskatchewan Crown Corporations Accountability 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m very pleased to lead off this discussion of the many serious 

issues facing Saskatchewan Crown corporations for the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus. There’s very little doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, that our Crown corporations are at a very serious 

crossroads, and the issues concerning Crown corporations such 

as SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) cannot be ignored by the government 

any longer. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are now very alienated from the 

Crowns due to this government’s actions. While the members 

opposite continue to speak rhetorically about the Crowns being 

owned by the people of Saskatchewan, in practice it’s because 

it’s very clear that these are only words. The people of 

Saskatchewan no longer have any say in how the Crowns are 

operated. They have no say over the rates they pay and they 

have no say over the mandate of the Crowns; it’s become all too 

clear over the course of the last six years under this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no better topic which reveals the arrogance 

of this provincial government than when we discuss the 

Crowns. The members opposite operate the Crowns as if they 

were their own personal toys. Decisions are being made behind 

closed doors away from public scrutiny, away from the 

legislature. And all too often the Saskatchewan people learn too 

late that another venture by a Crown has gone sour and the 

people of this province will be forced to once again pick up the 

tab. 

 

Yesterday in this House, the Minister of CIC stated that 

everything is in the open; everything is above board when it 

comes to the decisions made by Saskatchewan’s family of 

Crown corporations. That’s because this government, due to it’s 

overwhelming generosity I suppose, allows us to ask questions 

about significant transactions of our Crowns. 

 

Of course any such questions come months after the transaction 

is completed. And the minister states, this is just fine because 

that much was not even done a few years ago. What the 

minister doesn’t state, however, is that a few years ago we 

didn’t see the presidents of our Crown corporations and the 

Minister of CIC circumnavigating the globe just looking for 

more places in which to dump Crown money. 

 

Last week SaskTel president, Don Ching, was kind enough to 

inform the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations that it 

is his goal to invest $200 million around the globe in the next 

three to five years. Apparently SaskTel’s money is going to 

Australia, Europe, and the Caribbean, and we’ve already sunk a 

pile of money into New Zealand. And of course we won’t learn 

about the details of these transactions until the contracts are 

signed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And as we’ve learned lately, if these deals go bad it takes a 

whole lot more time to find out. When the NST (Network 

Services of Chicago) investment in the United States went up in 

flames we didn’t hear a word about it from this government. 

Only when laid-off employees in the U.S. complained about 

SaskTel publicly did the residents of Saskatchewan — the 

supposed owners of the corporation — become aware that $16 

million of their money was going down the drain. The  

government devoted all of one line to the NST fiasco in the 

latest SaskTel annual report, and even then not a word was 

mentioned about the details of what went wrong. We really still 

don’t know the whole story, Mr. Speaker, and until there’s a 

new government in town we probably won’t know the details. 

 

In the last couple of weeks we learned from the Provincial 

Auditor that our government had managed to squander another 

$8 million with SaskPower’s Channel Lake Petroleum deal. 

Neither the purchase nor the sale of Channel Lake came before 

the Crown Corporations Committee, because the minister had 

deemed it insignificant. Then we find out that Channel Lake 

was sold without even being put to tender and that the man 

hired to negotiate the sale ended up sitting on the purchaser’s 

board of directors. And we . . . when we the people of 

Saskatchewan were made aware of any of this by the members 

opposite, for those members, was this minister open and 

accountable then? Of course not. Sure, when they make some 

money off a deal like LCL, (Leicester Communications 

Limited) the fireworks are set off and the banners raised. 

 

(1530) 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we heard lots and lots about LCL. But 

everything else is withheld from the public until someone else 

outside of the government blows the whistle. It’s a contemptible 

way to treat the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we see this kind of behaviour continuing to this 

very day. 

 

When the Premier decided to call this House back to pass the 

unity resolution, suddenly SaskPower’s Guyana deal was put on 

hold, just so the minister would not have to answer questions 

this week. And we’ve seen him refuse to answer every day of 

the session so far. It’s just shocking arrogance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is there any wonder why the people of Saskatchewan are just 

slightly confused about SaskPower proposing to dump $31 

million into a broken-down power company in South America? 

Is there any wonder that the people of Saskatchewan are 

concerned that at the same time our SaskPower’s in Guyana, 

SaskTel is in New Zealand, and SaskEnergy is in Chile. It’s 

getting harder and harder for Saskatchewan residents 

themselves, the owner of these companies, to get quality and 

affordable service right here at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when these Crowns were set up it was to provide 

people here in Saskatchewan with equal access to affordable 

service where the private sector could not. The Crowns weren’t 

just set up as another tax tool for the government. They weren’t 

set up to allow the minister to jet all over the world looking for 

new investments. They were set up to give the people of 

Saskatchewan the best possible service for the best cost. 

 

Man, how times have changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Ask 

anyone who has applied for new farmyard service from 

SaskPower or for SaskTel or for SaskEnergy. Ask them what 

they believe the original edict of the Crowns was, and does it 

still hold true. And I think they will tell you that it does not 

because the cost of anyone wanting to get new service in rural 

areas today, the cost is totally prohibitive. Because to provide 

such service at affordable prices may eat into the Crown 

corporations’ record profits. It may eat into some of the money  



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

that this government now simply views as another source of tax 

dollars. 

 

Somewhere along the line these Crowns have gotten off the 

track. Instead of investing in service here, Crown money is sent 

overseas where the Crowns may or may not be able to turn a 

fast buck. That’s why SaskTel is willing to spend more than 

$200 million in foreign investments but is dragging its heels in 

enlarging local distance exchange areas here in Saskatchewan, 

which would have made a reduced cost and improved service 

for many residents in rural Saskatchewan. Does the government 

actually believe that its priorities are the priorities of the 

people? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard officials from the Crown state 

that these type of foreign investment decisions will make 

money for the Crowns and thus save jobs here at home. What 

I’ve never heard, however, is a quantifiable number. 

 

Let’s look at Guyana, $31 million. Will it create 10 jobs in 

Saskatchewan? That would cost $3.1 million a job. Let’s be 

generous; let’s say it creates 100 jobs in Saskatchewan. Then 

the cost of the jobs drop to $310,000 apiece. Seems like a pretty 

expensive way to create jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

How many jobs did the NST deal create? We know Channel 

Lake has created at least one job, but it doesn’t seem enough to 

make that worthwhile either. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan are 

telling us is that the Crowns are heading in the wrong direction. 

They’re telling us that it’s pretty hard for them to swallow 

sending $31 million to Guyana at the same time as their own 

utility costs are rising, with no real accountability. 

 

And what is the result, Mr. Speaker? The result is that the 

people no longer see the Crowns as their companies. They see 

them as the personal kingdoms of the likes of Jack Messer and 

Don Ching. The people of Saskatchewan are very quickly 

losing any sense of loyalty to these companies because they see 

them for what they’ve become. 

 

And in this time when they’re very, very quickly . . . we’re 

heading quickly towards competition, the government is setting 

up a disastrous course for the Crowns they claim to love so 

dearly. Because the people are angry. And when they get true, 

full competition in telephone, in natural gas, in power, what’s to 

keep them from switching to a company that offers them a 

lower price? 

 

I was recently speaking to a Saskatchewan businessman who 

had switched from SaskTel to another company and has seen 

his long-distance bill cut in half. And this same company, 

which uses a large amount of power, has explored options other 

that our Crown, SaskPower. Why? Because he has come to the 

conclusion that the alternatives are slowly becoming more 

available to him and that they are better than any sense of 

continued loyalty to SaskTel or SaskPower. Because this 

business person, like so many other people in Saskatchewan, 

has no sense that the Crowns have any loyalty at all to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this person’s company spends seven and a half to 

eight cents per kilowatt-hour for power. In Alberta the cost for  

similar companies is four and a half cents. That’s nearly double, 

Mr. Speaker. Of course he’s going to explore other options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these Crowns have made their bread and butter on 

the fact that they enjoy monopoly situations, and that’s going to 

end. And with the end of monopoly goes the advantage these 

Crowns have enjoyed for so long. And with the end of the 

advantage it is conceivable, it is possible, it is even likely, that 

the value of the Crowns is going to begin to fall as well. 

 

That’s why we have the spectacle of SaskTel complaining that 

they want a further exemption from CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) 

regulations. It wants an exemption from local phone 

competition because the government wants to hang onto the 

cash cow created by such an unregulated monopoly for a few 

more years. A few more years to plunder — something’s very 

wrong. 

 

It’s very, very clear that this is a government that wants it both 

ways when it comes to the Crowns. They want the advantages 

of an uncontrolled monopoly coupled with the advantages of 

operating like a private company. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

simply can’t have it both ways. 

 

If these companies are to be government owned, they must be 

accountable to the public for their actions. They must provide 

service to people at home and forget about the rest of the world. 

If they can’t do this or if they won’t do this, then there’s very 

little point in hanging onto them as Crowns. If they want to risk 

hundreds of millions of dollars all over the world, let them do it 

as private companies truly controlled by their shareholders. 

 

It’s very easy for this government and the likes of Jack Messer 

and Don Ching to make investments on our behalf in places like 

Guyana. It’s very easy to take risks like these now, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’re risking other people’s money — the 

money of every taxpayer in this province. Because whenever 

there’s a case like NST or Channel Lakes, these guys and this 

government know there’s always the public purse to cover the 

costs. 

 

Well private companies can’t work that way, Mr. Speaker. A 

loss is a loss. There’s no taxpayer-supported safety net. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these companies are to remain as 

Crowns let them do the work that they’re supposed to do. Let 

them work for the people of Saskatchewan, not work around 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in any situation when a monopoly of any kind is 

granted, there are certain conditions attached. A minimum 

service is required for an affordable price, which as I’ve already 

stated, is no longer the case here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in all jurisdictions other than Saskatchewan, when a 

monopoly is granted it is understood that there’ll be an 

independent control mechanism on that monopoly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in 

Canada which doesn’t have a rate review panel. Our Crowns are 

free to do as they please. Yes of course, we have this 45-day 

review sham, which I would think even makes the members 

opposite blush. It’s a PR (public relations) campaign which the  



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

public immediately saw through. 

 

A few months ago, the member from Rosetown-Biggar said the 

45-day review period was no longer good enough and 

something had to be done. In short order, he was shuffled out of 

the CIC ministry. Now it appears nothing will be done any time 

soon since now the same member states that the 45-day review 

process is just fine and that there’s no better rate review board 

than the provincial cabinet. It’s stunning arrogance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well even if it yet hasn’t become clear to the members 

opposite, the people of Saskatchewan do want a rate review 

board — a review board that would not only examine requests 

for price increase before it happened, but also examine the level 

of service these Crown utilities are going to provide now and 

into the future; a review board that would also have the 

authority to examine the worth of investments the Crowns wish 

to make outside of Saskatchewan before they’re made, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This type of board is commonplace 

everywhere, Mr. Speaker, but not here. Not in Saskatchewan 

where the government always knows what’s best for the 

citizens. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the citizens are quickly coming to realize 

that when it comes to Crowns, the government doesn’t always 

know best. And we need an independent board to put a clamp 

on these Crowns and this government. The public is demanding 

it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s becoming very, very clear to 

everyone, except the members opposite, that this is a minimum 

need of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another thing that’s becoming eminently clear, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s becoming clear that unless the government 

opposite begins to seriously examine options for these 

corporations, outside the realm of government owned and 

operated entities, the companies themselves are doomed to 

grow smaller and smaller, and less and less competitive and 

important. And of course it is concern because they will become 

less valuable. And they’ll be less valuable to the people of 

Saskatchewan, who will have to pay the price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the government is elected, it must govern 

for the good of the current and future generations. Individual 

partisan ideologies cannot blind their leaders to reality. Because 

while these ideologies may have been valid 30, 40, or 50 years 

ago, the world is a very different place today than it was just a 

few decades ago, and indeed, even a few years ago. 

 

And unless Saskatchewan, and this government in particular, 

begins to address and acknowledge the changing times, we will 

all pay the price for many years to come. Mr. Speaker, all 

options for the Crowns must be studied. And yes, one of these 

options must be privatization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as one cannot be blindly bound to the notion 

that every one of these corporations has to be run by the 

government, neither can one say we must sell them off as 

quickly as possible for whatever price. We have to study each 

and every one of our Crowns thoroughly and responsibly to see 

what would be in the best interest of the province as a whole 

and all of the people who live here now and in the future. 

In this age of competition and deregulation, options such as 

privatization simply must be studied because if it turns out that 

down the line these Crowns simply cannot compete in an 

unregulated open market, they will decline in value. They will 

probably decline in value irregardless. With the coming of 

deregulation they will begin to decline in value each and every 

year until the return for taxpayers is negligible. 

 

We must begin the process of deciding what’s best for the 

Saskatchewan of today and tomorrow, not the Saskatchewan of 

the 1950s. And I think the current minister of CIC knows this. 

He’s bright enough to understand these things, but he’s 

constrained by the politics and blind ideology of his own party. 

And that’s sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s sad for the people of 

Saskatchewan who have to pay for the politics of the members 

opposite who have had their heads buried in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there’s a compelling reason to hang on to a 

certain Crown, then by all means let’s keep it. But if there isn’t, 

let’s do what’s right and get the best possible price for it. If we 

were able to apply the revenue from the sale of Crowns to debt 

we would save hundreds of millions of dollars in interest costs 

each and every way . . . year. And don’t forget, once a Crown is 

privatized it’ll begin to pay taxes to the province as any other 

private company. It’ll soon look good to this government which 

never met a tax dollar it didn’t like. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are answers that we need when it comes to 

our Crowns. These are answers that the people of Saskatchewan 

want but the answers aren’t forthcoming from this government. 

We need to know the future of these Crowns. We need to know 

whether the people of Saskatchewan are still a priority for the 

Crowns. We have to know when the people of Saskatchewan 

are going to have a say in how the Crowns are run again and 

into the future. We need to know whether it’s in the best interest 

of the people that these Crowns remain as Crown corporations. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the questions that desperately need 

answers. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion, 

seconded by the member from Saltcoats: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

mishandling of Saskatchewan Crown corporations by 

failing to report losses in such ventures as NST and 

Channel Lake Petroleum, and demand the government 

immediately implement a mechanism for reporting such 

losses to the public, and further condemn the government 

for risking millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money through 

ventures around the world without any public input or 

approval while the public pays higher utility rate bills, and 

further demand the government provide Saskatchewan 

families with a utility rate review commission so 

Saskatchewan people are no longer gouged by frequent and 

unnecessary Crown utility rate hikes, and as well 

implement a legislative approval process for all overseas 

investment on the part of Saskatchewan Crown 

Corporations over $1 million. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with  



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

great conviction that I rise in the Assembly today to speak on 

behalf of this motion, to criticize the government for their 

mishandling of Saskatchewan Crown corporations. Given this 

government’s reckless investment of Saskatchewan’s taxpayer 

dollars in Guyana and failure to tender a reported loss such as 

Channel Lake Petroleum, I could go on and on but I will try and 

be as brief as possible. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to begin by reaffirming a very 

important message with my colleagues before we . . . my 

colleague has already touched on. This NDP government has 

totally forgotten the purpose and mandate intended for the 

provincial Crowns. Public utilities were established to ensure 

that at all times residents of Saskatchewan have access to high 

quality services at a fair price. Furthermore, many of 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations were set up because the 

private sector was not prepared to fill this expanded role. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, times have changed, and competition is 

upon us — at least it is everywhere else besides Saskatchewan. 

But mark my words, you can’t hold the wolves off forever. Mr. 

Speaker, it is no surprise to anyone but the members opposite 

that competition is here. And if they were to pull their heads out 

of the sand for just a moment, they too would see that they have 

not provided Saskatchewan Crowns with the proper tools to 

prepare for it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s look at SaskPower for a moment and 

determine whether it is serving the people of Saskatchewan 

well. First of all, is SaskPower ensuring that at all times all 

residents of Saskatchewan have access to quality service at a 

fair price? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that Mr. Messer and the 

minister responsible for CIC have more clout with the powers 

to be than any of us thought to be the case. Often people joke 

about putting in an order for a mild winter, but I am positive 

that we have the members opposite to thank for the above 

average temperatures we are experiencing this winter. 

 

I don’t give the members opposite such blatant praise very often 

so maybe I should explain why. Power is one of those things 

that people often take for granted. If you pay your bill, you will 

have power. Simple as that. But I don’t think people realize 

how dangerously close our province’s only power supply was to 

running out of power last winter. And why should they know, 

the way this government keeps everyone in the dark? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of CIC and his buddy, Jack 

Messer, repeatedly tell the people of Saskatchewan that there’s 

nothing to worry about and that we don’t need new 

power-generating capacity in Saskatchewan until the year 2010. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is the truth, then why was it 

necessary to beg our neighbouring provinces to sell us extra 

power in the dead of winter last year? 

 

I guess Mr. Messer and the minister and the people of 

Saskatchewan should put El Nino on the top of their list of 

Christmas blessings this year. We can thank him and not the 

members opposite for averting a power crisis this winter. And 

why? Well I think everyone in the province knows why. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the minister responsible for the Crown 

corporations is more concerned about trips to Guyana and  

throwing 31 million of taxpayers’ dollars into a third world 

country than dealing with our power crisis at home. 

 

From the very beginning, the deal to buy half of the Guyanese 

power company has been plagued with secrecy. If this is such a 

good investment, why did the government refuse to put the 

terms of the agreement on the table from the beginning so 

Saskatchewan taxpayers could probably scrutinize how their 

dollars were being spent? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is becoming increasingly clear that this 

NDP government simply does not care what the people of 

Saskatchewan think about this or any other investment they are 

making. The minister responsible for the Crowns believes that 

he has a clear mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to 

invest their money in whatever foreign investment he chooses, 

no questions asked. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s simply not good enough. The 

government has tactfully put the decision off long enough to 

avoid any scrutiny during this winter session. I would like to 

remind the CIC minister, Mr. Speaker, that he has publicly 

stated that he is waiting for the results of the Guyanese election 

to sign the deal. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, the results are in. What’s it going to be? 

Are you going to kiss our 31 million away during this session? 

Or are you going to wait for the week to be over? 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me remind the members opposite that 

Saskatchewan is the only province which does not have a 

Public Utilities Review Commission to hold the minister 

directly accountable, therefore the only accountability 

mechanism in place in this Legislative Assembly. Not bringing 

the decision before the Legislative Assembly for debate is a 

slap in the face of public accountability. 

 

It is clear, Mr. Speaker, the minister would rather hold the 

decision off until the people of Saskatchewan are too busy with 

Christmas to worry about a front page news story. The 

arrogance of this government and their cavalier attitude towards 

risking taxpayer dollars simply never ceases to amaze us. Not 

only do they not care what anyone says about the Guyana deal, 

now they are asking people to just ignore the fact that they lost 

8 million through the Channel Lake Petroleum deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this NDP government goes on and on about how 

open and accountable they are. I don’t know about you, but I 

certainly do not think hiding Crown investment losses like 

NST, 16 million, and now Channel Lake, another 8 million, is 

open and accountable. 

 

And why we didn’t . . . Why the government didn’t tell us about 

this loss? Why else? Because of a confidentiality agreement — 

the same reason they refused to release details on the Guyana 

deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a taxpayer, that leads me to believe the 

government has . . . must have other confidentiality agreements 

keeping them from disclosing other losses. Taxpayers deserve 

to know what other losses have been incurred that this 

government has not told us about. 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

How many millions more of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars 

are we investing at present and we have no idea what they are. 

What really is the limit of taxpayers’ dollars that this 

government is willing to put at risk and being accountable to no 

one. 

 

Not only does it matter to them, Mr. Speaker, that they have lost 

another 8 million, but they see nothing wrong with the fact they 

negotiated a deal to sell Channel Lake, a $21 million sale, 

without even tendering it out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government promised that in order to make 

the Crowns more accountable it would reveal any significant 

sale or acquisition within 90 days. I cannot believe that $21 

million falls short of this government’s definition of a 

significant transaction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do not believe for 

a minute that the people of Saskatchewan think that $21 million 

is insignificant. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has become more than obvious to the 

people of Saskatchewan that they can no longer trust the 

members opposite to disclose losses . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Why is the 

member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I also thank the 

member from Saltcoats for his indulgence in introducing three 

guests we have in the gallery opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their father, Patrick Shaw, came over to brag about their 

presence today. He’s our Sergeant-at-Arms and he serves us 

well and tries to accommodate the needs of the members. And 

when I looked up, my colleagues also mentioned what beautiful 

daughters he does have. 

 

I’d like to introduce to you, Meaghan, Aaron, and Shannon 

Shaw and ask all members to join in giving them a warm 

welcome. They’ve just flown in to be here during the Christmas 

season. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to ask leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — I’d like to thank the members. I’d also like 

to introduce a constituent of mine, Don Taylor, who is also a 

SARM director. Welcome here, Don. I would like you to join 

with me in welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 

 

Saskatchewan Crown Corporations Accountability 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it has become more than obvious to the people 

of Saskatchewan that they can no longer trust the members 

opposite to disclose losses and tender sales based on their own 

good judgement. More than ever Saskatchewan needs a 

mechanism in place to report all Crown losses. We should not 

have to find out the details of such losses from leaked 

information from the United States or elsewhere. 

 

These mechanisms are needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

under this current government the Crowns are accountable to no 

one. This is why my colleague from Melfort will soon be 

introducing a Bill to establish an independent Crown 

corporation rate review commission to replace the so-called 

scam of the 45-day review process. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the members opposite have 

recognized the need for such a process. As a matter of fact, a 

previous minister responsible for CIC realized that the people of 

Saskatchewan had no confidence in the 45-day review process 

and gave every indication that it would be replaced with a new 

rate mechanism. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all hopes of this were dashed the other day 

when the current minister announced that we will be sticking 

with the current system, inadequacies and all. But I have to 

admit he gave a sound argument. After all, why do we need a 

rate review commission when the government has already 

increased rates of every Crown imaginable this year, including 

the 8 to 10 per cent of SaskEnergy and now another 50 per cent 

increase in local telephone rates coming right behind. Irony of 

all irony, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The government continues their 

attempt to link the need for increased rates with competition 

when we all know exactly the opposite is true. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to close by saying the way to 

prepare Saskatchewan for competition is not through increased 

utility rates nor is it through pushing through as many 

hare-brained deals as possible while the people of 

Saskatchewan have no choice but to buy one’s service. 

 

Competition and deregulation are coming, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and you would be well-advised to prepare SaskPower for 

deregulation and competition by dealing with continually 

deteriorating infrastructure and imminent power shortages at 

home and not in Guyana. It would be everyone’s dream, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to run around the world and play big shot 

spending somebody else’s money; but in reality, if you’re a 

shareholder of a company you usually have a say where your 

money is invested. That’s not the case with this government. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, second the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will try to be 

brief and I do thank the members opposite for allowing me 10  



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

minutes or so to put some points on the record, because quite 

frankly this government has not been mishandling 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations. The record clearly shows 

that our Crowns are doing quite well. They are providing 

high-quality services at a fair price and we are preparing for 

competition and deregulation. We are doing that by growing 

our companies and ensuring that they are strong provincially, 

strong nationally, and strong internationally. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1996 the four major Crowns — 

SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy and SGI — had a net income, 

a net income, of $318 million. They made a huge contribution 

to the provincial economy. They employed collectively 8,500 

people in communities all across this province. They purchased 

over $1 billion worth of goods and services from Saskatchewan 

suppliers. And they were involved in over $345 million in 

capital expenditures. 

 

Our Crowns are an important part of the Saskatchewan 

economy and we intend to ensure that they remain an important 

part. The way we are doing that is by ensuring that we have 

good services at a fair price, at utility rates that are either the 

lowest or amongst the lowest in all of Canada, and at the same 

time making prudent and cautious investments, building on our 

expertise. 

 

Now the members opposite like to crow about a couple of 

investments that, in their point of view, have gone bad. I will 

admit that we did lose $16 million in the NST Network Services 

in the United States. But they do not bother mentioning that 

SaskTel made a $114 million profit on the sale of Leicester 

cable in England. They don’t talk about the fact that they were 

all present at a Crown Corporations Committee to review the 

significant transaction of $27 million of Saturn . . . in Saturn 

Communications in New Zealand. And they didn’t say that that 

was something we shouldn’t ought to have done. 

 

I will admit that we did sell Channel Lake Petroleum. But the 

members opposite know quite well that we did not sell it at a 

loss of $8 million. In fact, as they know and they’re 

conveniently forgetting, we made about $2 million for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

I find it passingly curious that they’re going on about how we 

should have tendered it. If somebody has a Kentucky Fried 

Chicken joint, they don’t tender the chicken for sale. It is usual 

that you tender when you’re purchasing something, not tender 

when you’re selling it. You try to get the best bargain that you 

can when you’re selling something. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we made $2 million when we sold Channel Lake. 

 

Now the members opposite are complaining that they don’t 

have an opportunity to review the so-called losses on Channel 

Lake. I would remind the members opposite that this 

government, through the Crown Corporations Committee, has 

implemented a practice that is unique in all of Canada. We do 

have a procedure for reviewing significant transactions. 

 

We have a procedure in place, despite the fact that when I 

reviewed both with major accounting firms in Saskatchewan 

and all across Canada, and when I did a search on the Internet, I  

could find no accounting body that had the temerity to define 

significant transaction. Our committee, the Crown Corporations 

Committee, did go ahead and develop a definition. Said 

definition talks about the acquisition or the divestment of assets 

greater than 1 per cent of a corporation’s assets or, if 

transactions are considered to be significant — in other words if 

they’re sensitive — that they would be reviewed by the Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

Now the members opposite can call me at any point, ask me to 

meet with them here in the legislature or outside the legislature 

and indicate that they feel that an investment or a divesture is 

significant. If they want a meeting, I’m prepared to call a 

Crown Corporations meeting tomorrow morning 7 o’clock, 

7:30, 8 o’clock, 8:30, just name the time — we’ll have a 

meeting on this matter. We have nothing to hide with respect to 

the Channel Lake transaction. 

 

Now the members opposite perhaps have forgotten, as when 

they were shuffling around and changing chairs this past fall, 

that they did want to expand the definition of significant 

transactions. So I asked the officials at CIC to contact them and 

to determine what more they wanted in terms of the definition 

of significant transactions. The office of the Saskatchewan 

Party was phoned at least three times and the answer that we 

got all the time was they were in too much disarray to deal with 

the matter of significant transactions right now. 

 

Now I find it passingly curious then that they would . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Now the House has 

been very calm while the mover and the seconder . . . Order. 

The House has been very calm for the mover and seconder to 

make their points and I’m sure that they will have more points 

after the hon. member from Saskatoon Southeast and I would 

ask them to allow her to make her point. 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sorry if the fact that the 

Saskatchewan Party was in disarray this fall has caused some 

members in this House to have some concern. But in fact if they 

want to review the definition of significant transactions, just ask 

me to call a meeting of the Crown Corporations Committee. 

We’ll do that, we’ll discuss it; we can review all the 

documentation on Channel Lake. Our government is committed 

to being open, transparent, and accountable. We are also 

committed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to maintaining either the 

lowest, or as close to the lowest as possible, utility rates in all of 

Canada. 

 

Just going to read into the record, so that the members can have 

their memory refreshed, a few facts about the utility rates. We 

have the lowest gas and automobile insurance rates in Canada. 

We are amongst the lowest for telephone and power. Our 

Crowns have managed to keep the rates down while paying 

down debt, expanding and improving their services, and 

providing a return on investment to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Not too bad for a social democratic government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Auto insurance rates have not increased since  



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

1993, and now we’re balancing them out so that people . . . the 

vehicles that cost more to repair will see some increases — 

there is no doubt — but premiums for other vehicles will fall. 

 

SaskTel has not had a local phone rate increase in more than 

four years. You don’t mention when we lower the long-distance 

rates. How come you don’t come into this House and complain 

with decreases? You didn’t come here and you didn’t complain 

when SaskEnergy decreased their rate as a result of the cost of 

their product. But you are complaining now that they have to 

increase their rates because of a cost from their suppliers. 

 

Now our 45-day utility rate review process is not perfect; we’ve 

admitted that. But we do find that it is the least costly, and an 

approach that can involve all the people of Saskatchewan is not 

an expensive, highly litigious PURC (Public Utilities Review 

Commission). And it saves the people of Saskatchewan money. 

 

The last time this province had a PURC, it cost $3.2 million just 

in the last year alone to have a PURC. We’re continuing to 

review the 45-day review process. It’s not perfect, but it does 

give the public access. And it allows people an opportunity to 

challenge the rate increases or decreases and also to learn more 

about them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion is a fairly lengthy one. There 

are six parts to it as I read it, and I could probably go on for 60 

minutes debating each one of the parts of the motion, but in the 

spirit of cooperation and to give the members opposite some 

time to paint a picture that is inaccurate and incomplete, I will 

take my seat. But I would urge all members in this House to 

defeat the motion. 

 

And I would also request, once again, if members from the 

Saskatchewan Party or the Liberal Party wish to have a Crown 

Corporations Committee meeting, simply let me know and I 

will arrange one in the next day or so, so that you can come to 

the committee and we can discuss and debate these issues. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I really am 

excited about getting into this discussion about the Crowns, 

especially SGI. But before I do that, I would just like to 

mention to the hon. member across that there are people that are 

little miffed when the chicken places, joints . . . I’m sure that 

there’s a lot more . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I apologize. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Okay. Apology accepted, I’m sure. 

 

Within the area of SGI, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the area of SGI, 

mismanagement and political interference and misguided 

policies have added up to higher rates and poorer service to the 

Saskatchewan public in the last few years. The very fact that 

SGI has an accumulated deficit in its rate stabilization fund of 

$112.6 million speaks for itself. 

 

The fact is even more galling when seen in the context of the 

sometimes desperate measures that the government has taken to 

correct it, just a little over two years ago when government  

introduced the no-fault insurance, it was over the objections of 

both the opposition and the public at large. No-fault was touted 

at the time as being the saviour for the financial mess at SGI. 

 

In its own advertising proclaiming the benefits of the plan, SGI 

declared in big, bold letters that no-fault, and I quote: “will 

prevent the need for rate increases.” It said that in the 

Leader-Post on April 26, 1994. 

 

The minister at that time stated in numerous letters to the editor, 

quote: 

 

It’s safe to say that the people of Saskatchewan do not 

want to pay an additional $100 for their car insurance. The 

personal injury protection plan will do that. 

 

He said that in the Kindersley Clarion on May 18, 1994. 

 

Yet in spite of the enormous effort and expense that this 

government undertook to sell Saskatchewan people on no-fault, 

it is clear that it has failed miserably. And what has been the 

cost of that failure? Victims like Bonnie Juneau complain of an 

underfunded rehabilitation system that treats patients in a 

cookie-cutter fashion. 

 

Families like the Markwarts that have their lives disrupted. SGI 

has put them through torturous rehabilitation rather than trying 

to compensate them adequately. Victims like Sharon Diedrichs 

from Carlyle have found themselves on the short end of the 

convoluted logic of no-fault. Ms. Diedrichs was just starting her 

own business, but she ended up not being able to sue or seek 

compensation for the business losses that she had incurred. 

 

The Crown has even spent money on spies to pry into the 

private lives of victims, and yet another desperate attempt to 

make this flawed system justify itself. 

 

There have been lobby groups established, protests staged, 

demands for the review of the system from the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan, and they’ve even put forward suggestions that 

would improve the situation. But no one is listening. 

 

The precedents for the no-fault that the government has used to 

point to have been crumbling. The system has been overturned 

in British Columbia and is under review in other places. And 

it’s in a number of places in the States and it’s also been 

overturned. 

 

But our government, that loves to trumpet the supposed value of 

the Crown corporations to the public, totally ignores the 

suffering it has caused, and refuses to review the system. And 

now they want more. 

 

Just last year they were proud to boast of no-fault’s supposed 

success when SGI Auto Fund posted a modest $3.5 million 

profit. But now the financial mess at SGI has once again 

worsened. They refuse to admit that this system that was 

brought in over the loud protest of the public was flawed from 

the very beginning. 

 

(1615) 

 

This isn’t the only area where both the corporation and the  



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

government have hidden their heads in the sand. Last year the 

Justice minister sat on his hands while auto thefts spiralled out 

of control. The SGI minister at that time denied that the car 

thefts and vandalism had an impact on claims. Yet the 

corporation’s own figures now show a nearly 30 per cent 

increase in this type of claim between 1995 and 1996, and a 57 

per cent increase in Regina alone. 

 

Likewise, wildlife damage increased but the NDP have refused 

to acknowledge the failure in their wildlife management 

policies. 

 

Over and over again the NDP and SGI have made every effort 

to avoid embarrassment, and to avoid admitting mistakes as 

they try to point the finger of blame at everyone but themselves. 

And now they’ve come back to the SGI policyholders and 

asked them to pick up the tab for their mistakes. 

 

Two years ago the minister of SGI said that a premium increase 

of $100 would be unacceptable. Well today the owners of new 

vehicles, vans, and sports utility vehicles will see their 

premiums increase by $143. Overall, in spite of their promises, 

Saskatchewan drivers will see their rates climb and their 

coverage decline at the same time. And still the government 

throws up its hands and says, whoops, I’m sorry, it’s not my 

fault. I guess maybe that’s what you mean by no-fault. 

 

At the same time, that’s what the NDP are continuing to inflict, 

this no-fault, on our province and they are ignoring reforms that 

have been successfully worked out in other provinces. In British 

Columbia the government’s NDP cousins there have rejected 

no-fault and instead instituted a plan that includes, first of all, a 

lifetime ban for third-time drunk drivers. They’ve also sharply 

raised rates for repeated offending bad drivers. They have 

probationary licences for new drivers. They’ve increased 

surveillance technology for speeding and for red-light-running 

offences. 

 

In Ontario, it’s no-fault system gave greater rights to sue for 

victims who have suffered significant economic losses, and 

provides legislative benefits to victims instead of leaving such 

considerations up to an insurance provider. These and other 

proposed reforms have been ignored by this government, whose 

first, last, and only response to any problem is to squeeze yet 

more money out of the taxpayers. 

 

All of the points very clearly point to the need for the kinds of 

reforms to Crown management that my colleagues have just 

spoken about. In spite of the statements of the Crown 

corporation ministers, past and present, the 45-day review 

period has not worked. Clearly, with regard to SGI, the 

government was not prepared to consider alternatives to rate 

hikes at public meetings. All they were prepared to discuss was 

their own strictly prepared agenda for a rate increase. 

 

Going back further, the consultation process that surrounded the 

introduction to no-fault was like wash, just a wash. The 

government heard many concerns and many proposed changes 

to no-fault from the legal and medical professionals and from 

consumers themselves. And again none of these proposals saw 

the light of day. The government did only what they had 

decided to do in the very beginning. 

The Saskatchewan Party’s reforms to Crown management 

would fix these and many other problems in the Crowns. The 

appointment of Crown officials would be regularly reviewed to 

give the public a fair assessment of how well or how poorly 

these public servants are doing in their job. A legislative review 

commission would give all parties and all members of the 

public access to the financial history of the publicly owned 

ventures. 

 

This is a simple business principle. Shareholders deserve to 

know what’s going on. Shareholders want to know how their 

money is being spent beforehand, not after. Our proposals 

would give the public regular and timely reporting of profits or 

losses by the Crowns, so the kind of management that we see at 

SGI does not come to the light of day only when officials have 

to have another rate increase. 

 

All in all, Mr. Speaker, this legislature needs to return its focus 

on what the Crowns are actually there for, why they were 

originally put forward in this province, and why people believe 

they’re supposed to be there today. What they want is a service. 

 

We can no longer afford to say that this is . . . that this sector, 

which accounts for as much as 40 per cent of all public 

expenditure, belongs in the realms of some private boys club. If 

Crowns are maintained to provide public service then they 

must, like any other aspect of government, be held to the light 

of public scrutiny. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a pleasure 

to enter this debate this afternoon and to add a few more points 

to some that my colleagues have already raised in regards to the 

motion before us, and the importance that Saskatchewan 

taxpayers recognize that indeed the Crown corporations that 

they are actually shareholders of, are indeed held accountable 

and are accountable to each and every one of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been listening to the debate . . . and I found 

it interesting that every time the government members need to 

be lifted up a little bit or get a pat on the back, they always 

seem to turn to the member from Saskatoon Southeast to give 

them that little lift. And while we certainly acknowledge the 

contribution that the member has brought to this Assembly this 

afternoon, I’d also like to suggest that while the member as 

Chair of the Crown Corporations Committee is all of a sudden 

more than obliging in asking all members to meet for Crown 

Corporations, she’s basically had all fall to do that. 

 

And talking with my colleagues who have been waiting for the 

phone to ring inviting them to a Crown Corporations 

Committee meeting, my colleagues have indicated that they 

were just given notice for a short meeting about a week ago, 

when they were waiting all fall and would have been more than 

willing, especially, Mr. Speaker, when news about rate 

increases started to filtrate through the system and taxpayers 

began to understand that, whoa, it’s Christmas time and here we 

go again. It’s normal for the government, or this government 

anyway, at a time of giving, rather than giving they like to take, 

and make these announcements about all these rate increases 

that are going to take place shortly after. And rather than being 

the Santa Claus they become the Scrooge of Christmas. 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we do have an 

opportunity to debate these issues and indeed call for a real 

review process in the province of Saskatchewan. And why do 

we do that, Mr. Speaker? We do it because while the minister 

and the members and all the government colleagues would like 

to argue that they have the best review mechanism in place or 

that we have a sound Crown corporations system and 

committee working in this province, we find that the taxpayers 

don’t believe it, and we also find, Mr. Speaker, that the chief 

person who is responsible to keep track of government 

expenditures, the auditor in this province, has a number of 

concerns in regards to how the Crown utilities operate, and the 

fact of how they report their budgets. 

 

And just for example, I want to bring forward an issue that the 

auditor brought to our attention again this year. The fact that in 

1996, remember the extra little part on your Power Corporation 

bill, that expenditure for reconstruction charge. And the 

auditor’s pointed out the fact that the corporation has failed to 

point out that they raised $14 million in 1996 as a result of this 

construction charge . . . reconstruction charge. The auditor is 

saying that if you’re raising revenue — which this is, it’s a 

revenue generator — if you’re raising that money it should 

show up in your accounts as an income, as a revenue generator. 

However SaskPower chose not to bring that forward, not to 

reveal that that was another piece of revenue that they have 

generated. 

 

And I would suggest to you that the taxpayers of this province, 

when they paid their power bills, whether it’s on a monthly or a 

quarterly basis were paying it, and when they paid that, they felt 

that that was just another injection of cash into the utility that 

would be recorded at the end of the day. And the major problem 

that Saskatchewan taxpayers have, and I think, believe, that the 

auditor is pointing out, is the fact that if the corporations don’t 

disclose every transaction, the taxpayer says, well you know, 

I’m making these payments. Why am I making these payments? 

 

Number one, why are Crown corporations divesting . . . or 

investing outside of the province of Saskatchewan when they 

have such large . . . or making such good income, net income at 

the end of the year? I believe in 1996 it was $139 million. 

People of Saskatchewan look at our Crown corporations as 

corporations that are here to provide a utility or provide a 

service at a fair cost, not to gouge the taxpayers of this 

province. 

 

And I think most taxpayers see Crown corporations and the rate 

increases as just a means of deriving revenue. And the 

member’s right — it’s a means of deriving revenue to run the 

ongoing operations of government. 

 

However, taxpayers don’t see it that way. Taxpayers believe 

that power and telephone and energy should be providing a 

reasonable return and a rate based on the fact that it’s a public 

utility available to each and every one of us. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in view of the time we’re in, I want to 

reiterate the fact that it’s imperative that this province bring into 

place a review committee that is totally independent of 

government, as we have in other jurisdictions. Certainly it was 

revealed just recently that in many jurisdictions, the CRTC does 

have an opportunity . . . and have some guidelines in regards to  

how utilities pass on the cost to the customer. 

 

And if you will, Mr. Speaker, in this province with the public 

utilities we have, with SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy and so 

on, SGI, the public really doesn’t have an opportunity to have a 

say. The government argues that we’ve got a 45-day review 

period. But once the decision is already made what’s the point 

of a 45-day review period? It seems to me that the cart’s before 

the horse. The government should be out consulting with the 

public beforehand. 

 

If a corporation has made millions of dollars, I don’t think they 

should be suggesting a rate increase is appropriate when they 

already are showing a net benefit to the public. They should 

maybe be asking the public beforehand. However, what are you 

going to get if you ask beforehand? You’re probably going to 

get the public saying, I don’t think so. 

 

And that’s why I think it’s imperative that we do have an 

independent body to review this process; that there is a body in 

place that the public can go to and feel that they have some 

confidence in relaying their concerns; that these concerns will 

indeed be raised, as the auditor raises them on an annual basis, 

semi-annually and annually, with each and every one of us. 

 

Another one of the concerns we have with the Crowns is the 

fact that while the government would argue that — and the 

minister, as we’ve seen over the last couple of days, would 

argue — that the appropriate place to deal with some of these 

issues is in Crown Corporations Committee, I would suggest to 

you the public in general feel that the Legislative Assembly is a 

body that is more open to the public, more accessible, and 

actually gives a greater voice to concerns that are raised, and 

this is the more of the appropriate place that the government or 

the minister should not be deflecting questions to a Crown — a 

committee that meets maybe once or twice a year or a few 

moments, or even in some cases, is limited in the amount of 

debate it can enter into. 

 

And in many cases, the biggest problem with the Crown 

Corporations Committee is that you’re dealing with questions 

that probably took place two or three years ago. And that’s one 

of the big problems we have when we deal with questions 

outside of this Legislative Assembly, whereas, as members, we 

can deal with them today. And I believe that’s what the 

Saskatchewan public are looking for. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this motion that we have before us is 

certainly an appropriate motion. I certainly commend the 

member from Melfort for bringing it forward and I will . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Pursuant to the special order carried in 

this House on Monday, the time for debate on this motion has 

now expired and the Chair is required to put the question. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:29 p.m. until 4:32 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 14 

 

Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 

Boyd Draude Gantefoer 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

Heppner Osika Hillson 

McPherson Aldridge Haverstock 

Julé Goohsen  

 

Nays — 22 

 

Flavel Atkinson Johnson 

Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 

Calvert Teichrob Pringle 

Trew Lorje Scott 

Nilson Serby Hamilton 

Stanger Wall Kasperski 

Ward Jess Langford 

Murrell   

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the 

Assembly that the answer I tabled in the Assembly yesterday in 

response to written question 95 contains some incorrect 

information. I would ask leave of the Assembly to provide a 

moment right now for me to be able to submit a corrected 

answer to question 95. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Government Whip has requested 

leave of the Assembly to provide a correction to the answer 

provided to the House yesterday. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure at this time to 

provide the corrected answer to question 95. Thank you. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — INDEPENDENT MEMBER 

 

Research Financing 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Before recognizing the 

hon. member for Saskatoon Greystone, the Chair must bring 

comment in ruling regarding the motion that is on the order 

papers. The motion is not in order, as currently drafted. 

 

Again, as all hon. members will know and understand, the 

House received a ruling from the Chair on Monday related to 

preambles of motions. And I find this motion out of order on 

the same grounds, in that it contains a preamble which is not 

appropriate under normal circumstances for motions of the 

House. And I’ll provide the hon. member the opportunity to 

indicate whether she would provide the motion to the House in 

proper form. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 

ask for leave at this time, and the indulgence of members of the 

Assembly, to replace the motion before them with a motion that 

keeps the intent but without the preamble. I have given this to 

all of the House leaders and I will send one to the Table. 

 

The Speaker: — The hon. member for Saskatoon Greystone 

has requested leave to introduce the motion, without preamble, 

maintaining the same intent. Is leave granted? 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very appreciative that people have granted me leave and 

afforded me the opportunity to raise this very important issue 

this afternoon. I’ve already met with the Minister of Health, the 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education, the Minister of Finance, 

and the Minister of Economic Development about the critical 

significance of lack of funding for biomedical, clinical, and 

health research funding to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that every member will be equally concerned once 

the facts that were given to the ministers are placed before 

them. And I’m very pleased that I’ve had a chance to do so 

today. 

 

And now let me dispense with the federal government’s 

responsibility first. Canada has fallen behind the G-7 

counterparts in the funding of medical research at an alarming 

rate. 

 

There are several likely disturbing outcomes of falling behind 

other countries and other provinces that are, in effect, our 

competitors. Perhaps the most serious is that our most talented 

and dedicated researchers are leaving for places that have 

demonstrated a strong commitment to health research and 

related development. As a result, not only do we lose their skills 

and potential contributions, but these same people become our 

competitors. 

 

Failure of our country to compete will lead to an inescapable 

conclusion. We will in future be buying all of our processes, our 

treatments, drugs, and other medical products from others. And 

no one disputes the fact that it costs money to conduct research, 

but it will pale in comparison to the costs of buying retail these 

goods and services from other countries where they have been 

researched, developed, and commercialized. 

 

Now I am pleased to report cautious optimism on the federal 

front. After much work on the part of the scientific community, 

it appears that their concerns are being given priority 

consideration. And I am really thinking that there will be some 

changes in the new year from the federal government and its 

funding as far as health research is concerned. 

 

I most certainly hope that that support from all parts of my 

motion today will serve to reinforce the efforts of those who 

have lobbied the federal government to improve what is within 

their mandate and will also serve to demonstrate the 

commitment of the Government of Saskatchewan to carrying 

out what is a provincial responsibility in health research. 

 

If one is to look at medical research in Saskatchewan today, it is 

really quite of a concern to us. If we’re looking at the medical 

research situation in Canada as a whole, it’s considered serious. 

If we look at what’s been happening in our province, it’s 

particularly acute. 

 

The infrastructure needed to effectively carry on research is 

disappearing. And by way of example, the College of Medicine 

alone reports that it has lost 6 per cent of its researchers and 25 

per cent of its support staff in just the last six years. We, as a 

province, are loosing our ability to compete for nationally  



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

funded research projects and the net effect of loosing our ability 

to compete undermines the quality of research that can be 

undertaken within our own provincial borders. 

 

It makes us in a position of making it very difficult for us to 

attract and retain the best researchers. And this erodes our 

ability to maintain first rate health care delivery because good 

clinical care is based on education and research. 

 

And if I may refer people to a recent article in the Journal of the 

American Medical Association, which confirms precisely what 

I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker. It is of great concern to me that, 

if in fact we remove a research component from a teaching 

hospital, it becomes nothing more than a gigantic family 

practice. And the direct relationship between research funding 

and an education-based hospital and direct health care services 

has been proven unequivocally in research. 

 

Now it is very tempting to point fingers and I think that we 

experience that very often here. That rather than addressing the 

responsibilities that lie at a provincial level, we point fingers 

elsewhere. And I know that in this case, that it is very, very 

attractive to point fingers at senior government. 

 

And there may be reasonable justification in one aspect of that, 

but it remains important to decide whether the province should 

identify medical research as an important initiative. It is 

important to analyse the benefits that would accrue from 

targeting adequate funds to put us back in the game, so to 

speak, in a competitive way. It is critical to make a deliberate 

rational decision on one issue. Do we care about medical 

research in this province? That’s the question. Do we care about 

medical research in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

If we take no, action the result is clear. There will be no serious 

medical research done in Saskatchewan, the home of medicare. 

Based on the trend lines in the previous statistical information 

that was available, and I made available to the Minister of 

Health, taking no action does not paint a very rosy picture for 

our future. 

 

If the provincial government were to take action, what would be 

the likely potential benefits? Well if the provincial government 

were to commit to an increased percentage of the health care 

budget being directed to medical research, then we have to ask 

what would be the likely outcomes. 

 

I believe that there are three primary areas of positive outcome. 

The first are the potential improvements to our provincial health 

care system over all. Secondly, the impact of direct jobs to our 

provincial economy — and I’m going to describe what kind of 

jobs those are, Deputy Speaker. And thirdly, the impact of new 

investment and business activity in our provincial economy. 

That is the reason why, when I took three scientists with me, I 

asked specifically to see the Minister of Health and the Minister 

of Post-Secondary Education and the Minister of Economic 

Development. 

 

(1645) 

 

It is very possible when we deal with the first positive outcome 

to envisage several examples of how research has had an impact 

on our health systems in the past and how we could actually  

anticipate how this could happen in future scenarios. For 

example, the average length of stay in hospital for many, many 

types of treatment is vastly reduced from what it was even five 

to ten years ago. Undoubtedly this has a cost saving to our 

health care system and these savings have resulted in part, in a 

substantial part, from previous investments in health research. 

 

For example we know that improved antibiotics have assisted in 

this — the discovery of insulin, polio vaccine and so forth. I 

mean, what would be the toll on our provincial health care 

budgets if we were having to treat these kinds of diseases today 

in the way we have in the past? 

 

Secondly, if the proposal to increase the health research budget 

— that I’m hoping will happen — to conduct research into the 

elimination of tuberculosis were approved and was successful, 

can you even imagine the benefits to Saskatchewan people and 

to the province’s health care system? 

 

Now I do hope that I can for one brief moment get the 

members’ opposite attention, because given that Saskatchewan 

has the highest proportion of aboriginal persons of any province 

in Canada and given that aboriginals have a rate of contracting 

tuberculosis which is 150 times greater than the rest of the 

population, imagine what the savings would be in human 

suffering, in terms of the cost of this province’s health care 

delivery system, and in terms of saving costs for opportunities 

lost. 

 

Another element would be in hereditary cancer screening 

programs that are being proposed in the province by the 

research community. And if it were adequately funded, what 

would be the cost savings here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 

would accrue to the provincial health care system if this type of 

early diagnostic procedure were able to take place? 

 

These are but a few examples. And if I may digress for just a 

moment, there’s an area of course I feel particularly 

passionately about, and we’re very blessed in Saskatchewan to 

have the MS (multiple sclerosis) neuroscience centre, which is 

probably one of the strongest infrastructures we have in this 

province. It’s not in a decaying position like so many others. 

Why we don’t utilize this to its maximum degree, I do not 

know. But one of the proposals that I put before the Minister of 

Health is this — and I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

anyone listening today and to all the members of this House, 

that if this does not speak to the heart of an issue and proclaim 

what common sense is, then nothing does — for $1.2 million 

over four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there could be hundreds 

of people in this province with all forms of multiple sclerosis 

treated. How? 

 

Well at present we’ve been hearing a great deal about relapsing 

remitting multiple sclerosis, but there are throngs of many with 

another form of multiple sclerosis which is devastating, and that 

is chronic progressive MS. 

 

There are very few treatments being put in place for this kind of 

MS. And one of the opportunities that we would have by simply 

spending $1.2 million over four years is to hire a clinical 

researcher, an added clinical researcher in this province. At this 

stage, we have one and that individual is working all the time. 

In 18 months he will retire and there will be no clinical  



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

researcher to oversee different forms of research for MS in this 

province. And that is almost unbelievable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Do you know that at this time, at this day, that there is an 

interferon which is an oral interferon. Betaseron is of the 

interferon family. There is an oral interferon — not an injection, 

oral — that for one one-thousandth of the dosage that these 

people who were just newly told that they could have 

Betaseron, one one-thousandth of that injection, they could take 

it orally. The receptors for being able to receive that interferon 

are in people’s mouths with MS, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 

means that it could be taken in immediately. It would cost less 

because it’s one one-thousandth of a dosage. It could be used 

for a longer period of time, and, they believe, with virtually no 

side-effects. 

 

Why wouldn’t we do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And the reason 

why it is not happening, is because we do not have common 

sense ruling health care decisions in this province. It is not 

happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we do not have the 

way in which . . . we need some vision for where we’re going to 

go in this province in health research and health services for our 

people. 

 

We have an abundance of people with multiple sclerosis. We 

have double the number of anywhere else in Canada. And at 

this time, if you speak to anyone who deals in this particular 

field, they say, let’s not go forward and have double blind 

studies. Why would we have randomized, double blind studies 

when we have the people here and we have drug companies 

right now that would provide all of these state-of-the-art drugs 

for nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They would cost nothing. Not like $21,000 a year for 

Betaseron, but they would supply it right now if this research 

could be done to make comparisons, have people who have 

chronic progressive MS, relapsing remitting MS, people on 

Betaseron, people who could be on these new drugs and look 

across the board and decide what is truly helping these people 

in their quality of life, and end costs to taxpayers of this 

province. To me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is nothing but 

common sense, and I am still wondering why this issue has not 

been addressed when I raised it weeks ago with not just the 

Minister of Health but with the Minister of Finance as well. 

 

If I may, there is a second positive outcome that could come 

from increased funding to health care, health research in the 

province. And I want to speak to that. Because the goal of every 

single government today is to provide an environment which is 

conducive to job creation. It has become perhaps the single 

most important criterion by which government policy is judged. 

While the biomedical, the clinical, and health research industry 

has much to offer in the way of job creation, it is imperative to 

understand the types of jobs which are created. 

 

The jobs created by the health services sector tend to be 

high-value jobs, long-term positions. These positions attract 

persons who command relatively high salaries and therefore 

they pay a high proportionate share of the income tax and they 

also become established in a community. It’s fascinating indeed 

to see what happens when people are excited at the prospect of 

being able to do the research in their field of expertise. If we get 

the best, they attract more money. And they not only attract  

more money, they attract more qualified people, which in turn 

attracts more money. 

 

We need to target areas in this province in which we can be 

best. We’ve not done this in health research. We’ve not done it 

in the biomedical field, and we should be doing it in the 

biomedical field. 

 

And I will contend at the end that just in the same way that 

we’ve been the best at ag-biotechnology, we should become a 

centre of excellence in particular areas of biomedical research, 

where we’ll continue to attract people, serve our people, and 

build an economy in this province. 

 

These kinds of positions create astonishing opportunities for our 

children. Not the kind that come from having part-time jobs or 

temporary jobs or the subject-to-layoff kinds of jobs or call 

centres or anything else. 

 

It’s not to say that people who work in these kinds of jobs don’t 

make a contribution. But to create the kinds of opportunities for 

our children to stay in this province after they have graduated 

high school and university, to draw people here to stay in our 

universities and be trained in biochemistry, to be trained in 

different fields that they can actually apply here at home, is 

going to be so important if we’re going to have a future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not going to create a future out of 

wheat, out of rocks, and out of trees. If we want a real economy 

of the future, we had better get with it. And we aren’t with it. 

And there is no plan to get with it. And I’m suggesting that this 

is an opportunity for people to finally get with it in this 

province by looking at targeting our tax dollars, our health care 

budget, a small proportion of our health care budget, like 1 per 

cent of our health care budget, on biomedical research. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — It is nothing short of an abomination, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we spend .27 cents of our health care 

dollar . . . of our health care . . . of $100 — every $100 spent in 

health care — on health research. 

 

If this government chose to double that amount, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we would still be the lowest in Canada — the lowest 

of any province. And I am saying that’s not good enough for the 

people of this province. And I believe, I honestly believe, that if 

these government members know these facts, it isn’t good 

enough for them either. I believe that. 

 

Not only do the kinds of positions that could provide quality 

employment opportunities come from increased funding in 

health research, they are going to illustrate — this will illustrate 

— that this province can offer the same kinds of relative 

opportunities that other provinces do. 

 

Within the health care system, the attraction and retention of 

qualified personnel is very crucial. People who work within 

these disciplines are attracted to employment situations where 

they’re likely to work with all sorts of other people who 

consider themselves among the brightest and best, and the 

converse is also true. 



December 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

Now I’m running out of time, and what I’d like to do is talk 

about the third positive potential outcome if in fact there’s 

increased health research funding in this province, and that’s 

the impact on new investment and business activity in our 

provincial economy. 

 

In the past, basic research was not perceived as the engine of 

business activity. That thought process has been transformed. 

And it’s been transformed by the emergence of 

knowledge-based economies. To the people of Saskatchewan, I 

go back to ag-biotechnology as the best example of the effects 

of research on business creation and investment. And our 

Minister of Agriculture most certainly would know about this, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the work that’s being done at 

Innovation Place, which has really contributed an enormous 

amount — not just to the city of Saskatoon and the province of 

Saskatchewan, not just to the nation of Canada — but to the 

world. It makes a major contribution in the quality of life 

because of the work that they do. 

 

While the success of that park is a relatively recent 

phenomenon, there is little doubt that people understand the 

linkage now between research, new businesses, and job creation 

far, far better than they have previously. 

 

If I may, in the news recently, I think a lot of people have heard 

of Biochem Pharma and what happened in Montreal. And I too 

was as astonished as everyone else with the bomb that went off 

there and no one could comprehend why. But Biochem Pharma 

has done an amazing job. 

 

If this government were to look at what the Government of 

Quebec has done in this field, where they sat down and said this 

is exactly what we’re going to contribute to health research 

funding, and we’re going to become the best at the following 

things, they did so knowing that there wouldn’t be any return in 

the short term but that there would be amazing return in the 

long term. And it’s happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

happened, with 1,000 jobs at Biochem Pharma, 1,000 of 

top-quality, long-term, sustainable jobs where they have an 

amazing kind of reputation throughout the world for the work 

that they’re now doing. 

 

Similarly in Hamilton with Vasoflux. And that just started from 

a basic research medical program — just a straight MRC 

(Medical Research Council) funded program. And it’s now the 

most growing employment force in that city. 

 

The key to all this business activity of course, is the funding 

necessary for expansion, for marketing, and commercialization. 

And I most certainly hope that the opportunities to lever basic 

medical research into strong, viable business activity is 

perceived and understood by this government. Because it’s 

something that the people of this province could benefit from, 

not just in terms of their own health, not just in terms of their 

own employment opportunities, but also for all other taxpayers 

and the contributions that can be made at the economic level by 

having the commercialization, of the manufacturing, and so 

forth, of all of these things. 

 

In conclusion, the key issue is this: will the Government of 

Saskatchewan take advantage of the tremendous opportunities 

in the area of basic medical research or not? If it does so, the  

government will be responsible for the industry’s enhanced 

ability to attract and retain first-rate clinical researchers and 

basic scientists. And by doing so, the government will be 

responsible for creating the environment that puts our province 

on the map in medical research. 

 

The result for our province will be that our children will have 

access to top-rate education at both undergraduate and graduate 

levels; that high-value jobs will be added to our provincial 

economy; that the province will enjoy an economic return from 

the new research development and commercialization 

opportunities which emerge. 

 

The fact that .27 per cent of the provincial health care budget is 

directed to research is not acceptable. And this translates into an 

investment in research that is far, far less than most other 

provinces. 

 

We want, I believe, to encourage people to come here. We don’t 

want Briana Biotech taking their money to Edmonton because 

they say the tax credit system isn’t good enough in this province 

to come here. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. It now being the normal 

time of adjournment, I would ask the member to move her 

motion now please. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I move that: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan urge the federal 

Minister of Health and the federal Minister of Science and 

Technology to increase the budget for all three granting 

councils without further delay, and certainly as part of the 

February 1998 federal budget, because Canada has fallen 

behind its G-7 competitors in the funding of medical 

research at an alarming rate; 

 

And further, that the Government of Saskatchewan commit 

itself immediately to the establishment of a meaningful 

target of the provincial health care budget directed to 

health research in order to address serious health care 

issues, some of which are unique to Saskatchewan, like 

tuberculosis, through discovery, development, and 

commercialization; 

 

And further, that the Government of Saskatchewan 

establish a tax credit system for investment in health care 

so that residents of Saskatchewan can participate in the 

Canadian medical discovery fund and take steps 

immediately to participate in the federal cost-sharing 

initiatives with respect to health research, namely the 

Canadian foundation for innovation program, the Canadian 

health services research foundation program, and the 

Medical Research Council regional partnership program in 

order to improve the quality of our health care system 

through the attraction and retention of the best and 

brightest in medical research and create new economic 

activity through high-quality, long-term jobs by levering 

basic research into commercial activity. 

 

I so move. 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave to 

introduce an amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — We are past time of adjournment and 

the question on the motion will be called. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:03 p.m. until 5:06 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 13 

 

Toth D’Autremont Boyd 

Gantefoer Heppner Osika 

Hillson McPherson Aldridge 

Belanger Haverstock Julé 

Goohsen   

 

Nays — 21 

 

Atkinson Johnson Goulet 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Calvert Pringle Trew 

Lorje Scott Nilson 

Serby Hamilton Stanger 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Jess Murrell Thomson 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1997 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1997 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1997 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1997 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1997 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1997 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1997 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1998 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1998 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 1998 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 

  Wiens ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2006, 2008 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2009 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2017 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2017 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Qualified Workers Needed in Hog Industry 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1999 

 Awards for Aberdeen School Newspaper 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1999 

 Can-Oats Milling Products Inc. 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1999 

 Member for Melfort-Tisdale Apologizes to His Wife 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1999 

 Provincial Housing Boom 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2000 

 Tribute to Northern Leaders 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2000 

 CenAlta Well Services, Inc. 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2000 

 World Champion Tap Dancer 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2000 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Grain Transportation 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

 Night Hunting 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

 SaskPower’s Investment in Guyana 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2002 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2002 

 Channel Lake Petroleum 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2003 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 

 Surgery Waiting-lists 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2003 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2003 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2003 

 Infant Mortality 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 



 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 238  The Wildlife Amendment Act 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

MOTION — THIRD PARTY 

 Closure of Plains Health Centre 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2012 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 

 Saskatchewan Crown Corporations Accountability 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2013 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2015 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2017 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2019 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2020 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2021 

MOTION — INDEPENDENT MEMBER 

 Research Financing 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2022 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2022 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2026 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2026 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2022 

 


