




















































Hansard: March 12, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 109 

 March 12, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, and 

particularly the city of Regina, with respect to crimes by young 

people. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth organizations and other organizations 

committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with a petition on behalf of 

concerned citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the problems 

with some of our youth. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

charges, including car thefts and crimes of violence; such 

task force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 

municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 

present petitions on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these appear to be from Bengough, I guess in that area 

around there, and Viceroy. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present petitions today on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

From Denzil — lots of them from Denzil — Borden, Hepburn, 

Langham, Ituna, Parkview, Abernethy; Moose Jaw even, Mr. 

Speaker; from across the province. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to close Argyle Elementary School; 

and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reduce the PST by two points in the 1997 provincial 

budget; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the municipal revenue-sharing reduction; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime in 

Saskatchewan; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

change the Saskatchewan big game damage compensation 

program to provide reasonable compensation. 

 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on day 10 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Finance: in light of 

comments made to the Regina Chamber of Commerce 

regarding targeted tax programs for business versus a 

reduction in the PST: (1) please provide whatever surveys 

or studies the minister used as a basis for her comment that 

Saskatchewan businesses prefer targeted tax cuts rather 

than a reduction in the PST; (2) according to the 

Department of Finance, how much estimated revenue do 

Saskatchewan businesses lose to cross-border shopping to 

neighbouring provinces, and the U.S. on an annual basis? 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 110 

I so present. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following questions: 

 

Of the Minister of Health: (a) how many Saskatchewan 

residents received publicly insured medical services 

outside of Saskatchewan in 1996; how much did the 

Department of Health pay to other provinces or U.S. states 

for medical services received by Saskatchewan residents in 

1996; and (c) please provide a list of all medical 

procedures received by Saskatchewan residents outside of 

Saskatchewan and paid for by the Department of Health in 

1996. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

With your indulgence I have two groups . . . I’m fortunate to 

have two groups to introduce to the House today. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and all 

members a group of 29 students who are seated in the west 

gallery and some of the students are seated here on the floor of 

the Chamber with us. These are students, Mr. Speaker, from the 

Alexandra Centre for Adult Education, part of the SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

campus in Moose Jaw. 

 

They are here this afternoon with their teachers, Yvonne 

Nicholson and Jan McArter. They’ve had a chance, I think, to 

tour the building, and I look forward to meeting with them for a 

short visit between 2 and 2:30, Mr. Speaker. I would invite all 

members to welcome these adult students from Moose Jaw, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  And then, Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege 

as minister responsible for the Public Service Commission to 

introduce and to welcome a group of public servants, civil 

servants, employees of the Government of Saskatchewan who 

are today seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are the individuals who work in a variety of departments 

of government. They’re here to spend the day at the legislature. 

And we sincerely welcome them both to the Chamber and thank 

them each individually for the work they’re doing for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Welcome to the Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Internet and Agriculture 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, as part of Agriculture and Food 

Week, I would like to take this opportunity to mention one 

change that is taking place in farming today that is having a  

tremendous impact. Mr. Speaker, it is the Internet. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers are using new technology and new 

techniques to improve their crop production. Attaining the most 

up-to-date information in an efficient and timely manner 

therefore, has become a vital aspect of most farming operations. 

In their attempt to remain well-informed, farmers are turning to 

the Internet for that agricultural information. 

 

In response to changing needs of producers, there have been 

numerous web sites set up that provide a wide variety of 

information to producers, such as the AgInfoNet and the Farm 

Business Management Information Network. 

 

Agricultural sites on the Internet are increasing the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan agri-food industry. The 

Internet, Mr. Speaker, will continue to play a major role in 

years to come. I hope that more producers take the leap and get 

on-line. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Quill Lake Goose Fest 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

often fail to recognize what makes our communities unique. 

Quill Lake has looked to its skies and chosen the Canadian 

goose, which flocks to the Quill Lake and area in spring and 

fall, as their mascot. In the past 13 years the whole community 

of 465 people have participated in the annual Goose Fest. 

 

This fall at the annual conference in Prince Albert, the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association presented 

Quill Lake Goose Fest committee with a community 

achievement award. Over the 13 years of the Quill Lake Goose 

Fest more than $100,000 has been raised and returned to the 

community for rink renovations, artificial ice in the curling rink, 

community hall, and a playground. 

 

The festival relies on the involvement of every service group in 

town, and even as people have been forced to leave the 

community the festival has been able to survive because those 

involved are willing to take on a number of jobs at the same 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Quill Lake exemplifies the spirit of Saskatchewan 

and I would like the Assembly to join with me in congratulating 

this rural Saskatchewan town on this recognition of their yearly 

Goose Fest achievement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Co-op Expansion 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I stood to 

congratulate the Wheat Pool on the expansion of its Weyburn 

elevator. Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also congratulate 

the Weyburn Co-op on its plan for a $2 million expansion and 

renovation of its Co-op food store scheduled for completion in  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  111 

September of this year. 

 

The new-look Co-op will merge the services and products 

offered at the downtown department store with the new store, 

install new refrigeration units, and feature more sales space. 

The refurbished Co-op will increase its space, Mr. Speaker, 

from 14,000 square feet to 21,000, thereby increasing the size 

of the Co-op to include a deli, bakery, pharmacy, and hardware 

departments, as well as adding a one-hour photo lab. 

 

In effect, Mr. Speaker, the renovations and expansion of the 

Co-op will result in a complete shopping centre for the people 

of Weyburn and surrounding area. In addition, the expansion 

will create numerous jobs for the community. Construction 

activities will employ approximately 20 people and when the 

project is completed, five new positions will be added in the 

first three years and as sales increase additional jobs will be 

added. 

 

The economic activities in Weyburn are very positive, just as 

they are throughout the province, and I congratulate the 

Weyburn Co-op for helping to create that atmosphere and for its 

commitment to the people of the community. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Exhibition of Allen Sapp’s Paintings 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Allen Sapp, the noted Cree artist 

and one of those fine people from North Battleford I spoke of 

yesterday, was recently honoured by having an exhibition of his 

paintings in Toronto. All residents of the Battlefords are proud 

of this very talented and respected member of our community, 

and North Battleford has built a gallery to display his work, 

which is now one of our prime tourist attractions. 

 

The present exhibition of Mr. Sapp’s work in Toronto is an 

appropriate occasion for hon. members to express our 

admiration for this great Saskatchewanian. It also provides we 

in the opposition an opportunity to reassure the hon. member 

from Saskatoon Southeast that opposition members do 

appreciate the contributions of Saskatchewan artists to our 

province and we are not the crude Philistines she seems to 

envisage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Alberta Provincial Election 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, as member for Lloydminster, the 

city that is half in the promised land of Saskatchewan and half 

in the outer darkness of Alberta, I want to comment on 

yesterday’s Alberta’s election, after the fact. I don’t want to go 

on prematurely like the member from Kindersley did the other 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in listening to the member from Kindersley 

yesterday, it was evident that his image was incomplete — 

something vague about Spam. If he had finished his comparison  

logically . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order, order. I want to remind 

the hon. member that statements by members are not to be 

debated in the House. And she will be aware that she is 

engaging in debate on the member made by the hon. member 

for Kindersley and I’m sure she wants to avoid doing that. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I’ll avoid doing that. I do 

want to agree with one point, however. Alberta is still without 

an official opposition. However, like our . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. I just want to caution the 

hon. member to . . . I just finished cautioning her to not engage 

in debate, and in debate in any form. And I’ll just ask her to 

complete her statement without engaging in debate on a 

previous member’s statement. Order. Order. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  I’m sorry about that. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

knowing me personally it is very hard for me to not engage in 

debate. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the caucus of Pam Barrett 

and Raj Pannu might provide the only sober thought in the 

legislature in Alberta. That is the election of two New 

Democrats in Alberta yesterday. I do want to point out for 

progressively minded people that the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) members are a woman and a person of colour. This 

might be the most significant fact of the election. 

 

I do congratulate all elected members and I want folks to realize 

that 50 per cent of the people of Alberta voted in the election 

and only half of them voted for Mr. Klein — a whopping 25 per 

cent. 

 

New Liberal Leader 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since this 

session began we haven’t heard a word of the new Liberal 

leader. We think that’s unfortunate because he obviously has 

some very intelligent things to say. 

 

For instance, the other day in an interview with the Moosomin 

paper he said: 

 

The Conservatives provided more effective opposition on 

many issues than did the Liberals in the last session. 

 

The new Liberal leader is obviously a very astute political 

observer. The Liberal caucus has made an excellent choice in 

having him as their new senior policy analyst, although I do 

question paying him from caucus accounts. 

 

He went on to say: 

 

The PCs had an advantage. They were media coherent. 

They have quick wits and they know how to talk in sound 

bites. 

 

I’m not sure if I believe the last part — four farmers and a 

school teacher able to completely manipulate Saskatchewan’s 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 112 

media. Nevertheless we feel there are some very astute 

observations we want to bring to the attention of the House. We 

feel the Liberals should be congratulated on making a canny 

political addition to their office staff. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Korean Veterans’ Wall of Remembrance 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every November 11 

we pay solemn tribute to our soldiers who were lost in the two 

world wars of this century. As we must, Mr. Speaker, because 

without their sacrifices it is certain that the nation we have 

today would be significantly altered, and for the worse. 

Sometimes lost in the memory of those two conflicts is the 

participation and sacrifice of Canadians during the Korean 

conflict of 1950 to 1953. 

 

As we prepare to turn the historical page on this century, it is 

necessary I think, to not let this smaller but significant moment 

be forgotten. We should not forget that this conflict presented 

the first challenge to the newly formed United Nations, the first 

time that 22 nations came together with the primary motive of 

enforcing peace, not to wage war. We especially should not 

forget that 516 Canadian soldiers lost their lives in the service 

of international order. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the Korea Veterans Association of Canada 

is raising funds to build a national wall of remembrance for a 

dedication date of July 27. On this 200-foot granite wall will be 

placed plaques which are replicas of the grave markers in the 

United Nations cemetery in Pusan, Korea where most of the 

fallen Canadians are buried. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join me in praising the 

Korean veterans association, and in urging all Canadians to 

participate in this necessary act of memorial memory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Neonatal Ambulance Service 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

comment on the new state-of-the art neonatal ambulance the 

Regina Health District Emergency Medical Services Unit put 

into action in late January of this year. The new unit will 

transport critically ill children from throughout southern 

Saskatchewan to hospitals in Regina for life-saving medical 

attention. 

 

This new neonatal ambulance is replacing a unit that is over 10 

years old and which can no longer accommodate the neonatal 

team or its high-tech equipment. The team responds to an 

average of 100 calls a year and travels thousands of kilometres 

to aid children in need of life-saving medical care. 

 

I extend my congratulations to the EMS (Emergency Medical 

Services) staff for spearheading efforts to raise capital for the 

ambulance, of which they raised half the funds. I would also 

like to congratulate the Children’s Health Foundation of 

Saskatchewan which played an important role in helping the  

health district achieve its goal. 

 

Providing transportation for critically ill children is a vital 

component in the health care of children. Children of southern 

Saskatchewan will undoubtedly benefit from the addition of this 

ambulance. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to applaud the achievement 

of the Regina Health District for its continued high-quality 

service to the children of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Dodsland Health Centre 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1993 this 

government, the self-proclaimed and self-delusional saviours of 

health care, closed 52 hospitals throughout this province and 

replaced them with empty shells which provide an assorted 

variety of services. 

 

Now it appears, Mr. Speaker, that some communities are going 

to lose even those minimal levels of care. The people of 

Dodsland are being told their health centre may be closed 

despite $200,000 sitting in a trust fund — money, Mr. Speaker, 

that the people of Dodsland raised to ensure the future of their 

health care in that community. 

 

The fund they created will not be used to keep the centre open 

and it may have to be shortly closed. Will the minister explain 

to the people of Dodsland why they can no longer use money 

they raised to ensure the survival of the health care clinic and 

what is he prepared to do to ensure the people of Dodsland will 

continue to have access to appropriate health care services in 

the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member does not quite 

have his facts correct. The member asks if the Dodsland Health 

Centre is going to be closed. I can advise the member, Mr. 

Speaker, not with any joy but just as a matter of fact, the 

Dodsland Health Centre, Mr. Speaker, was closed on October 1, 

1996. 

 

What the people of Dodsland are trying to do, and I support 

them, Mr. Speaker, is to create a medical clinic, which a 

physician will use for a number of days per week, in Dodsland. 

That’s what’s happening in Dodsland, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there is a trust fund — $15,000 was dispersed to the 

committee in Dodsland earlier. A business plan is to be 

presented by the community to the health board by June 1 of 

this year, which has not arrived yet, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately 

that has not been done yet. The health board locally is 

committed to meeting with the people locally to work out a 

solution. There’s up to $200,000 in the trust fund and I’m  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  113 

confident that, working together, a solution will be arrived at, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the minister 

has just made our point in the fact that we’ve seen the level of 

services in Dodsland and the other 52 communities increasingly 

decrease over the last three or four years. And that’s what’s 

happened, this. Yes, the health centre is not there any more. 

They’re down now to a doctor two days a week, Mr. Speaker, 

and no services. And now the health district, because of funding 

cuts by the provincial government, want to close this. 

 

Our question is, yesterday the minister stepped in and said that 

he was looking into the East Central Health District and looking 

at the tendering process. Now today he is saying that he will not 

step in. Which is it, Mr. Minister? Are you going to step in and 

help the people in Dodsland, and next Eatonia, to ensure that 

they’re going to have the services that are needed there or are 

you not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the difficulty I have of course, Mr. 

Speaker, talking to the member about funding, is what we hear 

from the member today and what we heard last year was that we 

should put more money into health care even though we have 

100 per cent back-filled, dollar for dollar, the cuts by the 

Liberals to health care. And we’re going to continue to do so, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the leader of the member’s party, Mr. Speaker, is on record 

as saying (a) he wants to shut down the hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan and adopt the Australian plan; (b) he wants to cut 

hundreds of millions of dollars out of the health care budget. 

And what we need to know, Mr. Speaker, is where does that 

member stand. 

 

Does he stand with us, believing that we should properly fund 

the health care system, or does he stand with the leader of his 

party who has said that we should take hundreds of millions of 

dollars out of the health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Property Tax Reassessment 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the entire reassessment plans of 

this government were thrown into chaos yesterday. Municipal 

representatives have taken the dramatic step, to demonstrate 

their opposition to reassessment, by voting to refuse to 

implement reassessment in 1997. 

 

Will the minister explain how this government intends to deal 

with the mess she has created? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier 

put it most clearly this morning when he said this issue is 30  

years overdue in being dealt with. It’s been discussed for 10 

years, and with 85 per cent support from the voting delegates at 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) at 

their annual meeting for this reassessment process, it’s time 

now to move with it, and we will be moving in that direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Deputy Premier is 

correct that this province is dealing with a reassessment dating 

back to 1965 while every other province is dealing with a base 

year of 1990 or more recent. 

 

Yet in spite of how much they have been dragging their heels 

. . . In fact it is even now just only a few days since SAMA has 

provided updated figures to the municipalities as to what impact 

reassessment would have on property owners they represent. 

Let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, that if reassessment in the rural 

areas comes unravelled, this also unravels urban reassessment, 

as the one cannot go ahead without the other. 

 

Will the minister explain if the government is prepared to do 

something, other than make veiled threats to our municipal 

politicians, to address the concerns and to deal sensitively with 

the issues of reassessment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

members opposite, and clearly to the people who are attending 

the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention in Saskatoon, that this is indeed a difficult process 

and a difficult situation, but not made easier by waiting to make 

tough decisions. And I think that’s what governance is all 

about, is working with communities, which we do. I think on 

the assessment panel, the people making the decision to go 

forward with this, there were three people from SARM, three 

people from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), and three from government. They agreed to go 

forward with this process. 

 

And I just say to the member opposite, as tough as these 

decisions are, if and when you ever get to this side of the 

House, decisions have to be made. And the fact of the matter is, 

a decision has been made. It’s a tough decision, one that will 

take a lot of cooperation, a lot of discussion, but we are moving 

forward on this issue with the people who voted in favour of 

moving on reassessment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Auto Insurance Rates 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was another 

report today stating that the people of Saskatchewan could be 

facing an increase to their auto insurance rates. Residents have 

been kept in the dark far too long, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) tell the people of this province what plans he has for 

the cash-strapped pocketbooks regarding possible increase to  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 114 

SGI auto insurance rates, and what avenue residents can expect 

to take to express their concerns and their opinions. If their only 

choice is the present 45-day review process, it’ll be nothing 

more than an exercise in futility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First 

of all I want to inform the member opposite that we have 

indicated now, I think, on two occasions — both the acting 

president of SGI and through a discussion that I had with the 

media — that our auto fund is experiencing some difficulty. 

There is no question of that. And in the Crown corporations 

review when members of your party had asked me the question, 

I’d indicated to them as well that there was some pressure on 

the auto fund this year. 

 

Clearly with the 1995 storms, the increase in the number of 

vehicles that are involved in damage this year, we’re 

experiencing that kind of a need to examine the auto fund. If in 

fact there was a requirement for any kind of an increase in the 

auto fund, that will be discussed in some detail both at the 

corporate level . . . the 45-day review process as you stated is 

correct. It’s still in place, and we’ll be providing that 

information in some detail for you if that becomes a process 

that we choose to undertake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are as well to the minister in charge of SGI. 

 

The minister is about, Mr. Speaker, to break yet another NDP 

promise. When the NDP introduced no-fault insurance, and I’m 

sure they will recall that on January 1, 1995, they promised a 

freeze for three years on rate increases. And it looks like an 

early thaw, Mr. Speaker. That freeze is now being lifted and the 

minister is blaming it on car theft and vandalism. Now that’s 

quite a thing, Mr. Speaker. The minister can’t control people 

from stripping cars nor can he control people from stripping in 

bars. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you breaking your promise to freeze SGI 

rates for three full years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The member from Maple Creek is obviously attempting to 

expose a couple of issues this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And clearly the rates that the member is talking about are not 

. . . the considerations currently that we’re experiencing in the 

auto fund are not directly related, as has been reported and the 

member purports . . . to do with car thefts and vandalism. 

Certainly there has been an increase in that area but it hasn’t 

been significant enough to put enough pressure on the auto fund 

where we’re requiring in fact to make auto adjustment 

increases. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, we had a tremendous number of 

incidents around the tin issue where we’ve had many rollovers; 

we’ve had a very difficult year in terms of weather conditions.  

And as a result of that, our insurance fund is under some stress, 

as I’ve indicated. 

 

Over the next couple of months, we’ve indicated we’re going to 

review that in some detail and we’ll be coming forward to 

announce to this Assembly and to do a 45-day review process if 

that’s in fact the case. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

this is yet another example of the tremendous cost that people 

are paying in this province for the NDP’s inability to control car 

theft and related kinds of issues. Not only is this problem 

endangering the police department and the people, it is now 

endangering the general public. 

 

And now every single driver in Saskatchewan is going to be 

penalized — caused to pay a fine, basically — through higher 

auto rates for the crimes of others. While the criminals continue 

to get off with little or no punishment, basically a slap on the 

wrist and a suggestion that they should be good boys and not do 

it again, we will be required, as the rest of the drivers in this 

province, to pay the bill. 

 

Our roads, Mr. Speaker, are also a very great cause of this 

problem — another inefficiency of this government. The 

potholes are really there. And believe me, Mr. Minister, we 

have had winter in this province before. That’s no excuse. We 

still have potash mines and lots of salt to put on them, just the 

fact that the problem is that we don’t get it there any more. We 

also don’t have highway crews any more either. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, how much are the insurance rates going to go 

up as a result of your mishandling of the auto fund? And 

believe me, that is the problem, is the mishandling. Also, Mr. 

Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. The hon. 

member will know that he’s been extremely lengthy in his 

preamble and I will ask him to put his question directly, 

immediately now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Minister, how much is this mishandling 

going to cost the Saskatchewan drivers, and how much is the 

Minister of Justice also going to cost them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, I want to indicate to the House and to the member 

opposite that in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have the most 

efficiently managed, the best auto fund that we have anywhere 

in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  In 1995, Mr. Speaker, we introduced in 

this province the personal injury protection plan which added to 

the services and programs that we provided for people who are 

injured in this province — the best rehabilitative services that  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  115 

we have anywhere in Canada today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact remains that in this province we have not had a rate 

increase, Mr. Speaker, in three years. We have not had a rate 

increase in three years and if you review the information that’s 

been provided through the Crown corporations to the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, you’ll find that in this province we’ve 

only had a 4 per cent increase over the last six years in this 

province — six years since we’ve had an increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I say to you that the kinds of discussions that need to take place 

over the next couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, and months will be 

to ensure that Saskatchewan people can continue to enjoy the 

lowest rates anywhere in Canada — as we have today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Property Tax Reassessment 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions as well are to the Minister of Municipal Government 

or her designate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister now appears to have a full-scale tax 

revolt on her hands as a result of the NDP mishandling of 

reassessment. Yesterday SARM delegates voted to delay 

implementation of the NDP reassessment plan for one year. No 

sooner had they done that, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, than 

the minister came up and the minister said that she was listening 

to the municipalities. However while she told them she was 

listening, she also threatened them by suggesting that 

municipalities who don’t do assessment will be up the creek 

without a paddle. She’s really earning her salary. 

 

Madam Minister, when are you going to stop lecturing 

municipalities and start listening to them, and will you at least 

listen to their requests for a year extension to address the 

concerns they have with reassessment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

makes one good point and that is listening. And I listened very 

carefully to his question and I want to remind members of the 

Assembly where the idea of assessing property on resale value 

came from. It came from the previous administration, led by 

Premier Devine at that time, which that member was a member 

of and sat on this side of the House. This is where the concept 

of reassessment based on resale value came from. 

 

And it is a difficult process, but I want to say that the municipal 

governments are in support of reassessment based on property 

value . . . resale value. 

 

Now for the member opposite to come here and try to fan the 

flames in order to get some political impact from it I think is 

unfortunate, made even more unfortunate by the fact that they 

are part of the architecture that created the situation of SAMA 

in the original Bill which we are implementing today. And I say 

to the member opposite he should stand and apologize for  

trying to make a political issue where he is one of the people 

responsible for what we have to deal with today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister has proven a point once again. While they — and I 

heard the Premier this morning — blame Ottawa, the reality is 

the problems that RMs (rural municipality) are facing today is 

the problems that have been created by this government and the 

offloading, even this year, of $37 million on municipalities. On 

top of it — the reassessment plan, Mr. Speaker, had some good 

points — this government has bungled the whole issue. And 

number one, what municipalities are facing today, Mr. Speaker, 

is they do not have the proper information or the proper tools to 

get the assessment plan in its right place and have it ready for 

this year. 

 

Madam Minister, will you do the honourable thing and allow a 

one-year renewal to address the concerns of RMs and thus avert 

a full-scale tax revolt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to make clear 

to the member opposite that this process of study and analysis 

and paralysis, which was so common in the previous 

administration, is not one of the traits of our government. The 

fact of the matter is that this issue is 30 years out of date — 

reassessment in this province. It’s been debated and discussed 

for the nine years, the nine terrible years, that you were in 

government. You did nothing. You pretended to start the 

process before you were defeated in 1991. 

 

And I want to say that this is a difficult issue and not an easy 

one to deal with. But the fact of the matter is assessment has to 

be redone in this province, is being redone with the cooperation 

of the municipal governments. And I say to the member 

opposite, he should come onside and help rather than create 

problems in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ministers’ Expense Allowances 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

over the past couple of days we’ve heard quite a bit of debate 

about how much it costs to feed an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly). The Liberals, on $4 a day, are feeling 

more light-headed and faint-hearted than usual. Meanwhile, the 

Minister of Social Services is telling us he could eat well for 

$3.75. 

 

The MLA expense rules actually provide a daily meal 

allowance of $26.75 for MLAs, the same as for most 

out-of-scope employees. However, there’s a few out-of-scope 

employees who get a much bigger meal allowance. Cabinet 

ministers get $40 a day for meals; the Premier gets $50 a day 

for meals. I guess raising taxes and closing hospitals is a hungry 

business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to whichever minister wants to 

explain this: why does it cost more to feed the Premier and the  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 116 

cabinet than it does other MLAs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite, who knows a lot about food, and I want to 

say very clearly that we can debate the issue of how much it 

costs to feed a family in Saskatchewan or doesn’t cost to feed a 

family. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that he should check the 

record on food allowances and where cabinet ministers stay 

today and eat today. The rules have not changed, that I know of, 

since their government was in power. And I want to say that in 

many ways the rates have been cut back. Salaries of cabinet 

ministers are 5 per cent less than they were when your 

government was in power. 

 

So I say again to the member, if he needs some help in studying 

analyses on food and amounts of food he should be eating, we 

can talk about that. But I don’t think the rules for cabinet 

ministers or for MLAs are out of line at all. If he’s getting paid 

too much he should send a little of it back in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Group Home Funding 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 

of our caucus learned two very important lessons yesterday. We 

learned that living on a $4 food budget, as residents of group 

homes do, is not easy. We also heard the Minister of Social 

Services demonstrate a true lack of compassion and 

commitment to the most vulnerable members of our society by 

suggesting that the $4 food budget is sufficient and is in fact too 

high when compared to StatsCanada figures of 3.75. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s attempt to detract from the issue at 

hand by quoting from outdated statistics is an affront to the 

seriousness of this matter. Many people have contacted my 

office expressing their indignation at the way the minister has 

slighted the needs of the disabled. I offer the minister this next 

moment to apologize to the developmentally disabled 

individuals in this province. 

 

Is the minister prepared to offer an apology for his comments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the 

opportunity to speak to a number of group home operators in 

the province who, in their own way, assured me that while it’s 

difficult to provide with the current food budget, they are 

managing and managing quite well in some cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if . . . and the members of the Liberal caucus sit 

. . . they sit in their bench and laugh. Mr. Speaker, they sit in 

their bench and laugh or they shout; the leader shouts from his 

seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they had some compassion, if these people 

cared a whit about social programing in this country, they 

would stand with us and stand with almost every other 

provincial government in this country and speak to their federal 

counterparts about what those federal Liberals have done to  

social programing across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why do they just engage in this chatter from their 

seats? Why don’t they stand up and speak for the people of 

Saskatchewan that they’re supposed to represent? 

 

Environmental Handling Charges 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Social . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order, order, order, order. 

 

Now I’ve just recognized the hon. member for Athabasca, and 

I’ll ask all hon. members on both sides of the House to allow 

the hon. member from Athabasca to put his question in a way 

that can be audible to all members of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Social Services indicated yesterday he doesn’t 

know where his government might find the money to increase 

the food budget for group home residents. And once again the 

Liberals have come up with a solution. 

 

He may want to encourage the Minister of the Environment to 

examine an agreement that this government has with SARCAN. 

Under this deal, the government will take in an estimated $9.4 

million from environmental handling charges on recycled 

containers this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of these funds will be turned over to 

SARCAN. However, $1.6 million will go into government 

coffers, not into recycling programs or to assist those with 

disabilities who are making a contribution to the preservation of 

our environment, as these funds were originally intended for. 

 

Will the Environment minister explain how his government can 

feed its own coffers instead of properly feeding the residents of 

our group homes who are forced to live on $4 a day? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ll take notice of that on behalf of the minister, who’s at the 

SARM convention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The very fact that 

Saskatchewan residents pay an environmental charge on 

recycled containers and a portion of these funds are directed 

into government’s General Revenue Fund is cause for concern. 

When you collect money for a certain specific purpose, it 

should be used for that certain specific purpose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  If in fact that these revenues are being 

collected as environmental handling fees, as I mentioned before, 

they should be used for environment. Anything else could only 

be labelled as a hidden tax. 



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  117 

Will the minister again explain what he intends to do to address 

what is, if I can use polite language, a less than honourable 

practice on the backs of our people with disabilities? Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Let me just say very briefly that all 

revenues from the environmental hazard are part of the general 

revenue. The largest portion of these funds are then collected 

and they’re paid back to SARCAN. 

 

As for what revenue SARCAN will receive, I know the hon. 

member will be pleased to wait until budget day, when the 

Minister of Finance will outline all of these sums. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Government Office Space in Melville 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve sat here in the 

House this afternoon and heard about all the consultation and 

the cooperation that’s necessary to make plans for the benefit of 

all people of Saskatchewan. The mayor of Melville has been 

informed the provincial police court is being moved out of the 

city’s provincial building, a decision he describes as “stupid.” It 

makes no sense. What’s being proposed is that court be held in 

the Legion hall or facility run by the Knights of Columbus. 

 

Is this another slap in the face to the community and residents 

of Melville, Mr. Speaker? What is the economic sense? What 

will happen to the law library? Why aren’t Justice and SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) talking to 

the leaders of the communities? 

 

The Melville Advance reports in today’s issue that there are 

plans to close some 60 or 70 similar such facilities throughout 

the province. I would hope . . . I would ask the ministers, 

whichever one, will you consult with leaders of the community 

before you make moves to shut down needed services and 

facilities in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to, first of all, inform the member from Melville that this 

government, in its process of dealing with a vast number of 

issues, aside from the one that I have responsibility for, 

continue to consult with communities in the decision-making 

process, first of all. 

 

Secondly, I want to say to the member from Melville that the 

decision to consolidate some of the services in the provincial 

building are the kinds of work that this government’s been 

doing in terms of rightsizing property all over the province.  

 

And last year, when I was in the estimates, this very same 

member asked me about the kind of work that this government 

was doing in terms of rightsizing properties around 

Saskatchewan. And we outlined to him the number of buildings 

and properties that we have taken out of long-term leases that  

were established in this province previously by the previous 

administration. And where we’re still stuck today, Mr. Speaker, 

was paying huge, huge funds to provide dollars for buildings 

that aren’t being used at all. 

 

In the case of the Melville situation, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

consolidating today some of the SERM’s (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management) offices into the 

provincial building, and then moving some of those services 

into the community which aren’t being used as often, and 

certainly at a lesser rate to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 5  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Amendment Act, 1997, be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997, be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 

Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje, 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 

honour to be standing here today representing the best 

constituency in the province and replying to the throne speech. 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 118 

The frustrating part about being fourth on the speaking list is 

merely repeating the thank you’s to the many people who 

deserve recognition in this Assembly. To yourself, Mr. Speaker, 

for setting a precedent in Canada to ensure our young people 

recognize their part, and their representatives’ part, in 

appreciating and maintaining democracy. I thank you. 

 

To the new pages and the rest of the personnel in the Assembly 

who work very hard to ensure the voices of all people are heard, 

I thank you. To the people of North Battleford who sent a man 

who is considered a valuable asset, a trusted colleague, and a 

message to this government, I thank them. And to the people 

who have chosen the leader of our party and the next premier of 

the province, I thank them. 

 

I came into the House last Thursday morning excited and ready 

for the next session. So many of the negative aspects of last 

year’s session were gone. We had heard that the Saskatchewan 

people had a bright future to look forward to after living 

through hell for the last decade. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was with growing trepidation that I listened 

to the opening speech for the throne for the second session of 

the twenty-third legislature. I don’t fear for myself but for the 

people of Saskatchewan. This fear stems from the growing 

realization that we are being led from the brink of bankruptcy 

into a dark void of a much more ominous type of bankruptcy. 

 

I refer, Mr. Speaker, to a bankruptcy of vision, a bankruptcy of 

ideals, and I refer specifically to a bankruptcy which is willing 

to write off everything that cannot be measured on a balance 

sheet. Our most valuable asset are people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this speech ignored the needs of the 1 million 

people in this province who are ready to get at the business of 

building the future. All they ask is to be allowed to get on with 

the task. The only real tools they require are to be freed from 

the stifling and prohibitive policies of this government. 

 

Secondly, and perhaps most importantly, to be released from 

the pervasive, self-deprecating attitude that has been forced on 

them by a government unable or unwilling to show faith in the 

future. The Speech from the Throne which was presented last 

week, other than the usual half-hearted and hollow 

chest-thumping we’ve come to expect from this government, 

exhibited no real or measurable clue that the short-sighted, 

narrow vision of the future by this government is going to 

change. 

 

The throne speech could in fact have been shortened to one 

sentence leaving more time for the true exuberance of 

Saskatchewan youth, the great performance by our young 

entertainers from the city. The real meaning and content of this 

government’s stated intentions, it’s vision for the future, could 

easily have been summed up by saying the beatings will 

continue until morale improves. Or at the most, to give some 

credit to the unsaid but vague hints implied in the speech, the 

beatings will continue until morale improves or an election is 

called, whichever comes first. 

 

Really, Mr. Speaker, does this government believe  

Saskatchewan people are so naïve that they’ll fall for the old 

political routine of pain in the first two years, coast for a year, 

and then give something back in the election year? Yet this is 

really the only clear message in this year’s throne speech. 

 

If I may be allowed one more metaphor, Mr. Speaker, the 

throne speech reminded me of the first time I went to a fair and 

saw cotton candy. There before me was a stand of huge cones 

filled with mountains of deliciously appealing yet somehow 

undescribable fluff that made me think of clouds. And I 

remember the disappointment when I touched it and tried to eat 

it. There was nothing there. It was superficial. There was no 

substance and it was just air. In fact if one did manage to eat it, 

it was sickening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what this throne speech offered — some 

intrigue but no substance; just fluff. And because we expected 

more, the result was sickening. So with your indulgence, Mr. 

Speaker, allow me to fill in what the throne speech did not say. 

 

I believe the people of this province have a right to know about 

the opportunities that were lost and the problems that were 

ignored by this coast-along-until-the-next-election-year speech. 

First in the area of fiscal management and the development of 

our economy, the stated intention of this session as expressed in 

the speech was simply more of the same. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that this beautiful province of 

ours, with its abundance of natural resources, has limited 

opportunity for sustained economic growth. I do believe we 

have the ability to maintain and even reinstate our infrastructure 

and our social safety net. 

 

Yet by maintaining the status quo, as suggested in the speech, 

means our economy is based simply on emptying grandma’s 

pocketbook at the casino, or sucking the vitality out of our 

farmers, business people, and labour force, through taxes and 

increased utility rates. 

 

The government’s plan for ’97-98 is their indication of their 

vision through the omission of even one single new positive 

proposal. Don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, I don’t begrudge 

grandma her right to sit at the slot machines, but I don’t believe 

it’s fair or reasonable to expect her to carry our economy into 

the 21st century. 

 

The government is content to hanging their hats on last year’s 

Partnership for Growth proposal which could also be compared 

to cotton candy. There is nothing substantial in the document. It 

didn’t work out last year and we have no reason to expect it will 

work this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problems that we see in Saskatchewan from 

child poverty, child prostitution, gambling and addiction, abuse, 

and younger offenders, stems from one very obvious problem 

— the lack of a good job. We have all heard the phrase, the best 

social program is a good job. The only way we can address the 

problem of child poverty is by ensuring that families have the 

ability to care for their children. The problems of poverty are 

increasing at an astonishing rate even though this government 

made a commitment to the people to eliminate the problem in 



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  119 

their first term of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do the people of this province realize that 82 per 

cent of single-parent families are headed by women? The 

problems facing our single moms centre around a meaningful 

job. Jobs require training and education. Are these issues truly 

being addressed in this throne speech? 

 

The special challenges that women face in terms of securing a 

well-paid job must be addressed if this government wants to 

end the vicious cycle of poverty that has resulted in women 

being over-represented in poorly paying, part-time jobs. There 

are no concrete job plans or programs to enable the most 

vulnerable in our society the right to a good education to gain 

meaningful employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where do rural women fit into this government’s 

vision for the future? What is the plan to ensure that those who 

live in rural communities are afforded opportunities for 

education, training, or employment? 

 

Anyone who has cared to research available data will know that 

women are three times more likely than men to succeed in small 

business. Where is this government’s commitment to provide 

entrepreneurial opportunities for rural people, especially 

women? 

 

So where should we be investing our very limited resources? 

Where is our hope for the future? Mr. Speaker, the answer is so 

obvious. It’s so obvious that this government and all its 

high-powered help can’t see it. 

 

The answer is our young people. They are our only hope. It is 

today’s youth who will still be paying taxes long after 

grandma’s purse has been systematically vacuumed clean. It’s 

today’s youth who will still be trying to move our economy 

forward long after the present Minister of Economic 

Development has retired to an island off Cuba. 

 

The answer is simple and obvious. And what are we doing 

about it? Are we putting forward any real measures which will 

encourage our young people to stay home and return home? No, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not. 

 

And let me illustrate my point. Imagine and consider an average 

graduate from the University of Saskatchewan or Regina or a 

technical institute. You’re probably seeing one of your own 

children. He or she has worked very hard and has excelled and 

now is saddled with a student loan roughly three times the size 

of my first house mortgage. 

 

Now we say to that kid, go out and get a job, and by the way, 

start paying back the student loan. Over 80 per cent of the 

so-called new jobs are in the minimum wage group. So we have 

a student flipping hamburgers for a living with a commerce 

degree, and he’s facing more of a challenge than our Finance 

minister ever did. She just downloaded her problems onto the 

youth. 

 

(1430) 

With the income tax rate nearly the highest in Canada, the 

take-home pay is $855. That’s at an average monthly pay of . . . 

We have 172 hours at $5.65 an hour; take away income tax, 

CPP (Canada Pension Plan), UI (Unemployment Insurance), the 

rest, you have 855 bucks. 

 

Rent payment, sharing quarters with a friend of course, is $250. 

Student loan payments will be about $320. Car payments on an 

old jalopy is $150. We have insurance costs, licence costs — 

which have increased — increased energy cost, increased power 

cost, increased telephone cost, gasoline costs at 62 cents a litre, 

and then we have to eat. Heaven help you if you have a high . . . 

a need for food. There is no money left to actually enjoy life. I 

believe if young adults are very thrifty, they’ll only go 

backwards about $180 a month. 

 

Could we at least not acknowledge that society has a 

responsibility and an obligation to ensure a future for our young 

people and to show a willingness to invest in that future? It 

could be a gamble for a small percentage of students, but this 

government has shown a willingness to gamble on risky 

business ventures outside our country and on gambling inside of 

our province. So in comparison, gambling on our children 

should seem like a relatively safe investment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  The government has given our young people 

some breathing space in the last budget. On the other hand, this 

government aims to give the students who have fallen behind in 

their payments to collection agencies. I always connected 

groups like that to — like the Mafia — to collection agencies. 

Why in the world would a government sick knee-breakers on 

our children? I have to question government priorities when 

they’ll give a grant to a multinational firm on one hand, and on 

the other hand, send professional collectors to intimidate young 

citizens. 

 

The icing on the cake is the fact that the government will give 

30 per cent of the money the agency collects back to them. Why 

in the world wouldn’t the student be given an opportunity to get 

a 30 per cent discount if they make the payment? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s totally contradictory stand on 

youth entrepreneurship is as amazing as it is amusing. How 

could we have ministers of Economic Development and the 

Minister of Education attempt to establish programing to 

encourage our young people to go into business while, on the 

other hand, we have the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 

Labour make Saskatchewan the least profitable place in Canada 

to have a business? Saskatchewan has higher capital tax, higher 

corporate income tax, higher sales tax, higher fuel tax, than our 

neighbours to the east, to the west, or to the south. 

 

Our convoluted Workmen’s Compensation Act is as inefficient 

as it is overpriced. Our regulations and laws governing 

employees are a deterrent for hiring people. I am confident that 

as we approach the next millennium and production changes 

warrant employees in traditional production lines to not be 

needed, many of our young people will be intrigued with the 

idea of owning their own business. I am just as confident that  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 120 

our intelligent youth will look at the barriers to business in this 

province and continue to go to Alberta or B.C. (British 

Columbia) to start a business. 

 

The new occupational health standards that were introduced last 

year added over 100 new regulations to Saskatchewan’s already 

atrocious list. The Partnership for Growth document introduced 

last year stated that the government would reduce the number of 

regulations by 25 per cent in the next 10 years. Well it’s going 

to be difficult to determine if that goal has been reached 

because we have no idea where we’re starting from, and also 

because the government gets to be their own auditor of the 

report. It’s something like asking a fox to guard a hen house. 

 

But if this open and accountable government would give us the 

true numbers I believe they would fail the test. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole idea of economic growth in the 

province is being left in the hands of a government who, from 

my research, tells me does not have one single member who’s 

ever been in business. 

 

I could be wrong. Maybe somebody did sell Avon or had a 

lemonade stand at one time, but I sincerely doubt if even one of 

those members has known what it’s like to try and make 

payroll. I’m willing to bet that none of them have ever 

remortgaged their home or added a second or third mortgage to 

their home to expand a business. 

 

There is no one across the floor who has the faintest clue what it 

means when a government decides to change labour laws, or to 

up utility rates, or to up workmen’s compensation rates, or to 

add regulations or to require another permit for something and 

still try and carry on a business. 

 

Do any of you know what it’s like to try and do a cash-flow 

projection for a bank, meaning you have to sign your life away 

and your children’s, and then have the whole picture change 

because some out-of-touch government changes the rules. 

 

In Saskatchewan business people do not have control over their 

lives or over their companies. The government does. 

 

Do you want to know why this government has to bribe 

companies like CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) 

and Sears to get a call centre in this province? Because they 

won’t come without a decent bribe. 

 

The systematic dismantling of our infrastructure in both urban 

Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan under the guise of 

reform has seriously put at risk those areas which the public has 

every right to expect to be the first priority of government — 

that being health, education, and highways. They have been 

dangerously weakened to a point of no return. The time for 

action is now, Mr. Speaker, not next year or the year after 

because it fits better with election planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was totally amazed and appalled to hear this 

government’s glowing sentiments about their dysfunctional 

health care system. One only has to pick up a newspaper or 

listen to a radio or watch TV to hear the horror stories about  

people who are suffering from the effects of health reform. 

 

In fact I believe it’s Saskatchewan newest disease — health 

reform. In lots of cases it’s terminal; it’s nearly always 

debilitating; and it’s very costly in terms of human suffering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  We are still seeing hospital beds closing, even 

though the waiting-lists are growing. Treatment centres are 

overbooked, and hands-on health care is deteriorating because 

our front-line workers are overworked. But most importantly 

we now know how much Kleenex is being used in the system. 

Many of us are lying awake at night worrying about things like 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the continuation of reform has seen our unionized 

workers unsettled within their own jurisdiction because of 

things like the Dorsey report. And who says democracy is alive 

in Saskatchewan? This report is in effect forcing health care 

workers to unionize. Whatever happened to freedom of choice? 

 

Our specialists and doctors are leaving the province in hopes of 

finding better working conditions. Our nurses are leaving the 

province in hopes of finding a job, and our patients are leaving 

the province in hopes of finding treatment. Can you tell me 

what’s wrong with this picture? 

 

The whole area of health reform underlines the fact that the 

throne speech is put forward by an arrogant government totally 

out of touch with the people of this province. The province who 

bragged about being the father of medicare is now nearly the 

killer of the same system. It’s hardly fitting. 

 

Agriculture was mentioned briefly in the throne speech, Mr. 

Speaker, but the people of this province didn’t hear any real 

encouragement for our single most significant area of economic 

activity, that being agriculture. The government offered no real 

solutions to the very real problems in the area of transportation, 

roads; no real solution or even acknowledgement of the 

problem that was created by our property tax assessment, a 

system that was so misaligned it requires tinkering to fix before 

it even becomes a law. 

 

This government has to admit that the very flawed system they 

are instilling in our lives will not only pit towns and villages 

against each other, it will pit neighbours against neighbours and 

cities against towns. 

 

There was no mention, Mr. Speaker, of the continuous, 

ever-tightening cost squeeze our farmers are facing this year. 

Many of the farmers in my constituency still have crops in the 

field, many of them are watching wildlife destroy their 

livelihood, and many have spent thousands of dollars to try and 

dry grain that has dropped in value by 25 per cent in the last 

year. 

 

The rural gas program that would have meant substantial 

savings to farmers was another one of the government programs 

where choices were made as to who would benefit and who 

would not. I wonder if any of the analysts the government  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  121 

employs to manoeuvre numbers to their best advantage has ever 

figured out what it means to have your net income reduced by 

25 per cent. That doesn’t mean the farmers have 25 per cent less 

spending money for themselves; it probably means they have no 

spending money for themselves. Costs have remained the same. 

They have not been reduced by 25 per cent — just the income. 

The money they had in their pocket is gone. 

 

Last year the government appeared to have a balanced budget 

without transferring the total amount originally budgeted for in 

March from the liquor and gaming corporation. And do you 

know how it was done? Because personal and corporate income 

tax exceeded budget expectations by nearly $200 million. So 

the money that was left then was left in the government slush 

fund. 

 

But now, my colleagues, there has to be some fear that with 

farm income expectations down considerably, the cash will 

have to come from some place else. Farmers’ GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) money was used to balance the 

budget in ’95, and last year high grain prices helped balance the 

budget. And, Mr. Speaker, farmers have nothing left to give. 

 

The other obvious exclusion in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, 

was any attempt to entice value added processing beyond this 

government’s very narrowly focused view of agriculture. We all 

know there’ll be incentives for hog barns and we all know that 

government believes potatoes are a priority. Beyond that, 

there’s nothing. 

 

Doesn’t it seem entirely unreasonable for government to decide 

which areas of industry should advance? Why is the 

government choosing which industry should be a winner? What 

about beef production or chickens or bees or greenhouses or 

mushrooms? Every time a government singles out an industry, 

it means they’re leaving out another industry. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to clarify that our caucus is 

definitely in favour of supporting the hog industry. The 

opportunities in the meat processing industry, which are a 

by-product of the end of the Crow benefits, are very quickly 

being filled by our neighbours to the east and to the west. 

Manitoba has doubled its hog production and Alberta will triple 

theirs in the next year to fill the void in the Pacific Rim 

countries. 

 

Saskatchewan industry is being stymied by the 9 per cent sales 

tax, and that of course is not an issue in our neighbouring 

provinces. I predict that your government will finally see the 

light, and after many years of lobbying by the stakeholders, 

they will eliminate this tax in the upcoming budget. We 

definitely hope so, but we’re asking that you don’t limit it to the 

hog industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of colleagues have brought forward the 

problems involving our youth and young offenders to the floor 

of this Assembly and this debate is still raging. I will leave 

further discussions on that to my very capable colleagues, but 

there is one point I would like to make. With all the talk 

centring around offenders, we seem to have forgotten the 

problems of the victims — people who have lost their  

possessions that they have worked for many years to attain. 

People are now scared to leave their homes; the stress that 

people are living through because there’s just one more problem 

beyond their control. 

 

And you know what this does for government representatives 

like ourselves? It adds fuel to the fire of cynicism. People feel 

that government does not care and that government does not 

listen. I know it’s obvious they aren’t listening but apathy 

towards government hurts everyone. 

 

As a socialist government, you should be all too aware of the 

saying, the minority shall have their say but the majority will 

have their way. All too often in this government, we see the 

majority paying for the sins of the minority. It’s time this 

government got their priorities straight. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak to the problems in 

the area that saddens me the very most. I live in and represent 

an entirely rural area, although in the big picture all of 

Saskatchewan is rural. But, Mr. Speaker, the largest centre in 

my constituency has a population of less than 1,500 people. The 

15,000 people I represent all live where they do because they 

have chosen to do so. We live there because we are convinced 

that our way of life is the envy of virtually the entire planet. 

 

Furthermore, fully 60 per cent of the population of our province 

and most of the citizens in the two major centres very highly 

value the rural Saskatchewan way of life. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

dare say that nary a single citizen in this province, whether 

newly arrived from a foreign land or a fourth-generation worker 

of the land, does not know what I mean when I say the 

Saskatchewan way of life. The only people who seem to have 

lost a sense of the value of this way of life are the people who 

are leading us. Could this be? 

 

What is worse, Mr. Speaker, is that this loss is going to be for 

ever. I believe that if the Saskatchewan way does not appear as 

an asset on the province’s balance sheet very quickly, if it does 

not appear as a state of priority very soon in this government’s 

vision for the future, then the Saskatchewan way of life will be 

lost for ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have tried in vain to find something in this 

throne speech that could make me believe this government 

believes in our province, in our people, and in the 

Saskatchewan way. It’s not there, Mr. Speaker. This 

government does not have a philosophical belief in the future I 

believe we can have in Saskatchewan. For that reason I cannot 

support the motion to approve the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased and 

I’m proud to enter into the debate on the Speech from the 

Throne in this the second session of the twenty-third legislature. 

On behalf of the constituents of Regina Wascana Plains, I rise 

to support the important agenda we have placed before this  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 122 

Assembly — investing in people, preparing Saskatchewan for 

the 21st century. 

 

It has taken us a number of years to get to the point where we 

can open our session on a hopeful note, one of the most hopeful 

times in the province in many years, and I for one don’t take 

this turning point lightly. Five years ago our first session had us 

come to the House in November to approve a financial 

statement, for there was no budget approved that year. The 

financial statement, sadly, had everything to do with debt and 

deficit and nothing to indicate we would be able to set our own 

agenda for a long while. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the time has come. And for the first time in 

more than a decade more people are moving to Saskatchewan 

than are moving away — a definite signal of hope. Our young 

adults, after years of living here, are hopeful they can stay here 

and find jobs. Our seniors are hopeful. They can see their values 

are going to continue into a new century. They are the ones who 

demonstrated to us the values of cooperation, of community, 

compassion, mutual respect, and a shared responsibility. Those 

principles also see the importance of a society that’s grounded 

in a democratic forum for organizing ourselves and for decision 

making. 

 

I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not mention your role 

in this valuable capacity. I compliment you on your agenda of 

going out into our communities and our schools, and informing 

people throughout the province of our British parliamentary 

system of democracy. This expanded knowledge base also gives 

our citizens a new respect for the power of the people when we 

act collectively for the good of all. It protects us from the 

single-issue lobbyists, the corporate elite, and the greedy, 

me-first individuals, the individuals we see when we listen to 

the right-wing agenda that’s presented to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Commonwealth Day also brought home to me the 

diverse nature of our community, The gallery was packed with 

people united to keep strong a system of governing that other 

countries continually struggle to attain, some of them with their 

very lives. South Africa is an example of the vast strides that 

can be made in developing institutions to govern in a 

parliamentary democracy and also as part of a federal state. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate you on your celebration of this day. 

I’m also continually impressed with your dedication to serve. 

I’m humbled when I follow the speeches of my colleagues on 

this side of the House. My congratulations to the member from 

Swift Current, the mover of the throne speech. And although 

I’m not particularly familiar with his pitching arm, I do know 

that his dancing legs are going to give him the stamina it takes 

to keep up with the best of us. 

 

The seconder, our member from Saskatoon Southeast, shares a 

similar training ground as mine, a member of city council, and 

deeply concerned with the quality of life and social justice 

issues that are before her community. Both members did an 

excellent job to bring an overview of the priorities that are 

coming forward. All the speeches gave us an understanding of 

the individual constituencies and how each member views his 

or her responsibility to our great province. 

As you know, my constituency is one of the new four 

urban-rural constituencies. It begins near Balgonie to the east 

and it encompasses the communities of Pilot Butte, White City, 

and Emerald Park, and it ends just west of Rowatt. The urban 

subdivisions include middle to upper income earners in 

Wascana View, Windsor Park, Wood Meadows, Varsity, and 

University Park. 

 

In the course of a year I have the opportunity to meet with a 

broad range of my electorate — from the youth at school, at 

Optimists’ public speaking contests, at carnivals, at sports 

events, at rodeos. I had the opportunity to talk with and discuss 

the issues with employers and employees and with the small 

businesses that are located within my constituency. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to meet with the 

seniors — those who are remaining active in their community 

events, who extend warm hospitality to me at their senior 

centres, or who invite me in to visit in their senior housing 

complexes. 

 

And everywhere I go, I’m mindful that there is a cautious 

optimism and a hope for the future. There is agreement that a 

top priority for us must be jobs and economic growth. 

 

My government’s economic blueprint is set out in the 

Partnership for Growth strategy document. It brings together 

working people, business, the cooperative sector, on a clear 

goal — a goal of full employment. It builds on a growing, 

diversified range of opportunities. They include expansion of 

trade, expansion of our rural economy, renewal of our 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations, promotion of tourism, 

fostering of northern economic development, and employment 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a job is the best form of social development I 

know. Someone should be telling this to our Prime Minister and 

the Liberal Party opposite. Goodness knows we’ve tried. 

 

I’d like to know if the members opposite feel that double digit 

unemployment figures in this country are acceptable to them. 

They obviously are, Mr. Speaker. I’ve listened very carefully to 

the Liberal speaker before me and she did not place forward one 

new idea to expand the province’s economy. She’s leaving it to 

the youth of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well our seniors showed us the way. We’re working on it today 

and it will stand our youth into the future of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, in good stead, to be part of the employment of this 

province. 

 

Is there a plan on the other side of the House that’s the same as 

the federal Liberal government, who says that child poverty 

initiatives should wait until 1998; a Liberal government, whose 

first line of cuts and fiscal responsibility comes on the backs of 

health, education, and social safety nets in our country? Does it 

stand instead in shoulder to shoulder with the federal 

government — the federal Liberal government — whose job 

numbers, as the media have said . . . federal job numbers remain 

bleak. Bleak, Mr. Speaker — 10.5 per cent in February of ’97, 

which is up from 10.4 in February of ’96. Are the  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  123 

Saskatchewan Liberals doing anything about jobs? I haven’t 

seen it. 

 

Their independent member offered at least a job suggestion a 

day, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen nothing a day from the Liberal 

members opposite. 

 

I was hoping that this session we were going to move beyond 

gloom and doom economics from the Liberal members 

opposite, and here we go again. What a way to advance 

economic development, by telling everyone what’s wrong with 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we hear from them, well let’s cut taxes, let’s withdraw 

from labour legislation. A blatant attack on occupational health 

and safety, Mr. Speaker. The number of people we consulted 

with before we put in that legislation that translates into the 

safety of the workers in this province . . . certainly is not viewed 

as a detractor to economic development when we have a worker 

in the workplace who feels safe and committed to the job that 

he or she holds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  So let’s reduce occupational health and 

safety regulations. That’s a way to increase the jobs. And let’s 

reduce the number of regulations that are in place. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of them make some sense and some of 

them don’t, and we’re committed to looking at those and taking 

them off the way that we would do business in Saskatchewan. 

But there are some that make good sense, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

been worked on and approved by workers and by the employees 

alike, Mr. Speaker. And some of those include the safety of our 

workers. Some of them include workers’ compensation systems 

that would see the safety of the employer in that they wouldn’t 

have the suit before them if something went wrong, but also 

includes the ease of the employee, knowing if something does 

go wrong there’s a system in place to address that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All of these things, Mr. Speaker, from a party that wants to 

harmonize the GST (goods and services tax). Let me tell you 

that employers in Wascana Plains say that doesn’t sound like a 

tax cut to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, harmonizing the GST, to many of the employers 

in Wascana Plains, sounds like a tax hike. Expanding the GST 

to children’s clothing, to books, to restaurant meals, to building 

supplies and materials — this does not sound like a tax cut to 

me. Ask anyone if this sounds like a tax cut to them. 

 

Well maybe what they want to do is further reduce funding to 

health and education. We’ve heard their leader say he can 

extract from health millions of dollars. Well that’ll put 

employment opportunities into the health sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This does not speak of job creation to me. In stark contrast, Mr. 

Speaker, here’s the news I want to share with my constituents 

and with the people in Saskatchewan: 1996 was a very good 

year — it came from my newsletter, Mr. Speaker, and I wanted  

to just highlight some of the points of the good news and the 

optimism I want to share with the people of the province. 

 

Saskatchewan was one of the few provinces in 1996 that 

enjoyed economic growth throughout the entire year. The oil, 

uranium, ag-biotech, and tourism industries all experienced 

substantial growth, as did the retail, manufacturing, and housing 

sectors of our economy. As I’d stated just the other day in the 

House, the reports this year are equally encouraging. 

 

On July 1 Saskatchewan‘s population stood at 1,022,500 — it’s 

highest level since July 1989. The province’s population 

increased for 11 consecutive quarters, growing steadily since 

January 1993. How does that jibe with the speaker opposite 

trying to tell us that people are leaving the province and young 

people feel they’re going to have to go somewhere else for a 

job? Mr. Speaker, tell them to get their researcher to do some 

more work. 

 

Saskatchewan had the lowest monthly unemployment rate in 

the country throughout most of 1996. The spring budget last 

year provided 110 million in new provincial funding to replace 

the ‘96-97 federal cuts to our health, post-secondary education, 

and social service programs. 

 

In August the provincial government injected an additional $40 

million into health, and that was above the $47 million that we 

put into health to back-fill the federal cuts to our health 

programs. Our growing provincial economy, coupled with 

sound financial management, gave us the freedom to do this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our mid-year financial report for ’96-97 showed that the 

province will balance the budget for the third consecutive year 

and the province’s debt reduction plans are ahead of schedule. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  On May 28, 1996 — a very proud day for 

this province, Mr. Speaker — Saskatchewan received it’s first 

major credit upgrading in 20 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Standard and Poor’s, one of the oldest, 

largest, and most influential credit rating agencies in the world, 

raised our credit rating from BBB plus to A minus. 

 

That’s the kind of news I’m sharing with my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s the kind of hope that we should be giving 

to the people in our province, not spreading gloom and doom 

and chasing away those people who would be the people that 

would move into my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well if that wasn’t enough, I was looking through some 

material to try and organize my remarks for today and, lo and 

behold, I found the economic news indicators for Saskatchewan 

and I thought it wouldn’t be wrong to reinforce this for the 

members opposite. 

 

Employment in December of 1996 increased by 3,000  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 124 

compared to December of ’95. Saskatchewan was one of five 

provinces that recorded an increase in employment in December 

of 1996. 

 

The unemployment rate: Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate in 

December ’96 was 5.8 per cent. That’s tied for the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada for that month. 

 

As a result of the December sale of Crown petroleum and 

natural gas rights, 1996 calendar year revenues are the fourth 

highest since the sales began in 1952. 

 

(1500) 

 

Tourism: cumulative tourism indicators show us that there’s an 

increase of 11.5 per cent compared to the cumulative numbers 

of inquiries of 1995. 

 

Oil and gas industry has a near record year in ’96. They posted 

near record numbers for the wells drilled and the licences 

issued. Oil and gas seismic activity is up. Plans submitted by oil 

and gas companies to do seismic work established a new record 

— the number established a new record in ’96. 

 

Jobs and businesses created: activity under the small business 

loans association program during the ’96 calendar year include 

creation of 677 new jobs, 313 new businesses, and assistance to 

275 existing businesses. Sounds like the economy is hopeful in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve come a long way. We acknowledge there’s much more 

that has to be done and that we are yet to do. We’re putting the 

same determination forward that we used for fiscal integrity in 

this province behind our job creation and economic 

development strategy. 

 

Obviously education must fit closely in with this strategy. 

 

In the throne speech you saw that we were going to invest in 

Saskatchewan and invest in education. Education, training, 

apprenticeship, co-op education — they all must play a 

prominent role in preparing our province for the 21st century. 

 

My government is committed to providing the best possible 

education and training at every level. This is going to prepare 

our future generations for our new information-age economy, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s not going to do the same kind of thing that a 

major withdrawal of training and funding dollars to our 

post-secondary institutions have done for us that the federal 

government chose to do in their round of budget cuts, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To equip our workers to meet the needs for a skilled workforce, 

we’ll be furthering our JobStart and Future Skills programs. 

 

So other than re-announcing that they would do what we’re 

already doing, what are the Liberals going to do about 

education, training, apprenticeship, preparing our youth? Stand 

back and say, oh woe is us, there’s nothing we can do, and we’ll 

let the next generation try? We haven’t heard what the Liberals 

would do. We haven’t heard what the Tories would do. 

Share your plans. If you don’t agree that investing in 

Saskatchewan and investing in people in the area of jobs and 

training and education for our future generations is a priority, 

tell us what your priority is. Stop standing up and making 

excuses for the federal government. Give us your vision and 

your plan for this fine province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Where do you stand on the race to continue 

Mulroney’s agenda federally? Where do you stand on 

implementing deregulation in our utilities? Where do you stand 

when the utilities are going to be deregulated and the impact it 

has on the province affects your consumers back home? Have 

you told them that’s what’s happening? Have you told them 

that’s the Mulroney agenda full tilt? 

 

You know the burden this places on Saskatchewan consumers 

and yet you’ve been silent on this issue. In fact Saskatchewan 

Liberals and the federal Liberals seem to have a little game 

going, Mr. Speaker. It goes something like this. 

 

First, you quietly withdraw either financial or administrative 

support from long-standing, successful, cooperative national 

programs. Next, you loudly proclaim your support for and 

determination to enforce the standards of those said programs. 

Then, to publicly demonstrate your support, with fanfare you 

contribute a fraction of what was originally lost as evidence of 

your commitment. 

 

We’ve seen it with health care; we’ve seen it with education; 

we’ve seen it with social services; we’ve seen it with education 

and training; and now we’re seeing it with transportation with 

an announcement from Saskatchewan’s contribution to federal 

dismemberment, our member, Ralph Goodale. The federal 

Tories started it and the federal Liberal government has 

completed the abolishment of the historic Crow rate. With the 

abolishment of the Crow benefit, Saskatchewan loses $320 

million this year and every year henceforth. 

 

The loss of this historic transportation subsidy is leading to 

more rail line abandonment, which means fewer elevators and 

more truck traffic, which means less business to small towns 

and more expense for damaged roads. And they’re asking, 

where’s our commitment to highways. We haven’t heard them 

on what they’re proposing that their federal counterparts should 

do in the abandonment of the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

been silent on that issue. 

 

Next the federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale, came to 

the SARM convention in Regina and announced federal support 

for Saskatchewan roads last year — much publicity and much 

gratitude for the pittance. He announced the amount — 320 

million was abandoned from the Crow benefit — $20 million 

last year or one-sixteenth of the amount that we had already lost 

was going to be put back into Saskatchewan roads. 

 

And we’ve heard what their infrastructure program is for this 

year federally. Now that’s a real commitment to the highways 

of Saskatchewan. Nothing. Nowhere near $320 million that was 

lost from the federal government. 



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  125 

Not only is that $20 million woefully inadequate to repair 

60,000 kilometres of roads deteriorating from overuse from the 

truck traffic from the withdrawal of the Crow benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s strings attached. And you obviously have to be 

having a Liberal advantage to pull them. For it’s the RMs who 

at the very last minute are going to have to coordinate their 

construction plans in a short time to be able to come into 

acquiring those monies, Mr. Speaker. Some strategy, I must 

say. 

 

We’re developing a comprehensive, long-term plan to ensure 

our highways are sustainable well into the future in spite of 

what Ottawa is cutting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I have to tell you that I’m really proud 

of our Minister of Highways, who’s been going throughout the 

province and working with a wide range of people, from the 

municipalities to the grain transporters, to the Wheat Pool, to 

the rail lines and so on, to try and develop a comprehensive 

strategy for the province. Not an easy task, Mr. Speaker, but 

something must be done in the face of a complete lack of a 

funding commitment from the federal government or any plans 

. . . a comprehensive transportation plan for this country. We 

will have a comprehensive transportation plan for this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Why would our members opposite vote 

against a throne speech that includes that for the province of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in health care; 

we’re committed to medicare. I want to hear the commitment 

from the members opposite to medicare, not only in this 

province but in this country. 

 

It’s our government that replaced every dollar that we lost from 

the federal government — $47 million last year. It’s our 

government that added an additional $40 million to help with 

the reforms to our health care system. We’re introducing 

wellness and prevention to complement and to improve the best 

curative system in health care in this country. 

 

When additional dollars become available we’ve put additional 

dollars into our budget. And that leads to the number one item 

on our budget for this last year and for this year coming up of 

about $1.6 billion for the health and the wellness and the care of 

the residents of our province. Mr. Speaker. 

 

So much has been said about what’s not being done in health 

care that I’m a little confused. I hear the members opposite say 

we’re not doing enough. And the member particularly who 

came before me said that the health care system needs 

improvement and it needs funding and it needs this, and I 

haven’t heard what their plan is except I did hear from the 

Leader of the Liberal Party that his plan is to do away with 

democratically elected boards who make decisions at the local 

level. 

 

Now as they disregarded the democratic life of this House . . . 

because they, obviously in the last speech, stood up and said the 

best thing we can do is free this province from government  

and from democratically elected positions. Here it is again: free 

this province from democratically elected health boards who 

make decisions at the local level, and what? Let’s replace 30 

boards with 400 Liberal-appointed boards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m trying to figure out very quickly in my head how this adds 

up — that 30 boards require more administration than 400; that 

400 boards require less time to make decisions than 30; would 

be more efficient than 30 district boards who are locally elected 

and appointed. 

 

Well to let those members know where we’ve come from and 

where we are today, let me tell you that in our province health 

services in communities, such as home care, respite care, home 

intravenous programs and physiotherapy have been expanded. 

Funding for these services have grown 47 per cent. 

 

Residents have better access to services in their homes. Adult 

day programs are in place for seniors. Physio and occupational 

therapy, counselling for mental health, alcohol and drug abuse, 

and health education are more widely available to residents 

right in their own communities. 

 

Health services such as breast cancer screening and mobile 

wellness units travel across Saskatchewan, and particularly into 

rural Saskatchewan, to ensure better access for all residents. 

There is greater use of day surgeries, so there’s less time spent 

in hospitals. 

 

Twelve hundred first responders are currently in place in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and I have to give them credit for the 

work that they do. They provide support to accident injury 

victims while an ambulance is en route. And they take great 

pride in the work that they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. Before there 

was no recognition for the work that these first responders were 

doing. 

 

The ambulance system has been maintained so that 95 per cent 

of the population lives within 30 kilometres of an ambulance 

site. And we’ve heard from our member from Swift Current 

about a neonatal ambulance that’s been put in place. 

 

Saskatchewan still has an ample number of hospitals, Mr. 

Speaker — more per capita than any other province. 

Seventy-eight hospitals for one million people where the 

Canadian average is 30.7 per million. 

 

Three per cent of Saskatchewan’s population lives in the 

northern administration district line, north of the line. The North 

is covered by four hospitals, including the La Ronge Health 

Centre, which offers acute care, a health centre, and a long-term 

care facility. There are also 10 provincial health centres: six 

primary care centres and four public health centres. 

 

We’re maintaining and expanding hi-tech health services such 

as the new kidney dialysis unit, major renovations to the Allan 

Blair care centre, and expanded coverage for cancer drugs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite is hollering about what 

are the physical plants of those things, we all know it’s what 

services are provided there and the people who provide those 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 126 

services who count in those areas. 

 

They’re hollering about the old bricks and mortar kind of health 

care, Mr. Speaker. We’re hollering about providing more 

programs and services to the communities of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  I’d rather, Mr. Speaker, they hollered at me 

their commitment to medicare. I’d rather they hollered their 

commitment rather than starting to knock down the doors like 

the 1962 Liberals and starting to talk about bricks and mortar 

when we’re talking about people and programs. 

 

What we’ve got is one group mired in privatization. Let’s put so 

much cost into that system and know that it’s going to collapse 

under the cost and the burden of that cost, that we couldn’t 

provide that for this province, Mr. Speaker. And what would it 

lead to? Privatization. Well the Conservatives are upfront about 

that, Mr. Speaker. They don’t make any secret about their 

privatization of health care. You only have to look to Alberta to 

find out what their agenda is in health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the other group, as my colleague from Swift Current 

reminded me in his speech, is a little more underhanded and 

more insidious I’d say, but it’s still the same desire to privatize 

the health care system. They’re on record as supporting a 

two-tired health system in the form of profit clinics, and with 

taxpayers picking up the tab. 

 

(1515) 

 

Their leader? Has anyone seen that Liberal leader lately? And 

he said he’s going to find hundreds of millions of dollars in 

savings in the health budget. We didn’t hear one proposal from 

the Liberal members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d say, and I’ve just been through the health care 

system recently with a daughter, a 17-year old who has 

undergone surgery, and I would say she was treated with the 

utmost professionalism and care. But let’s ask the nurses in the 

system who are already overworked and who are already 

stressed by the amount of monies we’re able to put into the 

system, how they feel about another withdrawal of hundreds of 

millions of dollars from the system when they said the $40 

million additional that we’d added was really only a band-aid 

approach to our systems but much more was needed. 

 

Let’s ask the front-line workers where the hundreds of millions 

of dollars of savings will come from, because our health and 

utilization committee is hard at work and they’re not saying to 

us that they would find that throughout our system. And their 

leader is saying you know, that communities really can’t be 

responsible for health care. It’s much too complicated for the 

communities to address. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll say to them, I have faith in our rural 

communities and the people who live throughout 

Saskatchewan, and I know the best decisions are made for the 

people at the local level in a democratic way. And I have faith 

that that is the process and it will maintain a good system of 

health care in our province. That’s more than the Liberals are 

saying to our rural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in people; we’re investing in 

Saskatchewan. There’s every reason to be hopeful and 

optimistic. We have a broad, progressive agenda. I’m proud to 

be a member of a strong team that believes in drawing people 

together; and in drawing together people, we make things 

happen. 

 

We’ve put forward our vision. Not a vision of individual gain, 

but one of honestly investing in the province to position us as 

leaders nationally and internationally. 

 

My whole constituency is looking forward to the democratic 

debate and the alternatives that would be placed before us by 

the opposition parties. Let’s see it. 

 

They ask us all to move past the political rhetoric we’ve heard 

and the grandstanding to let them know what they can expect 

from their leadership. Let’s signal to them that we’re all ready 

to have this province on the move again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support our framework for action and I urge all 

members of this House to do the same. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to 

respond to the throne speech on behalf of the constituents of 

Athabasca. And the point I wish to make early on in this 

presentation, Mr. Speaker, is people in northern Saskatchewan 

want aggressive change. The people in my constituency are 

vibrant, they’re intelligent, they’re hard-working people that are 

self-driven and very, very proud. As other people throughout 

this diverse and great province, they have hopes and they have 

dreams for their children and their grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the North have waited and have been 

patient for too long. They are tired of the same old approach by 

governments. They are tired of being powerless over their lives 

and they are simply tired of the same, bland old approaches to 

the issues that they have been struggling with over the many, 

many years. 

 

The people of the North and the people of Saskatchewan want 

exciting, they want innovative approaches to dealing with their 

issues. The people of the North, as with the people of 

Saskatchewan, want exciting and innovative approaches to 

governing this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, the people of the North 

want change. We are, as I said, a proud people. We do not ever 

want, nor do we ever . . . will be wards of the government. We 

are tired of the stereotypical view of northern people. What we 

want, Mr. Speaker, is not special treatment. We want fair 

treatment. We want fair treatment and we want economic 

integration. 



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  127 

In order for us as northern people to remember where we’re 

going, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to remember where we 

come from. Yesterday I paid tribute to a great man, Louis 

Morin of Turnor Lake. Mr. Morin dedicated 86 years of his life 

and I expressed to you and to the House here yesterday the 

many attributes and the many committees he served on and the 

many committees he founded and formed. 

 

That type of effort, Mr. Speaker, should encourage all of us, 

myself as a young individual, the people back home, and most 

certainly the Government of Saskatchewan, in responding to the 

issues that he so eloquently and for very long expressed at 

public meetings, at government meetings, and throughout the 

media. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of people all throughout 

northern Saskatchewan. As CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) once said: a million people, a million stories. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan we have 30,000 

people and we have 30,000 stories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that we have no choice as government, 

that we must do things differently in northern Saskatchewan. 

There are serious catching-up efforts that we must undertake 

immediately. There are problems with health care. There are 

problems with roads. There are problems with social 

development, with economic development, and infrastructure 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan wants economic and social 

justice; not rhetoric and not empty promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, we know and I know and every 

single member of this Assembly knows that we have not treated 

northern Saskatchewan fairly. I have said on often occasions 

there is more vision for northern Saskatchewan in the little 

finger of many of the leaders, including the mayors and the 

chiefs, than the entire members of this Assembly. They have 

more vision in their little finger than we all do in a collective 

effort. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, if we realize that and recognize that, 

why aren’t we empowering them to make changes in their 

lives? Mr. Speaker, we are not doing this. 

 

The thrust of my response to the throne speech is the issues of 

northern community initiatives. I will explain first the benefits 

of the industry, and in particular the mining industry. I will then 

provide the problems encountered in those northern 

communities. I will present you with disturbing facts and 

real-life story of hardship. I’ll then explain the challenges facing 

the mining industry. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will present 

one of the many of the solutions that many people share. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not about asking for more. This is about 

giving people back their dignity and their pride, and it’s about 

support for the people of the North. And they have been patient 

for so long, and I think their wait is over. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, you and I, throughout time, 

we’ll realize that there never was a real grand strategy for 

northern Saskatchewan. I know it and the members opposite 

know it. And seriously, in the last year we’ve also heard, quote: 

“There is no real grand strategy for economic development in 

rural Saskatchewan.” 

 

Imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, where northern 

Saskatchewan fits. If rural Saskatchewan is put on the back 

burner, then sure as heck northern Saskatchewan is not even on 

the stove. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, in typical Saskatchewan pride, 

the Saskatchewan pride we all brag about, well, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s alive and well and thriving in northern Saskatchewan. But 

some of the non-activity by the various governments over time 

— and that includes the PC (Progressive Conservative) and the 

NDP governments — have stifled that Saskatchewan pride. 

They want a new answer, Mr. Speaker, and they want to drive 

that economic engine on their own. 

 

And I think the thrust of my presentation to the throne speech is 

to really indicate to you that in spite of all the rhetoric we’ve 

heard in the past several weeks, in the past several years, in the 

past several decades, you and I and the rest of the Assembly 

know there is no plan. That’s the primary message that I want to 

give at this point in time of my presentation: there is no grand 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to beg your indulgence to give a brief 

history of northern Saskatchewan and in particular some of the 

facts that are real. Most Northerners reside in 37 northern 

municipalities ranging in size from 40 to 2,800 people. In 

addition, 12 Indian bands live in the North, with several 

reserves located in close proximity to northern municipalities. 

 

Although northern Saskatchewan covers approximately 50 per 

cent of the province’s land mass, only 3 per cent — 3 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker — of the province’s population, or approximately 

35,000 people, reside in the area known as the northern 

administration district. 

 

It is estimated that 80 per cent of the northern population is of 

aboriginal ancestry, split evenly between Indians living on 

reserve and of course the Metis, status, and non-status Indians 

living in northern municipalities. 

 

Municipal government is different from provincial and federal 

levels of government, Indian reserves, or territories, in that they 

are not recognized in the constitution. Municipal governments 

are a product of provincial laws that gives them definition and 

sets out their authorities and responsibility. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the major laws from which municipal 

governments receive their authority under The Urban 

Municipality Act, The Rural Municipality Act, and of course 

for northern Saskatchewan, The Northern Municipalities Act. 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 128 

The importance of local government in northern Saskatchewan 

is best understood when one recognizes the diversity of its 

people and the expanse of its geography. Each community and 

area has a character of its own, unique to the individuals who 

live there, and the resources available to them. Local 

governments enable people to exercise democratic control and 

initiative in their own affairs. 

 

The Northern Municipalities Act was passed in 1983, fully 100 

years after the first local governments were established in 

southern Saskatchewan. Northern municipalities include 10 

settlements which are administered by the province, 13 hamlets, 

13 villages, and 2 towns which are autonomous local 

governments with a variety of authorities and responsibilities 

delegated by the province. And I quote some of these facts from 

a presentation made by a government official several years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s all basically meant to give a brief 

historical effective . . . history of northern municipalities. 

 

The next part of my information, Mr. Speaker, I want to share a 

couple of contrasting comparisons of what’s happening in 

northern Saskatchewan. I will of course get into a large 

presentation in terms of the overall picture, but what I want to 

do was bring out a couple of points, Mr. Speaker, in comparison 

to what the government makes in revenues from northern 

Saskatchewan, to what the real-life story is living in northern 

Saskatchewan. I know, Mr. Speaker, because of the 58 

members in this particular Assembly, I live in northern 

Saskatchewan and I see this almost every day I’m home. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the province estimates that it puts in 

$1.67 for every dollar it takes out of northern revenues. 

However this calculation does not make clear that these 

revenues include money raised through the sale of power 

generated to the northern hydro electric utilities, the oil and gas 

royalties, forestry, the corporate, personal income tax, and the 

list goes on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the future, uranium production is estimated to 

increase by 42 million pounds annually when Cigar Lake and 

McArthur River begin production. It is estimated, Mr. Speaker, 

that the province will receive 100 . . . $200 million in revenues 

annually from McArthur River and Cigar Lake alone. With the 

same production levels estimated for other mines, we can see 

that these revenues can greatly increase over the next 5, 10, 15 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the McArthur River panel supports issues like 

hiring of northern people. They support environmental 

monitoring. They support training and they also talk about 

direct benefits such as revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. And the 

whole situation that we’re coming up here is most people say, 

of the four issues that are important, what is your response as 

MLA? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that northern Saskatchewan has 

contributed lots to the provincial economy. Over the many 

years it’ll continue contributing lots to the provincial economy. 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, you look at these disturbing facts. And 

I’ll give some examples. 

Health care: the biggest and the most serious example of a 

health care problem is La Loche’s hospital, St. Martin’s 

Hospital. Here we have a town of 3,500: La Loche, 

Saskatchewan. It’s served by trailers, Mr. Speaker —17 ATCO 

trailers that have been up there for 15 years. 

 

And let me give you an example of some of the problems, Mr. 

Speaker. First of all, ATCO trailers should not ever house sick 

people because of the extreme weather conditions. 

 

(1530) 

 

And another rule they made, Mr. Speaker, to the Assembly’s 

information, is that when they take X-rays in the X-ray room, 

they have to go outside and make sure nobody’s standing 

against the wall where the X-ray room is. Because if there is 

somebody standing against the wall, Mr. Speaker, what you 

have is two actually skeletons showing up on the same X-ray. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, before they take an X-ray, they got 

to go outside and tell people who may be waiting to see the 

doctor: you cannot stand against the wall because we’re taking 

an X-ray. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, when you walk down the hall . . . I 

had the opportunity to visit the same hospital on three or four 

occasions, and the one occasion, Mr. Speaker, I walked in there 

and they had seven tiles on the ceiling collecting water, water 

dripping down. And, Mr. Speaker, nobody should accept that. 

Nobody in Saskatchewan should accept that. 

 

And you look at the other problems they have in terms of 

visitors. You know, they often have bats; you know, they have 

rodents; they even have animals visiting that whole facility. 

And you have the main door falling off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then to top it all off, you have health care workers working 

in that system, you have sick people in there hoping to be cured, 

and you also have people going there to visit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as long as that hospital in La Loche is not 

replaced and as long as it stands, it will be a symbol of the NDP 

government’s commitment to northern Saskatchewan health 

services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands 

of examples. I tell you of the thousands of stories. One such a 

story is in the village of Patuanak. Patuanak has a large number 

of older people, people that have developed this country 

through the many, many years of their contributions. And right 

now, Mr. Speaker, senior citizens haven’t got a home in 

Patuanak in which they can relax and spend their final years in 

peace. They have been struggling with a senior citizens’ home 

in Patuanak for many, many, many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about housing for a minute, Mr. Speaker. 

At this point in time they’re 600 units behind in social housing 

in northern Saskatchewan — 600 units. There are no repair 

programs that have been accessible enough nor has there been  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  129 

any repair programs to help the many people that are living in 

overcrowded houses, Mr. Speaker. There is no question in my 

mind that there’s often 15, 16, 17 people living in one house, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is not happening in Guyana, Mr. 

Speaker; this is happening in northern Saskatchewan. And these 

are serious, disturbing facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well we look at the other problems in northern 

Saskatchewan. There are no specific support programs, Mr. 

Speaker, for the chronically ill, the many people who have heart 

problems, cancer problems, and who have very little time to 

live. Where’s their support system, Mr. Speaker? There are 

very, very few things out there to help these people along their 

way. 

 

You look at the disabled, Mr. Speaker. There are close to 350 

disabled people in northern Saskatchewan. What type of 

services have they got? They’re busy, Mr. Speaker, rolling 

down their wheelchairs on gravel roads. Mr. Speaker, they have 

accessibility problems to buildings. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

have accessibility to services and support. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most important part of our history of 

course, is our elders. In northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

we have seen many elders — proud elders that have worked all 

their lives to build up their grandchildren . . . to build up their 

own children so they may become independent people. And 

they are disturbed at what they see, what’s happening now. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, a double whammy — many of them are 

forced to go on welfare because they cannot afford prescription 

drug costs. Because of the sky-rocketing drug costs to these old 

people, many of them are forced to swallow their pride and go 

seek welfare so they can survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not how you treat an elderly group of 

people. You treat them as treasures, Mr. Speaker. You give 

them support in their old age because they gave us support 

when they were young and we were in need of support. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the problems of the chronically ill, the 

disabled, the elderly — it’s all over the place, Mr. Speaker. And 

we need more aggressiveness and we need more commitment 

from this government to deal with these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to use a few other examples. Before I go on 

to other examples, I want to point out that this government is 

anticipating to get $1.5 billion in revenues from two or three 

mines over the next 10 to 15 years. That’s not million, Mr. 

Speaker, that is billion. And what are the people of the North 

saying? Well hey, we shouldn’t be putting up with a lot of these 

problems because look at the revenues you’re making. Look at 

all the money you’re making off the North. 

 

Now we’re not demanding special treatment; we’re demanding 

fair treatment. Treat us as Saskatchewan residents, because we 

are part of Saskatchewan aren’t we? So that’s the whole thing 

that we’re asking. Aren’t we part of Saskatchewan? And if we 

are, Mr. Speaker, then give them the services that they deserve 

and put your money where your mouth is when you say that 

you’re committed to a certain people. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I go back to the point of $1.5 

billion for one mine alone. I talk about the roads, Mr. Speaker, 

the roads of northern Saskatchewan. They’re in much worse 

shape than southern Saskatchewan, and some of the examples 

we use is Pinehouse, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, Dillon, St. 

George’s Hill, Michel Village, Garson Lake. These are some of 

the roads in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. Black Lake. The 

road to Black Lake is also being planned and there’s only $1.5 

million put in by the province on this whole issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what are the people saying in northern 

Saskatchewan? Are they saying we want paved roads in every 

one of these communities? No, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying we 

want training programs so we can train 10 to 15 people from 

each of these communities; we can train for 3, 4, 5 years so we 

can build up these roads and we can do this work on our self. 

 

And are they asking for new money, Mr. Speaker? No. Many of 

them are asking for training dollars; many of them are asking to 

recycle the welfare dollars. And a good example of that is La 

Loche, again, Mr. Speaker. Their mayor and council as well as 

their staff have been working really, really hard on the Garson 

Lake road. And they’ve asked the Minister of Highways for a 

$250,000 contribution for once every three years. So that’s 

three years, three quarters of a million dollars. 

 

And what does that do, Mr. Speaker? What it does is it lines up 

La Loche to Garson Lake. It connects Garson Lake to the rest of 

the province. But the most important thing, Mr. Speaker, is on 

from Garson Lake is Fort McMurray. And there, Mr. Speaker, 

is a lot of potential for natural gas, for tourism and for forestry. 

 

So they’re thinking, Mr. Speaker. At the community level 

they’re saying, well if we build that road and then we’ll get 

more traffic this way, we’ll get more opportunity and perhaps 

we’ll capitalize on it. And it’s all recycled dollars. 

 

So why don’t we go and ask the minister for some support on 

this? So what happens is they come to us and we say no. There 

is no dollars. And yet, Mr. Speaker, the anticipated income for 

the next 10 to 15 years from one mine alone is $1.5 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go into Sandy Bay as well. Sandy Bay is 

right next to a power generating station, the Island Falls power 

generating station. And upon my visit to Sandy Bay this 

summer to attend a youth conference camp, I had a chance to 

visit a few people. And I asked them why they weren’t playing 

hockey, because there’s a beautiful rink and there’s never any 

hockey teams from Sandy Bay. And they said, well last winter 

we had to shut our rink down. We didn’t have enough money in 

our small village to pay for the rink costs. It was something like 

three or four hundred bucks. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a village 

right next to a power generating station. And they haven’t got 

money to keep their arena going because they could not pay the 

power bill. So, Mr. Speaker, you tell me if that’s fair treatment 

for northern Saskatchewan? And the obvious answer is no, it’s 

not. 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 130 

And let’s look at other examples, Mr. Speaker, power bills in 

northern Saskatchewan. Again, living in northern Saskatchewan 

I, on the average, spend 150 to 200, sometimes as much as $225 

a month on power bills. Over $200 on power bills, Mr. Speaker, 

telephone bills. So you see the huge costs of living in northern 

Saskatchewan yet there’s no extra compensation to consider 

these facts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you point out the situation as clear as day. 

Number one is there is no plan. There is no economic or social 

agenda by this government for northern Saskatchewan. And as I 

mentioned before, some of these stark examples and the 

realities, you can check these facts. These are facts. Really 

judge if you’re committed to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

As the member from Kelvington-Wadena pointed out, a lot of 

fluff but the details will come out in the budget and, Mr. 

Speaker, northern Saskatchewan people are really, really 

watching. 

 

Now to continue on some of my comments, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to share with you a few other disturbing facts. And the stats 

show that violent crimes are steadily increasing in northern 

Saskatchewan. And one of three northern children lives in a 

household below the low income cut-off level, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in northern Saskatchewan this is the fastest growing 

population, the young people. A huge amount of the aboriginal 

people of Saskatchewan live in the North — a huge amount, 

Mr. Speaker. And of that amount, almost 60 per cent are under 

the age of 24. 

 

So you can see the challenges when you talk about social 

development, Mr. Speaker. And you can see the challenge when 

we talk about economic development. Simply, as I pointed out 

before, the government has no choice but to begin to address 

these issues. You need imagination; you need innovation; you 

need excitement, because 10 to 15 years from now, these people 

are going to grow up to become adults. 

 

And what’s up there for them at this point in time? Dependency 

on government. And Mr. Speaker, I go back to my point. They 

do not want dependency. They want their dignity back to earn 

their own living so they can instil pride and hope and optimism 

in themselves, and it’s all for their children. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, 10 to 15 years from now these young people 

are going to grow up and there’s going to be 1,000, 2,000 

people looking for work in some of the larger centres. There are 

going to be 2, 300 people looking for work in some of the 

smaller centres. What kind of work are we going to give them 

then? 

 

So the point is, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve got to get off our duff 

right now and we’ve got to start planning alongside of northern 

leaders, the chiefs and the mayors, and start talking about 

aggressive, an innovative and exciting package for northern 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, unless we start getting direct 

benefits from some of the mining sector, then these problems 

will persist. It is only common sense — we deal with this 

problem now or we pay for the price later. That’s the alternative  

we have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Continuing on some of my presentations in my response to the 

throne speech, I want to refer to the Minister of Northern 

Affairs when he quoted in the paper article, and I quote: 

 

The government is already sharing more with the North 

than it is reaping in resource revenue. The government 

spends 150 million on hospitals, schools, and roads in the 

North and takes out only $90 million in resource revenue. 

 

What the minister failed to consider, Mr. Speaker, is that 

governments have traditionally been responsible for services 

like hospitals, schools, and roads elsewhere in the province. 

North, East, West, South, they all look after the province as 

one, but the government does not receive anywhere near 90 

million bucks back from these other regions, yet it seems he’s 

penalizing the North with this response. 

 

And the other point that we want to talk about is the remarks to 

me are an archaic way of looking at northern Saskatchewan. 

We’re no longer in the ‘60s and the ‘70s in northern 

Saskatchewan. We want you guys to begin to think of the ‘90s, 

the ‘90s and the year 2000. We talk about the 21st century, Mr. 

Speaker, yet our treatment is still stuck in the 1960s where the 

government will do all and be all. We must recognize and we 

must feed the Saskatchewan spirit that is alive in northern 

Saskatchewan people, and we ought to feed that by giving them 

control over their destiny and over their lives. 

 

Continuing on, Mr. Speaker, the northern leaders have for some 

time been requesting meetings. There’s been years and years of 

discussion, as I pointed out, on the whole issues of revenue 

sharing. 

 

And again, March 12, this very day, and I quote from the paper, 

“Northern Saskatchewan leaders want to discuss revenue 

sharing.”. The larger headline says, “Uranium meeting with 

Romanow sought.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these leaders have been for years talking 

about revenue sharing or direct benefits. They’ve been talking 

about this thing. And I go back to another article of Wednesday, 

March 5, and I quote, “Goulet seems in no rush to talk revenue 

sharing.” 

 

So I guess the response here we have is really, what is the 

situation here? Are you going to talk about revenue sharing or 

are we not going to talk about revenue sharing? And further in 

the article, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “But Environment 

Minister Lorne Scott said recently the government will 

re-examine it.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting a lot of mixed signals here, and 

what I’m trying to do with the thrust of my throne speech today 

is to encourage the government to begin to deal with this issue. 

Because if you don’t begin to deal with it, Mr. Speaker, there 

are going to be significant problems. 

 

(1545) 

 



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  131 

And it’s not a threat, Mr. Speaker. I don’t believe you can 

govern by fear. I don’t believe you can govern by problems 

persisting in all areas. I don’t believe you can govern by 

confrontation. You must govern, Mr. Speaker, by compromise. 

And this is what the northern Saskatchewan people want. They 

want to compromise. They want to talk about things which they 

want done, not 10, 20, 30 years from now when the mines are 

all gone. We want to talk about things that are going to affect us 

now — 5, 10, 15 years from now. Because, Mr. Speaker, we 

have no choice. We’re not dealing with the situation on our 

own. We’re dealing for this issues for the children of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Continuing on, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a few things 

also I think is very important. In northern Saskatchewan, as a 

province, people recognize and are proud that they’ve 

contributed to the provincial economy. Everyone in this room 

knows the largest industry in the province is agriculture. 

 

The second largest industry, Mr. Speaker, is mining, the mining 

industry, and a huge majority of the mining activity in the 

province of Saskatchewan except potash occurs in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They have many mines: Cluff 

Lake mine; Key Lake mine; McArthur mine; McClean Lake; 

Cigar Lake; and the list goes on and on and on. 

 

So the northern people know that they’re contributing to the 

provincial economy. They know that. They understand that. 

Now what they’re also saying is we don’t mind if the North is 

developed. We’re encouraged that the North is being developed. 

Their argument is let us become part of that development so we 

no longer have the poor roads, the poor housing, the poor 

hospitals, the non-support for social development, the 

non-support for economic opportunity. All these issues, that’s 

what they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. They’re trying to 

compromise. They’re trying to compromise with the 

Government of Saskatchewan on what we think is the best 

medium for northern people in general. 

 

And these are some of the things we have to look at, Mr. 

Speaker, and what you could in essence create is a win-win 

situation. When you deal with the northern Saskatchewan 

people’s issues and all of a sudden the environment for mining 

activity to continue and to expand, is positive. The mining 

companies, Mr. Speaker, they want to operate in a 

non-confrontational manner. They want to do the best they can 

to ensure that they are able to mine these mines as efficiently, 

and without problems, as possible. 

 

So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is if you deal with these issues 

you are taking away confrontation in northern Saskatchewan. 

You’re giving the people of the North a fair share of what is 

happening and what is occurring as far as development in 

northern Saskatchewan. We know the North is going to 

contribute a tremendous amount of money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to share with you a few other examples, just a few 

other examples, Mr. Speaker. The northern village of 

Pinehouse, a community of about a thousand people, and I was 

speaking to a number of people there. They want some social 

development dollars so they can deal with some of the  

problems at the local level. They said, we are tired of the same 

old approaches. We have no control; we have no say at the local 

level. Everything seems to be administered from La Ronge or 

from Regina. And where does that give us enthusiasm to change 

things in our own lives? 

 

So the point is, Mr. Speaker, if the government cannot deliver 

these services to the local level, then let the local people deliver 

them on their own by using their resources that the government 

currently collects. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, a good example again is Pinehouse. 

I’ll go to Pinehouse as well, Mr. Speaker. Here we have a 

community again of about a thousand people. They have been 

living next to the Key Lake mine for 20 years, 25 years. And 

this group of people living next to a mine, next door to a mine, 

they have not got, Mr. Speaker, even a public arena — no arena 

in that particular community. 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker, infrastructure is a problem. We 

know economic development is a problem. We know social 

development is a problem. We know roads are a problem. And 

we know all these . . . health care problems and the other 

problems in northern Saskatchewan are very apparent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again focusing my response to the mining 

sector, I want to point out that mining, being the second largest 

industry in Saskatchewan, I believe that they want to continue 

expanding the mining industry in northern Saskatchewan. And I 

believe that northern people want to support that. But we also 

know, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are thousands of jobs 

created in Regina, in Saskatoon, and Prince Albert as a result of 

the northern mines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there are millions of dollars created 

in economic activity for the service industry, for the 

construction industry, for the agriculture industry in southern 

Saskatchewan as a result of these mines. 

 

We know that there are research and educational contributions 

made to all areas. And everywhere you look, Mr. Speaker, there 

are direct benefits associated to all the province of 

Saskatchewan because of the mining happening in the North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t even begun to talk about the 

billions of dollars that they will also generate for the resource 

base, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to point out that the 

mining sector wishes to operate in a non-confrontational 

manner. They want these issues resolved at the local level so 

that they can operate in peace. 

 

We know as northern people that the environment will never, 

ever be compromised. We will monitor the environment as best 

we can. In no way, shape, or form will the environment be 

compromised. And, Mr. Speaker, what happens in the 

environment in northern Saskatchewan? Cut-backs. 

 

So once again the question you ask, is the government’s 

commitment to northern Saskatchewan there? And I beg to  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 132 

differ with the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. It is my honest 

and true belief that the commitment is not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a couple months ago there was several mines that 

we knew were going to close down. And recently the Komos 

mine shut down just north-east of La Ronge. And the primary 

reason, according to the people I spoke with at the main office 

in Calgary, was the price of gold. There is nothing that could be 

done at the provincial level regarding the prince of gold. We 

understood that and we’re taking that realistic and responsible 

step. 

 

However, upon continuing to discuss the issue, we talked about 

the overregulation of the industry; we talked about the taxation 

of these industries; and we also talked about the high cost of 

servicing the mine sector, such as fuel costs, electricity costs, 

and manpower costs. All these costs heaped on, one on top of 

another, Mr. Speaker. That, in essence, discouraged that junior 

mining company from continuing, and certainly discouraged 

them when they first began their efforts of trying to locate here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s other examples — the Box mine near 

Uranium City. A lot of potential there, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

they could not afford to do business in Saskatchewan. 

 

So what’s happening here is we’re stuck in a flux. You have the 

northern people wanting development but wanting a better 

share. Then you’re having mining companies that want to come 

in but can’t afford it. So in the meantime, who loses? The 

Saskatchewan people lose. And particularly, Mr. Speaker, the 

northern Saskatchewan people lose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the responsible position that we 

should take is that we’ll have great difficulty expanding the 

mining industry in northern Saskatchewan unless we deal with 

these northern issues, unless we start looking at how we can 

attract junior mining companies that are very marginalized in 

terms of their operations. 

 

And when you haven’t got a plan, Mr. Speaker, to address some 

of these issues, what you have is non-movement. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is much worse than trying something and failing. 

Non-movement is non-movement. 

 

So in making all these points, Mr. Speaker, naturally once again 

we want to make sure that we’re not totally ignoring the fact 

that we have a solution. We as Liberals, and certainly myself as 

MLA of Athabasca, talk about solutions and we talk about a 

new direction for the North. And we talk about what we 

commonly refer to as a northern community development Act 

— a new northern community development Act, an Act that 

will recognize the legitimate role that some of these northern 

communities play in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And the proposal is to develop this northern 

development Act. And how will we do so? Allow me to 

explain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are not talking about investing more money. We’re talking  

about reallocating dollars, current dollars, and we’re also 

talking about reallocating new dollars that will come as a result 

of the expanding mining industry. 

 

We’re not going to compromise any of the issues of northern 

Saskatchewan communities. We will provide accountability to 

this new plan. We will empower northern citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

We will empower communities and we will empower ideas at 

the local level to this northern community development Act. 

 

And this Act, Mr. Speaker, will look and recognize local 

councils, local municipal councils — issues like direct 

financing of local economic development corporations; issues 

of direct financing of social development agencies; issues of 

training dollars right at the local level; issues of dealing with 

infrastructure needs over a sustained period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as Liberals want to provide the solution with a 

new northern community development Act. This Act, Mr. 

Speaker, can finance local organizations and local people to 

come up with that change they so desperately need. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this Act will also address some of our responsibilities 

as provinces to look at the road issues, the health care issues, 

the hospital issues, and the housing issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This new northern community development Act talks about 

ways and means in which the municipal governments could 

become a greater partner. At this point in time, the only 

revenues that they have is enough to collect garbage, to 

maintain their water and sewer system, and shoot dogs, Mr. 

Speaker. And the moment they start talking about economic 

development or social development, there is no money — we 

haven’t enough money. 

 

I could name, Mr. Speaker, 10, 11, or 12 communities that get 

60 or $70,000, Mr. Speaker, 60 or $70,000. What could you do 

with 60 or $70,000, Mr. Speaker? You cannot do anything and 

no wonder the frustration is so apparent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll give you an example, a very proud example, of how and 

why we should begin to invest in northern communities, is none 

other than the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. They got help 

from the federal government, Mr. Speaker, to buy a 40 per cent 

share in a struggling pulp mill — NorSask Forest Products. 

 

And MLTC (Meadow Lake Tribal Council) then launched a 

new business to do reforestation, logging, and road 

construction. MLTC since then has paid $11 million in taxes 

and saved $10 million in social assistance. This is a creation of 

240 jobs, Mr. Speaker. So one project by one tribal council 

ultimately saved us $21 million. 

 

So our choices are (a) continue putting money into social 

assistance, or (b) become aggressive and start looking at things 

like the northern community development Act. And people say, 

well what do you mean, how do we finance that, how do we 

begin to build on that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And this is just one idea. I don’t want to say this is the idea 

that’s going to be prevalent in northern Saskatchewan. I want to 

be very cautious on that. What I do want to say is this one idea  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  133 

that we spoke about . . . And the point is easily: where can you 

get the dollars to set up a new northern development fund? We 

have one already — $4 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, $4 million 

and you divide that by 35,000 people — I’m not sure how much 

that works out to be. If my math serves me correct, that’s 

maybe 50 or 60 bucks a person. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, where could you get dollars from? And I use 

the example in many of my northern community speeches: in 

Regina alone this provincial government put $150 million into 

the Crown Life Insurance Company for the creation of 800 jobs. 

And I applauded that effort. I said, good for them. They’re 

attracting a new insurance company to the province that 

provides an expansion of our services. 

 

(1600) 

 

And what did they do for 35,000 people in northern 

Saskatchewan that occupy half the land mass of this province? 

They put $4 million in for 35,000 people. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that money is earmarked simply for the mining industry. It’s got 

to be geared towards the mining industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not good enough. That is not good enough. 

 

So in essence what we should do is look at a series of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. Revenue-sharing, for example, from resource 

extraction or direct benefits, whatever you want to phrase it. 

Federal initiatives — there are a lot of initiatives that could 

result if we had the money to back us up. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, when the province does become involved 

with treaty land entitlement in southern Saskatchewan, they’re 

usually buying land. So in the case of buying land in southern 

Saskatchewan, the deal is that 70 per cent of that cost of 

purchase is being paid for by the federal government, 30 per 

cent is being paid by the provincial government. 

 

What happens, Mr. Speaker, when this land is being purchased 

in northern Saskatchewan where the government owns all that 

land? Instead of coughing up 30 per cent, they’re gaining 70 per 

cent. And let me tell you, between the Meadow Lake Tribal 

Council, the Prince Albert Grand Council, and the Peter 

Ballantyne Band, there’s a lot of land being purchased. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on about the ideas. We talk 

about reallocation of provincial programs, the northern 

development fund, the Primrose Air Weapons Range, all these 

different examples of where the money could come from. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if you lump in revenue sharing, you lump in the 

federal initiatives, the sale or lease of Crown land, you talk 

about reallocation of current programs, you talk about the 

northern development fund, the existing one, all of a sudden 

you’re easily up to 10, 15, $20 million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is not about new money. This is about 

existing money. And we’ve pointed out the indication the North 

has, the pressing indication that the North has is that, give us a 

piece of the pie so we can become part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am almost finished my presentation but I want to 

make a couple of qualifying remarks. First of all, this new  

northern development Act should not be compared to nor 

should it be confused with self-government; nor should it be 

confused or compared to when you talk about the current 

responsibilities of the provincial government. This new 

northern development Act does not talk about highways and 

schools and hospitals, Mr. Speaker. They simply cannot afford 

to sustain that type of need on this small, meagre amount of 

dollars. These are three very separate issues, Mr. Speaker, and 

they must be viewed as separate issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the Liberals do have a 

plan — this northern community development Act, of which I 

hope to introduce a Bill this session to talk about reallocation of 

current funding, not new funding. 

 

And the point is, Mr. Speaker, is we have to get away from this 

whole archaic system of thinking, we’ll we’re looking after the 

North; we’re putting more than we’re taking out. We know that 

is not the truth, Mr. Speaker. And that very attitude poisons any 

hope of northern Saskatchewan people realizing their own 

destiny. 

 

We are very serious in northern Saskatchewan to develop and 

build a future for our children. That responsibility is ours; we 

realize that, Mr. Speaker. But for crying out loud, give us some 

power and control over our lives. And I can almost guarantee 

you, if you begin to empower people, Mr. Speaker, you will see 

the welfare rolls drop; you will see the crime rolls drop; you 

will see the dependency on governments drop. You will see that 

Saskatchewan spirit rise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, the North is also concerned of some of the challenges 

facing us as a province. We’re not only contributing to the 

province but we also believe, Mr. Speaker, is that we cannot 

simply save our way out of this debt. We cannot cut spending as 

our way out of this debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the northern people believe that we have to create 

a stronger economy to generate more tax dollars to also reduce 

this debt. If we have aggressive economic planning in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, like the Meadow Lake Tribal 

Council has shown, we can generate a lot of tax dollars. The 

North once again wants to help with that task, Mr. Speaker. 

And again I reiterate that we have to make that effort. We have 

got no choice. 

 

I also want to point out, in reference to the previous Tory 

caucus, when they were in power, Mr. Minister, they gave away 

everything to the mining sector. All the tax breaks you needed. 

The PC caucus gave that away. And how did they give it away 

and who did they give it away from? From the northern people 

again. And we’re asking, would not a truly socialist government 

support the concept of empowering people, communities, and 

ideas to become self-sufficient? Isn’t that the social agenda, Mr. 

Speaker? Isn’t that what this is all about — empowering 

people? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask the government not to wait. No 

government have crystal balls determining what is going to 

happen six months from now, much less six years from now. So 

in saying this, we know we cannot wait for every election year 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 134 

to give out goodies. 

 

What we do know, Mr. Speaker, is politics is changing all 

around us, and sooner than later we have to turn back control 

and power to the people we serve. We are public servants, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is time for a new, fresh approach to politics in 

the North, East, West, and South. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if there is a commitment to develop 

the North to the same standards as the South, then we must have 

steady, sustained, and consistent planning that is controlled at 

the local level. 

 

And contrary to what the CBC news may have reported, the 

North is not threatening court action and blockades. They have, 

through various press releases, indicated: let’s consult; let’s 

negotiate; let’s sit down at the table and talk these things out. 

That’s what they want, Mr. Speaker. And is it any wonder that 

their frustration level has gotten to their level over the years of 

constantly being not heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the northern people again are a very proud, 

productive people, and they are prepared to fight, to work, and 

to work smart for a better future for their children. They will 

hold their own and they will contribute to this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in closing I refer to the final word as a song 

that John Lennon sings, and the words are: “I may be a 

dreamer, but I’m not the only one. I hope some day you’ll join 

us and the world will live as one.” Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members of the 

Assembly, it is indeed an honour and a pleasure to address you 

on the Speech from the Throne for 1997. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to respond not only to the 

members from across the floor on their comments but I would 

like to respond in a structured format which deals with the issue 

of right-wing governments and social spending, right-wing 

governments and debt. Liberal and Tory governments being the 

same in history or being the same as Republicans. And also 

when we look at the issue, they talk about taxes. I would like to 

mention the issue of taxes as well as also the issues from the 

member of Athabasca in regards to the North, and also 

aboriginal peoples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to start out by first of all paying due 

respects to people who have passed on recently. I would like to 

join with the member from Athabasca in regards to recognizing 

Louis Morin, the late Louis Morin from Turnor Lake. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I knew this person from the early ’70s, 

and he was a strong fighter in regards to education. I watched 

him at the meetings where Metis people gathered. And you saw 

his strength, his determination to deal with many issues, 

whether it was fighting for jobs, whether it was in regards to the 

issues relating to resource management in the North, and also 

for Metis people and their fight for aboriginal rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say these words in the true spirit of 

Louis Morin. He was a person who spoke English, Cree, and 

Dene. In that spirit I would say, with all respect to the 

languages of the House and our peoples: 

 

Kigistenimitinan Kagee isi weechihak utoskehinu uschi tu 

neepuhistumasowak. 

 

In translation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s respect — and this is 

in regards to the late Louis Morin — that you have helped us 

achieve educational control, to fight for jobs, and the fight in 

regards to standing up for your peoples. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to also pass those same words 

on to Dr. Oliver Brass in regards to his tragic death last week. 

He himself was a fighter for the improvement of education in 

this province, for his own people, first nations of this province. 

Mr. Speaker, his work has impacted us as individuals in the 

aboriginal community, but I also see it impacting people in the 

rest of the province in a positive way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention 

a friend of mine from Sandy Bay, the late Alfred Stewart. He 

passed on earlier this year. I’ve known him when I did my oral 

history thesis in Sandy Bay, on the stories and the history of 

Sandy Bay back in 1983-86. So I’ve known him for quite a 

while as a strong fighter, again in regards to the trapping issues. 

As I went to Europe with the FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations), with the Metis representatives, 

with the trappers’ organizations, and fight for trapping and a 

way of life, I thought of Alfred Stewart who did many work in 

his community — and I might add the same type of words for 

Louis Morin. 

 

(1615) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those remembrances, I’d like to take my 

place and debate the issues of this House that were brought 

forward, not only from this side of the House but from the 

members in the opposition ranks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the speeches made by the members 

opposite and when I looked at the historical record of the past 

20 years, I looked at the situation from not only a practical 

basis, but from an ideological basis. I saw a lot of rhetoric from 

right-wing governments, whether you looked at the Republicans 

under Reagan and Bush and their over 20 per cent cut in the 

social spending area, or whether I looked at the history of Brian 

Mulroney and the Conservatives in Ottawa, or whether I looked 

at Grant Devine and the devastation that he put forth in this 

province. 

 

Every one of these governments attacked the poor, the 

defenceless, the middle class of the system. Their devastation 

ended up to be a burden not on the taxes to the people capable 

of paying, but to the middle class and small business of society. 

 

In many ways, I saw them utilize a lot of the public funds from 

people who worked hard, who paid the taxes fairly, and what  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  135 

they saw in all those governments was people spending and 

putting us in a tremendous debt. 

 

After we went through this period of the ‘70s and then ‘80s — 

and most particularly in the ‘80s — we saw a lot of people 

saying we need to have some sense and responsibility to it. 

People were starting to get sick and tired of right-wing 

governments coming in here and their rhetoric of 

anti-government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  People were getting sick and tired of the 

rhetoric saying pick government when these same people had a 

selected mix of big-business friends which they supported 

through tax loopholes, etc. 

 

There was a tremendous amount of monies that were spent in 

that capacity. They said absolutely nothing in regards to the big 

expenditures with their selected friends in big business who 

supported them in putting all kinds of money in their party 

coffers — absolutely nothing — but they kept attacking the 

middle class and the poor. 

 

So when you look at the situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

anti-government talk which we saw in Grant Devine, we are 

now facing the suffering of that mentality. You look like 

Senator Eric Berntson going to the States after Dick Collver 

tried to make everybody an American here in the ’70s. He 

speaks in New York and he says we will mismanage this 

government so that no other governments can run this again in 

the future. 

 

This was the essence of anti-government sentiment for people 

who are supposed to be here to be proud of one of the greatest 

democratic institutions in the world, our parliament, where 

people elect us and put us in so that we can be responsible, look 

after their money and make sure that we utilize it on health, 

education and the many things that our children hope and dream 

for as we face the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I looked at the devastation of 

Devine, a lot of the people . . . as I walked into my constituency 

in northern Saskatchewan and I looked at that history, I 

reminded people that many of these right-wingers were Liberals 

one time, Tories next time. They just took their membership 

cards and moved from one party to another but were the same 

old right-wingers. 

 

Even when you look at a top person like Senator Eric Berntson 

— he was a Liberal and then he became a Conservative. And 

now we see the connection in regards to the devastation. 

 

You look at a lot of the people who are in regards to the new 

Liberal leadership races that took place after they kicked out 

their old leader, the member from Greystone. In many cases, I 

saw them move with the same group that used to support the 

Tory Party. It’s the same old group. 

 

When we look at what it really means . . . And a lot of people 

ask me: what does $15 billion mean in the hole? What does it  

really mean in regards to the devastation? And I might add on 

this one, the Liberals figure they can get away with it at the 

federal level on the $600 billion there, but one-third of that 

money was there when the Liberals were governing this 

country. They overspent that money, and that was the essence 

of what started the Tory big-spending spree. 

 

So when you’re looking at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people ask 

me what is the difference between a million and a billion 

dollars? The difference between a million, which can run a 

teacher education program like NORTEP (northern teacher 

education program), one of the finest in northern Saskatchewan, 

and get 200 people into the classroom, when we get a program 

like that for approximately a million dollars, I hear people say 

we can relate to that; but a billion, we don’t know. 

 

Well a billion, my explanation to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

this: if you owe a million dollars it will take you 12 days to pay 

it up if you paid a dollar every second — 12 days to pay up a 

million dollars. If you owed a billion, it would take you 32 

years. The difference between a million, on a million that you 

owe, is 12 days . . . 32 years for a billion to pay back if you paid 

a dollar every second. What these Tory- and Liberal-type 

people have done in this province has wrecked havoc for many 

generations of our young people. 

 

When I look at the federal Liberals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see 

the Chrétien government being worse than the Tories before 

them with Mulroney in the sense of attacking the poor and the 

middle class of the country. And regards to the Tories, 

remember the history. They tried to do de-indexing of the 

pensions on seniors in this province. Remember that they also 

backed down from it when a lot of people and a lot of seniors 

from across Canada said that would be devastating to our 

seniors. 

 

But when I look at Chrétien, he was not only talking about 

de-indexing. It was a $7 billion cut. When you compare one 

million to 12 days and one billion to 32 years, this is a $7 

billion cut on things that they said that they would never wreck. 

Medicare — we support medicare, they said. But like Thatcher 

who kicked down the doors here many years back, that is what 

they are attacking. 

 

When you look at the aspect of education, they give you a lot of 

rhetoric in regards to the youth. But youth see the questions 

arise, etc., and they see that $7 billion cut having an effect. For 

this province alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it means $110 million 

last year, over 90 million this year, making it over $200 million 

in a two-year period. Those are the cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from North Battleford chirps from his seat on 

taxes. I will mention the GST later on. 

 

So when you look at the situation, Mr. Speaker, on the health 

side, I look at the situation in comparison to the federal 

government and their devastating practices. They talk a good 

round and they try and sound like the NDP before the election, 

but they govern even worse than the Tories. 

 

So when you look at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, out of that $110  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 136 

million, $50 million were cut in health in this province alone — 

$50 million. What did the province do? Not only did they 

replace every penny of the $50 million that they cut, we put 

another 40 million on top of it. 

 

Now this is an important thing. The member from Melville said 

something about the hospitals. I will mention something about 

those district health boards which they called puppets earlier on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of the Tories, they love 

comparing us to Alberta. Of course they never mention — and 

they talk about the taxation which I’ll mention later on — but 

they never talk about the $860 per family of four that they pay 

in regards to health care premiums over there. But what is more 

important is this: how much do the Albertans spend in regards 

to health per capita? When we look at it in Saskatchewan on a 

per capita basis, we spend $1,560. In Alberta, it’s $1,340. In 

addition to that, Alberta has kept 15 per cent, whereas we have 

added on to our health costs and put in more health dollars of 40 

million last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the member from Canora-Pelly 

yesterday or the day before, I was actually very, very surprised. 

For a person elected in this province, for many years we talk 

about elected people and democracy whether at the local level, 

the regional levels, or the provincial levels, or the national 

levels, the importance of democracy. We have had for many 

years appointed boards of which there were about 400 in this 

province. 

 

We made a decision to go with a combination of eight elected 

members and four appointed system in this province. We made 

sure there was a majority of elected members in those boards. 

And when I listen to the member of Canora-Pelly, the words he 

used were very scathing against the people who are dedicating 

their lives in regards to the governance of health in this 

province. He said that there were “puppet health district 

boards.” 

 

(1630) 

 

I am very surprised at the Leader of the Opposition. He said that 

our health boards were democratically elected by the people of 

this province and in their own areas were puppet. These are 

people that are chosen by their own people in their own areas. I 

thought that maybe the member from Canora-Pelly was trying 

to . . . after running for leadership, he was trying to please his 

new boss. He was trying to impress his own boss and he came 

out with puppet. 

 

And when I looked at it, of course it was not much different 

from what Melenchuk had to say. The Liberal leader, on 

November 25 last year, 1996, quoted in the Star-Phoenix. This 

is what he said: 

 

When you’re dealing with an issue as complex as 

health-care delivery, your governance people need to be 

highly educated and highly knowledgeable on health-care 

delivery. You may not get that with a democratic process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk and say that Melenchuk will 

hand-pick the elite of this province, the so-called educated, 

knowledgeable people, it is absolutely no different than what I 

heard from Grant Devine when I was in opposition. Not only is 

this concept and this proposal by the Liberal leader elitist, it is a 

put-down for the people who fought in regards to the elections. 

 

But when you look at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Melenchuk, 

when I say that the Liberals and the Tories are the same, they 

are the same in this sense. Grant Devine when he was in trouble 

— and they’re in trouble because they’re divided up and 

fighting amongst each other, getting a new leader all the time 

 when they’re in trouble, what Grant Devine did was he was 

going to select 100 people to make recommendations to the 

province. Some people may have forgotten that process. We 

used to call it con Sask. He tried to con the people with a 

handful of selected people — hand-picked versus the elected 

process that we’ve seen. 

 

It was that democratic process of people putting their vote in 

selecting those health boards that was important, that the new 

leader completely disregards. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here you have a new leader that will talk about 

the new Liberalism, the new democracy. But we know that they 

will have absolutely no respect for the knowledge base of the 

people and the educational levels of the people. They will have 

new respect about that and push forth their new elitist form of 

patronage which they have been well-known for in the past. 

This is old Conservative Liberalism of the past. 

 

I also, when I looked at it, this is not a fluke from the leader 

who says that, and from the Leader of the Opposition, you 

know, the member from Canora-Pelly who sits in this House. I 

also heard it from the member from Wood River who talked 

about two-tier medicine. And again when I look at it, on 

two-tier medicine and the fight for medicare in this province, 

what I saw was a quote from the leader again, the leader of the 

Liberals, again the Leader-Post September 10, ‘95, and this is 

what he said: the province should allow private clinics. 

 

Again we saw the situation, Mr. Speaker, of complete 

disrespect not only for our elected people but on the two-tier 

system that was proposed by the member from Wood River, 

which by the way he became your first member of the House 

who stood up in the newspaper to support Melenchuk. I knew 

right away they were heading on a right-wing direction when I 

heard that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the educational side, I had already mentioned 

the tuition increases because of the Liberal cuts, you know, by 

the students . . . borne by the students of this province. But also 

what is forgotten today . . . for example, we saw in the House, 

disabled people in the House. Those programs were devastated 

by the Liberal cuts of last year. And I think that in many cases 

we saw that in relation to the women’s programs as well in this 

province. They were devastated by the Liberals. Now they’re 

trying to tiptoe around by their appointments by the Liberal 

leader, you know, across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so when you compare the Saskatchewan NDP  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  137 

government versus the federal Liberal government, we see the 

idea of debt and debt management by the province; and the fact 

that we have balanced our books, the first to do in Canada, and 

the fact that we passed balanced budget legislation so that the 

Conservatives or the Liberals or whoever comes in power 

cannot go accounting the way the Tories did. And I think it’s 

very important to have this balanced budget legislation so that 

there will be no trickery in the books. 

 

I listened to one of the members talk about trickery. And they 

should know a lot about it because that’s what they know best. 

Even as I look at the new Leader of the Liberal Party, we see 

him getting a pay cheque as a research staff person from the 

caucus budget. Is he an elected caucus member? No. He’s not 

an elected caucus member, but the new leader is getting a 

consultant allowance. 

 

I remember we used to bring this up with the leader from 

Greystone who also had another salary from the Liberal Party. 

Maybe they should disclose their books and find out whether or 

not they’re even getting extra pay from the Liberal Party on top 

of their research staff situation. That would be a good question, 

you know, for the press to research out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the situation of cuts, we 

knew in the province that we had to do a certain amount and we 

knew that a certain amount of it takes place at the federal level. 

But the difference was the severity of the cuts. At the federal 

level the cuts on health, education, and social services 

represented 73 per cent of the cuts. And yet it was only 17 per 

cent of their budget, and yet they bore the brunt of 73 per cent 

of the cuts. And I heard these members from across talking 

about a social conscience. They have no social conscience, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The other major piece of rhetoric that I always use in regards to 

taxation. I used to listen in this House in opposition with Grant 

Devine talk about the gas tax, and how he’d save the province 

lowering the gas tax. And I remember later on he brought it 

back because of the huge debt that he caused in this province. 

Now, like I said, the Liberal is a Tory is a Liberal is a Tory. The 

Liberals are saying the same thing. They’re talking about tax 

cuts again. These are the same people who at the federal level 

promised to do away with the GST. These are the same people 

who promised that they would help the people in regards to the 

GST. 

 

I looked at the TV before Christmas and that poor Jean was 

shaking in his boots because he knew he was not telling the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. He tried to weasel away on some words, but 

he just couldn’t, he was caught right on camera. Then they 

looked at the TV from where his previous statement had been, 

and it was true that he promised to do away with the GST. But 

is it done? No, it is still here. 

 

Those Liberals from across, they want to harmonize, they want 

to harmonize the GST. They’re trying to harmonize it. 

Children’s clothing —that’s what the Liberals want to tax. They 

want to tax education. Not only do they have a rise in tuition, 

they want to tax the books at the educational level. And yet, he 

wants more educated board . . . 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. I’ll ask the 

cooperation of all hon. members on both sides of the House to 

refrain from shouting across the floor of the House. All hon. 

members will have the opportunity, if they haven’t already, to 

enter into debate, and if they’ve already entered into debate, 

then I’m sure that they will no longer need to be obliged to 

shout across the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I think, Mr. Speaker, the truth is getting 

to them. The truth hurts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I know very well that when 

they tried to run away from the GST, we know that there was 

election of and re-election of Sheila Copps on this issue. She 

resigned. And here they tried to say that they had never 

promised to do away with the GST. And so when you look at it, 

Mr. Speaker, taxation — they always try and work on taxation. 

We’re the ones who protected the issue in relation to 

restaurants, books and education, and children’s clothing in this 

province. It’s the NDP who protected the people of this 

province. 

 

When you look at the situation, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 

this rhetoric, let’s look at the facts on the politics of the rich and 

poor in North America. About the 1920s and ‘30s about 1 per 

cent of the wealth was controlled by 20 per cent of the people. 

And when you look at . . . I mean 1 per cent of the population 

controlled 20 per cent of the wealth. Today 1 per cent of the 

people control 40 per cent of the wealth. So it’s very clear that 

the rich got richer over this period in time. 

 

And also in the ‘50s when I look at taxation, the corporations 

used to pay about 30 per cent of the tax in this country. 

Working people, people who paid a personal income tax, paid 

about 32, 33 per cent in the ‘50s. The unemployment rate was 4 

per cent. 

 

The line that they try and sell you all the time is that lower taxes 

will create jobs. Now you look at the history. Today, when you 

look at this history, whereas the corporations used to pay about 

30 per cent of the revenue at the federal level, they now pay 8 

per cent. But did you know the unemployment rose from 4 per 

cent to 10 per cent? 

 

So when you look at the facts of some of the right-wing rhetoric 

in regards to taxation, they let off some of their big-business 

friends on tax loopholes. Even when banks are making record 

profits, they let them get away with it, but the poor students, the 

seniors, the middle class, the small business have to pay. So 

when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, they talk a lot the good line 

about tax, but all it means is a bigger tax load for the middle 

class of this country and this province. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move on now on the question of 

the North. The member from Athabasca was there. I knew that 

the member from Athabasca has a tremendous doom and gloom 

feeling. I know also I see him get mixed up on the facts. One  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1997 138 

hand he wants more money, the next two paragraphs as he 

speaks, he says, we’re not talking about new money; we’re not 

talking about more dollars; we’re talking about reallocation. He 

is going this way and that way, like the Liberals and the Tories. 

Same old people. 

 

And I see the poor member from Athabasca. When I looked at 

it, I knew, Mr. Speaker, that he supported Lynda Haverstock. 

And he was the head in the front benches, the House leader. 

When the smoke cleared and when they had a coup and they 

went around with a new leader and they had a temporary leader 

put into place, they moved him. But at least one thing they had 

respect for was his knowledge about northern issues, about 

northern Saskatchewan. At least they put him as a critic of 

Northern Affairs. Mr. Speaker, today I look at it and I see the 

member made a speech about the North. 

 

And I look at the MLA from North Battleford, who is now the 

new critic for Northern Affairs — not one word did he say 

about northern Saskatchewan. The new critic of Northern 

Affairs said not one word of northern Saskatchewan. They tell 

me that he took one ski-doo ride to La Ronge and that’s his 

experience in the North. They tell me in the North, as I travel, 

that maybe those Liberals got mixed up because the word North 

Battleford had the word north in it. Maybe they think that’s the 

North. 

 

But I think this much, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this 

overall issue from the member from Athabasca, it reminded me 

about even the member from Canora-Pelly’s talk about the 

North and aboriginal people. Because he’s saying — the 

member from Athabasca says something about stereotypical 

views. That’s what I heard again. There wasn’t even a word 

from the Leader of the Opposition in that regard. 

 

So when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, it also reminds me of the 

time when I voted against Meech Lake in the House. I later on 

met with Elijah Harper. When I voted against Meech Lake in 

1987 I talked to Elijah Harper about my experiences about that, 

when I stood up in regards to the issue of aboriginal and treaty 

rights in this province. When I looked at it . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from North Battleford says, great 

Liberal. I think he’s a sorry Liberal. 

 

Elijah Harper is a sorry Liberal today because he was an NDP 

cabinet minister. When he became a Liberal they put him in the 

back benches like they put the member from Athabasca in the 

back rows to keep him quiet. They don’t even allow him to 

speak on northern issues; he’s not even the critic of Northern 

Affairs any more. They took that away from him. That is 

modern day colonialism, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you look at this situation, Mr. Speaker, those Liberals 

are the same as the Tories. They only talk about Northerners 

and Indian, Metis people in doom and gloom terms. Never any 

feeling about the fact that Northerners can accomplish anything 

or that Indian, Metis people can accomplish anything. All they 

talk about is welfare. They, the Liberals, are the welfare 

mentality when it comes down to Northerners and for Indian 

and Metis people. 

 

When I look at what happens in regards to the North, I am 

proud of the people of northern Saskatchewan. I’m proud of the 

people who go in and fight for the jobs in the mines, combined 

with good, sound governmental policy from the NDP. On our 

lease agreements we make sure that the people have contracts, 

the people have jobs, that environment is cared for. No other 

province in Canada — Liberal, Tory, or whatever — can say 

that. 

 

But this NDP government has done that in what has been a 

success story. The member from Athabasca slipped up because 

he said when there was nothing done, he said the ’60s. But the 

government from the ’60s was none other than Thatcher and the 

Liberals. It was a devastating period for the North, you know, 

as it is when the Liberal government is around at the federal 

level. 

 

Now you look at the NDP record. For the first time in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan, we have 1,000 people 

employed at the mines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  This is cooperation from the mining 

companies, the communities, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

This is an historic first. Out of that 1,000 — over 1,000 people 

— we have 874 that are Indian and Metis workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition we have people who are in the labour 

sector, the mill operator sector, as well as the apprenticable 

trades and the technical trades. We have now 121 people in the 

technical trades. We also have 70 people now in the 

apprenticable trades — electricians, mechanics, etc. We also 

have people in management and supervisory positions at the 

mine, approximately 40 people, Mr. Speaker. Now this is 

something to be proud of. When we used to be 5 per cent of the 

employment rate, we are now 50 per cent and we’re working 

even further than that. 

 

The other thing that’s very important is, the Liberals can’t stand 

the success of what I saw in the northern opportunities business 

conference. I saw about 150 entrepreneurs talk about exciting 

things, on how to bid for contracts and how to get parked right 

into the mining development and forestry development. 

 

We saw, Mr. Speaker, from 1991, about $25 million worth of 

contracts. The northern businesses moved from 25 million to 

155 million this year. There is absolutely no government in 

Canada that matches our record. That is a tremendous success 

story — a 500 per cent increase in regards to contract dollars for 

businesses. Can the federal government say that? No, absolutely 

not. 

 

When I look at the question of the environment, we have 

absolutely every community represented in three environment 

quality committees in the North. We spend about a quarter of a 

million. 

 

But I’ll tell you one thing that the member from Athabasca 

forgets about. When the two leaders met the other day to talk 

about revenue sharing in the North, they talked about not only  



March 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard  139 

the provincial government but the federal government. The 

federal government will also reap over a billion dollars, a 

billion and a half dollars, from mining. But did they put any 

money in the environmental quality committees where people 

are involved? Not one penny. 

 

We have a $4 million program that the member from Athabasca 

calls down. But did the federal Liberals put any money into it? 

Not one cent. 

 

So when you talk about revenue sharing, we are revenue 

sharing. In regards to business development, in regards to 

employment, we are making headway and we are the leaders in 

Canada in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, in regards to that, we also 

had . . . when I went to school 30 years ago there was about a 

handful of us. I was the one at the university and there was a 

few at the technical institutes from throughout the North. Today 

the report is 1,750 people in education, people who are trying to 

better themselves, people who are making headway, looking for 

babysitters so that they can go to school, so they can see a better 

and brighter future. That’s what the people of the North are 

doing now. But all we hear is doom and gloom from over there. 

 

So when you look at it overall and aboriginal people as well, we 

have seen tremendous success by this government. When you 

look at the governments across Canada, there was only three 

locations where there was movement on land. We are the only 

ones in Canada that have moved in on treaty land entitlement 

that will more than double the size of reserve land in this 

province. When you look at the Tory governments — zero; 

Liberal governments — zero. The only place where they did 

some work was in Ontario when Bob Rae was around. The only 

other place where they’re doing work on land for aboriginal 

people is in B.C. 

 

So the only place where it’s been successful is here in the 

province of Saskatchewan because we know that . . . we know 

the history. Thirty million acres, 38 million acres of land on the 

free homesteads — we had about 31 million acres and 6 million 

acres on paid homesteads. We worked with the settlers to build 

their farms in the province, to move forward, and that policy 

was very positive. 

 

But there was also positive effects in regards to other areas. But 

I would say that when I look at aboriginal peoples on treaty 

land at that time, we had 60 million acres of land all over the 

province for corporations. Even the Hudson Bay got 3.4 million 

acres of land, 15 million for the railroads, and . . . (inaudible) 

. . . for the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway). But when you look 

at it overall, the aboriginal first nations have gotten 1.2 million 

acres of land at that time — 60 million for everybody; 1.2 for 

aboriginal people. 

 

So we had a lot of supporters out there when we explained this 

to the public and they said that is a matter of fairness and that is 

what we believe in. You’re going by the right way and that’s  

the way to do it. And that’s how we approached this issue. 

 

So when we look at it, we see mining success. The world’s 

largest company on uranium development and transportation is 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band in the partnership with the 

communities as well as other businesses. That is a success 

story. 

 

The member from Athabasca did mention Meadow Lake Tribal 

Council, a success story. I think that it is important to remember 

that is the essence of building, and that as we move forward, 

economic success and putting food on the table and economic 

self-sufficiency is the way to go for everybody, including 

aboriginal peoples. 

 

Also in what was not discussed by the member from across is 

that last year in this legislature we passed respect for aboriginal 

and treaty rights — exactly the same thing as was at the federal 

level on section 35. The first government, first provincial 

government, in Canada to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I looked at their record compared to the 

Liberals, we see the same old Jean Chrétien White Paper 

strategy of offloading to the provinces in regards to social 

services, to the provinces on Indian issues, on offloading on 

many of the responsibilities in regards to northern revenue 

sharing only to the provinces. This Jean Chrétien strategy of 

offloading to the provinces still alive and well while we are 

fighting and partnering with people in making sure that there is 

a better place for our children — whether it’s in the North, 

whether it’s Indian, Metis people, but also non-aboriginal 

people in this province. 

 

We will, I think, Mr. Speaker, make a great effort, when we 

look at it, to really challenge the type of amendment that they 

put forth. And as we move forward, put across our 1997 throne 

speech as another excellent an example of the Government of 

Saskatchewan working with the people of this province in 

building a better and positive future. In fact, that is my address 

on the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 109 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 109 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 109 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 109 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 109 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 109 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 110 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 110 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Internet and Agriculture 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 110 

 Quill Lake Goose Fest 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 110 

 Weyburn Co-op Expansion 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 110 

 Exhibition of Allen Sapp’s Paintings 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 111 

 Alberta Provincial Election 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 111 

 New Liberal Leader 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 111 

 Korean Veterans’ Wall of Remembrance 

  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 112 

 Neonatal Ambulance Service 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 112 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Dodsland Health Centre 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 112 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 112 

 Property Tax Reassessment 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 113 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 113 

 Auto Insurance Rates 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 113 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 114 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 114 

 Property Tax Reassessment 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 115 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 115 

 Ministers’ Expense Allowances 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 115 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 116 

 Group Home Funding 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 116 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 116 

 Environmental Handling Charges 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 116 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 116 

 Provincial Government Office Space in Melville 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 117 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 117 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 5  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 117 

 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 117 

 Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 117 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 117 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 121 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 126 

  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 134 

 




