



















































Hansard: April 28, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1183 

 April 28, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much. I hope you had a 

nice dinner, if you had one at all. Let’s just pick up where we 

left off, and I’m hoping that I’m carrying on the same train of 

thought here. 

 

But I want to go back to the second of the two questions that I 

was asking you about the Association of State and Provincial 

Psychology Boards. And that was, what exact steps did your 

department take to examine the implications that the proposed 

changes would have on Saskatchewan’s reputation at large? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We were more concerned with portability 

within Canada than we were with the issue that the member is 

raising, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  I ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

apologize to the member from Greystone; although I am sure 

that I will not be breaking her train of thought on this piece of 

legislation as I do the introduction. But I do appreciate that 

she’s given me leave to do so in the middle of her questioning. 

 

It’s my pleasure this evening to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, a woman I met at an East 

Indian banquet, who comes to Regina from Thornleigh, 

Australia, a subdivision of Sydney. Ms. Rhonda Wilson is 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery and is going to go on a tour with 

me shortly. 

 

She came to Regina about January 2 in the middle of an 

Australian summer. And the kind of things she can say about 

that is that it’s been an experience, but she has a few more 

months before she returns to Australia. 

 

Her work here is in the school of journalism at the University of 

Regina. She’s working in the registrar’s office. And her 

counterpart from Regina is working in the same capacity in the 

University of Sydney — a wonderful time to get away from a 

Saskatchewan winter. 

 

But I would ask all my colleagues to join in a warm welcome to 

Rhonda Wilson from Thornleigh, Sydney, Australia. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  If I just may make comment. You were 

saying that your primary concern was within Canada. The 

association of course is both provincial and state, so it’s 

inclusive of the United States and Canada. And having said that 

and given your comments, I just want to bring your attention 

again to the memorandum by Agnes Sawchyn, and her 

comments regarding the Canadian register of health service 

providers in psychology. 

 

This is explicit to Canadian provinces as well as the territories. 

It was established in l985 to do the following, and I will give 

you a direct quote: “To identify psychologists who meet basic 

criteria for the provision of health services.” I want you to know 

that this constitution has been ratified by all 10 provinces and 

the Northwest Territories. 

 

The eligibility criteria for listing with the Canadian register of 

health service providers in psychology include having a 

doctoral degree and two years of supervised experience, at least 

one of which must be post-doctoral. And exceptions are made 

for master’s level individuals who meet stringent 

grandparenting criteria. 

 

I think what’s noteworthy is that at their annual meeting as 

recently as January 7, a motion that would have allowed 

master’s level psychological associates in Ontario to be 

registered with this organization was defeated on the grounds 

that these individuals are not fully trained psychologists. And as 

was pointed out in a previous letter to all of the members of this 

Assembly by Agnes Sawchyn, psychological associates in 

Ontario are only permitted to perform authorized or controlled 

acts, including diagnosis, if delegated as competent to do so by 

a doctoral level registered psychologist. 

 

So I’m interested in your comments on that, given that it is a 

particular position given by a Canadian organization which is 

considered very high in its standards and agreed to by all people 

in every province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: Well I appreciate the member’s comments, 

and also respect her point of view. 

 

I understand that the Association of State and Provincial 

Psychology Boards has a model Act for the licensure of 

psychologists, and their view is that only people with a doctoral 

degree in psychology should be licensed as psychologists. 

 

We were aware of that point of view before we drafted the 

legislation. And basically our view is that most of the 

psychologists doing clinical work in the province of 

Saskatchewan are master’s level psychologists. We believe they 

should be licensed and regulated. And we don’t believe we can 

fairly say to those people that they cannot refer to themselves as  

  



1184  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

psychologists. And that’s what the issue seems to boil down to. 

 

So I understand and respect the member’s point of view in that 

regard. But it is not the policy choice that we’ve made, and 

we’ve made the policy choice that we have arrived at with the 

support of the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, and the 

Saskatchewan educational psychologists education, the health 

districts, the association of health organizations, many of the 

school boards, and some of the other professional organizations. 

 

That’s the choice we’ve made. I understand that that choice is 

not agreed to and I regret that. But nevertheless, balancing all of 

the interests, we’ve decided that we should license and regulate 

all psychologists practising in Saskatchewan and we’ve decided 

that it’s fair to refer to them as psychologists. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, I would just like to make 

comment on something that you stated regarding the 

Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards because 

I think the information you’ve been given is erroneous. 

 

Perhaps what is necessary is just expanding a bit on it because 

it’s the position of this particular organization that the training 

provided in master’s degree programs is insufficient to 

adequately protect the public’s interest unless the services are 

supervised, okay? And it doesn’t say that they shouldn’t be able 

to do it, that they’re poorly trained. It means that in order to be 

fully capable of carrying out a wide range of everything, that if 

they’re supervised for a particular period of time, that they 

could probably practice in anything. 

 

So the question I guess I must raise again . . . but I have to 

preface with one more comment. You have stated on numerous 

occasions that this is about the licensing and regulation of 

master’s level psychologists. I agree with that. The 

Saskatchewan Psychological Association agrees with that. We 

have no question or concern about that. We’ve supported it for 

years, and I supported it for years. The points being made are, 

the people to whom you’ve gone and the organizations that 

support unequivocally no supervision, no kind of boundaries or 

restrictions or anything else, come from bodies which are not 

regulatory bodies, have never been regulatory bodies, and have 

never dealt specifically with standards. So what we’re really 

talking about here are standards, particular kinds of standards 

for people receiving services in this province and people 

providing services in this province. 

 

If you’d like to make comment on that, I’ll sit down and let you 

make comment. Otherwise I’ll just move on because we seem 

to be going on a little treadmill here. Is that all right? Would 

you like to comment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well just to say that I fully understand that 

the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan and the 

Saskatchewan educational psychologists association are not 

licensing and regulatory bodies. The objective of this legislation 

is to make them, along with the SPA (Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association), a licensing and regulatory bodies 

and to bring everybody under a regulatory regime. I’m well 

aware of the fact that they don’t license and regulate people at  

the moment. That’s the problem that we’re attempting to deal 

with. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I know that you have spoken with people 

from the department of psychology at the University of 

Saskatchewan, and I know that you’ve actually been speaking 

with a broad range of people. But I wish to, just for the record, 

read to you a letter from the head of the department, Dr. 

Cheesman. 

 

I write to express our opposition to The Psychologists Act. 

The department of psychology, in a meeting yesterday (and 

this is dated April 25), endorsed the unanimous support of 

the following motion: 

 

Whereas the recently introduced Psychologists Act (a) 

registers persons as psychologists and licenses them to 

practice with either a master’s or a doctoral degree; and 

 

(b) makes no distinctions between psychologists with 

master’s or doctoral degrees except requiring that, in 

written communication, the title “psychologist” must be 

followed by the abbreviation for the post-graduate degree 

held by that member; and 

 

(c) makes no distinctions in the scope of practice between 

those with master’s and doctoral degrees. 

 

And whereas the clinical psychology program is a doctoral 

program; 

 

And whereas the department does not believe that a 

master’s program provides adequate training for the 

independent practice of clinical psychology; 

 

Be it resolved that the department of psychology is 

opposed to The Psychologists Act for the reasons cited 

above. 

 

The department of psychology believes that the Act is not in 

the best interests of the profession of clinical psychology, nor 

is it in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And to go beyond the motion, the department of psychology, he 

states, has repeatedly expressed its opposition to this Act to the 

Minister of Health over the past one year. None of our concerns 

have been adequately addressed in this Act. The department of 

psychology at the University of Saskatchewan represents 23 

full-time faculty, 35 part-time faculty, 73 graduate students, and 

over 600 undergraduate student majors. The department of 

psychology will be voicing its strong opposition to this Act to 

our students and to the public. 

 

Now we had spoken on other occasions, Mr. Minister, about the 

fact that this is one particular department at the university of 

which all of us in this province have been extremely proud. And 

one of the reasons, it was very unusual for a department such as 

this in a province this size to be accredited not only by the 

Canadian Psychological Association but by the American 

Psychological Association. 

 

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

It is perceived by many — not just throughout Canada, not just 

in the United States, but throughout the world  as an 

absolutely class act as far as departments of psychology and the 

training of clinical psychologists are concerned. 

 

And I guess I would like to hear your views and concerns, if 

you have any, about the letter written to you by Dr. Cheesman. 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well of course I have a great deal of 

respect for the department of psychology at the University of 

Saskatchewan, and in fact I know some of the people that are 

members of that department. And of course it concerns me that 

they don’t support the legislation and I very much regret the 

fact that they don’t support the legislation. 

 

But I want to say that many people who have doctorates in 

psychology do support the legislation, and two psychologists’ 

organizations in the province support the legislation. And I’d 

like to say to the department of psychology at the University of 

Saskatchewan that nothing in the legislation prevents them from 

continuing to concentrate on turning out only psychologists 

with doctorate degrees. In fact I think that’s their intention and 

they don’t intend to train people at the master’s level any more. 

They want all psychologists to have a doctorate. 

 

And I think in the future that may happen, but the situation that 

we’re dealing with is a situation that exists in our province 

today and trying to meet the needs of the public for 

psychological services. And unfortunately Saskatchewan, like 

other provinces, has a shortage of doctoral psychology 

graduates and so we have to rely on master’s level people. I 

think that eventually, as with teachers, the standard of training 

will be increased so that there are more and more doctoral level 

people operating. The legislation will not prevent that, nor will 

it interfere with the views and practices of the department of 

psychology. 

 

So we very much regret that the academics, unlike most of the 

clinical practitioners in our province, do not support the 

contents of the legislation. We’ll look forward to having their 

involvement and dialogue under the new legislation, and 

listening to their advice in terms of how people should be 

licensed and what qualifications they should have, and what 

scope of practice people trained at various levels should have, 

because, as we discussed this afternoon, that won’t be the same 

for everybody. 

 

So we’re aware of their concerns. I’m sorry they feel that their 

concerns haven’t been addressed. I think there have been some 

changes to the Act as a result of consultations. I regret that they 

can’t support the legislation, but I believe, and many people in 

the province agree, that the legislation is in the best interests of 

the people of the province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Earlier this afternoon, Mr. Minister, you 

made reference to the transitional council and stating that there 

would be great opportunity for people at that juncture to get 

together and to basically map out, strategize, be able to come to  

some conclusions, hopefully. 

 

I guess one of the things that’s been of great concern to me is 

that there were many people who tried to participate in a 

process where they really did feel that they were going to have 

significant impact. And right up until this particular Bill was 

introduced in the House, I had calls from people who were 

extremely optimistic that differences between master’s level 

organizations . . . or rather organizations where the majority of 

people are master’s level trained and SPA were being 

reconciled. 

 

Then of course this was introduced in the House and they were 

astonished, because they really did think that they were coming 

to some culmination after having been able to work out some 

differences. 

 

Now I find it rather interesting that there can be people whose 

job it is to understand nuances, whose job it is to deal with 

human behaviour, whose job it is to pay attention to all different 

kinds of communication, whether that be verbal or non-verbal, 

and yet these people were told that they were totally wrong, that 

they absolutely had it wrong; that there wasn’t going to be any 

kind of coming together of these differences at all; that in fact 

these people had misinterpreted what had been able to be 

achieved up to that point. 

 

And I’m wondering how that can be explained away  that we 

have a group of people who really did believe that they were 

making major contributions, that these were being heard, that 

the other side was contributing and they were being heard; that 

they were coming up with solutions to differences that have 

existed for a long time, and yet in one day one group was told 

they were totally wrong, that all bets were off and that they 

might as well just go along their merry way because the other 

group was going to get what they wanted. And I’m wondering 

how you respond to that because I most certainly didn’t have 

any responses for them because I don’t understand it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to assure the member and the 

House, Mr. Chair, that all attempts were made to reach a 

compromise position and deal with the members of the SPA to 

attempt a compromise. I want to say to the House and to the 

member — and I’m sure the member knows — that attempts 

have been made for 20 years to bring this legislation about  

not one year, 20 years. And unfortunately we have never been 

able to have the various organizations of psychologists come to 

an agreement on some of the basic elements of the legislation. 

 

This particular draft of the legislation has been under active 

consideration by the department and by these organizations for 

the last four years. And I think it would be stretching it a bit to 

say that this matter was being rushed or rammed through or 

proposed without consultation or consideration. 

 

This has been ongoing for 20 years. And I have to say that I 

regret the fact that all of these groups were unable to come to an 

agreement. I’m not blaming any of them. But I’m saying that as 

a matter of public protection and in the public interest it’s my 

responsibility to finally bring this matter to a close and proceed 

with the legislation. 

  



1186  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

 

It hasn’t been rushed. There has been extensive consultation. 

Some people may not feel there’s been consultation when 

there’s no agreement. They do not agree with all aspects of the 

legislation. But I can assure the member that every effort has 

been made to listen and to talk and to consult. But after 20 years 

it is now time to act and that’s what we’re doing. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well, Mr. Minister, I have never 

questioned that there’s been consultation, and I have never once 

while on my feet either this afternoon or this evening stated that 

there was not consideration. So we don’t have disagreement on 

that either. 

 

What we do have some concerns about, what I have some 

concerns about in things that have been raised with me, is that 

the transitional council is going to be so dependent on working 

in good faith. And what I have raised with you this evening is 

that some people don’t feel that they were dealt with in good 

faith. 

 

So here we have a great deal dependent upon how well this 

transitional council can work toward standards; can work 

toward any kind of way of differentiating between what one 

person should be able to do with a certain kind of training 

versus another person with another kind of training — all of 

these kinds of things which are quite specific in nature and very 

personal to a lot of people. 

 

And my concern remains that there were people who felt very 

good about where this process was going. They didn’t feel that 

great about it before, but they most certainly were coming to a 

point of feeling reassured; of feeling that their participation was 

meaning something. And now they feel that those things were 

false. They were told that their impression wasn’t right at all. So 

that leaves them a little disconcerted, if you will, about entering 

into another phase of what’s called discussion, consultation, 

arriving at conclusions and so forth, in this transitional council 

when they don’t believe they’ve been dealt with in good faith in 

this last part. 

 

And I’m not talking about people who were discussing this 20 

years ago, or 10 years ago, or 5 years ago; I’m talking about the 

people who have been active participants in this over the last 

year. And I’m wondering if you can provide some reassurances 

to them, that in fact the feelings that they’ve had about what’s 

transpired very recently — in the last few weeks, if you will — 

that in fact that that won’t be repeated; that they should be able 

to walk into a situation, albeit the transitional council or 

whatever, and be able to feel that they really will be full 

participants in this process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’d like to give them every 

reassurance that they need not feel afraid of the process. The 

process involves people from the SPA (Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association), the doctorate level psychologists, 

who . . . many of whom, most of whom perhaps, do not support 

the legislation; the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, 

which does support the legislation; and the educational 

psychologists, who support the legislation. All of them will 

have representation on the transitional council and there will be 

some representatives appointed by the province as well. 

 

And I can only say that if they’re feeling afraid and insecure 

about the process, then I’m very sorry to hear that. But I think 

that in time if they proceed in good faith and if parties 

cooperate with one another, they will be provided with the 

reassurance that nobody is out to harm them in anyway. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well let me put on the record, Mr. 

Minister, I don’t think they’re afraid of being personally 

harmed in any way. The concerns that they’ve raised have been 

professional in nature. The concerns that they’ve raised are 

about the standards of the practice of psychology in 

Saskatchewan. The concerns they’ve raised have been about 

public safety, and they’ve also been about the protection of a 

profession. They have not had individual personal concerns for 

themselves of which they are feeling afraid to go into a 

meeting. I think they’ve been very justified in the things they’ve 

raised and quite frankly we should all be thankful that they’re 

that concerned about their profession and the people that they 

serve in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that we had touched on was your impression 

of what this transitional council should be made up of. And I’m 

wondering if you could state that for the public record tonight. I 

was interested in what you said and it made me more hopeful in 

fact about the transitional council. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I have written to at least two members 

of the SPA about the transitional council and I have said that 

they will have two of the nine members from the SPA. So those 

will be people with doctorates in psychology. I will ask the PSS 

(Psychological Society of Saskatchewan) and the educational 

psychologists each to appoint someone . . . one of their two 

members to the transitional council who has a doctorate, so that 

you would have at least four people out of nine who have 

doctorates. And I will be appointing three people to the 

transitional council myself and I’ll give consideration to 

appointing a fifth person with a doctorate. So the objective 

being that the doctorate level psychologists will be very well 

represented. And I’m certainly open to that and have said so in 

letters to people; so therefore have said so publicly. 

 

The other thing is, as I said to the member from North 

Battleford on Friday, this professional legislation, like some 

other pieces of professional legislation, says that the minister 

has to approve of the bylaws that are arrived at by the council. 

And he was asking me why that was, and I said, it isn’t unique 

to this legislation; it’s something they’re putting in some of the 

newer pieces of professional legislation. 

 

But one thing it does do, is if any particular group tried to 

dominate another or make rules that were not in the public 

interest, then the minister could disallow the bylaws. And I 

won’t go into some of the fears that have been expressed and 

that I tried to respond to in the last response I gave, but if 

somebody tried to abuse their position of authority — let me put 

it that way — then I would be prepared to use my office as 

Minister of Health to ensure that that didn’t happen. 

 

So I will both try to work with them in terms of having the 

other organizations appoint people with doctorates, if that will 

provide some reassurance; I’ll look at that myself in terms of  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

my own appointments, and I’ll be prepared to examine the 

bylaws very closely. 

 

And I truly believe that once this legislation — or if this 

legislation is passed, if I could put it that way — once the 

parties begin in earnest to make a sincere effort to prescribe the 

kinds of qualifications that one should have to perform the 

various aspects of psychology, including the question of when 

one should be supervised, I believe all the parties in due course 

will find that they can make this work; not only in their interests 

but also in the public interests. I truly believe that. 

 

(1930) 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well I’m . . . believe it or not, remain an 

optimist. You kind of wonder why after my life. But I really do 

agree that there is an opportunity here but that opportunity very 

much is consistent . . . contingent upon the sorts of vision that 

you have for the make-up of this transitional council. And I 

know that people would feel much more assured if this weren’t 

. . . we’ll simply encourage this to happen. 

 

You can well imagine the feeling if out of a body of nine, that 

there are two placements for people who have been the primary 

keepers of the standards of psychological practice and 

regulation in the province of Saskatchewan. Two out of nine 

isn’t very reassuring. 

 

And it’s great that one can say we, as government, will oversee 

the bylaws just in case something really bad happens. But 

heaven forbid if that would ever have to be put into practice. 

What one would want instead is that the highest possible 

standard is placed by these nine individuals from the beginning, 

that they all feel a need to look over the literature, to look over 

the standards that are not just considered now acceptable in 

Saskatchewan but across the North American continent. I don’t 

know why it is we would want to lessen our standards, Mr. 

Minister. I see no reason for Saskatchewan to ever lower its 

standards. I think we should be either working toward 

maintaining, as you speak to every day in this House, trying to 

maintain a certain level, a certain standard if you will . . . 

Whether by stating I’ve back-filled this or we’ve done that, 

you’re trying to maintain a particular standard. 

 

We should be working towards elevating our standards. Why 

we would want to do anything but that I don’t know. And I 

think the people need to have some reassurance. Not just SPA, 

but those people who are receiving services in this province, 

they want to know that we have outstanding standards. And I 

think that they would want to know as well that those people 

who have been primarily concerned with standards for our 

province for years as a regulatory body, that they in fact are 

assured of having at least an equal number. 

 

Now if it’s simply I’m thinking about putting a PhD level 

person on there or I’ll simply suggest to PSS to have a doctoral 

level person there, I don’t think that’s going to make them feel 

very secure. If in fact they know that there will be five doctoral 

level people out of nine, then I think there’s a much greater 

opportunity here for ensuring that there will be some agreement 

on different standards and especially the issues that they’re  

facing. I’ll let you comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  You know I’m not going to repeat the 

answer I gave before. But I’ve said that I’m going to attempt to 

get doctoral level people nominated by the other organizations; 

and I have the authority myself, if I’ve failed in that regard, to 

appoint people to the council. So I’m going to work with all 

three groups to ensure that the doctoral representation on the 

transitional council is more than the two. I’ve stated that 

publicly. I’ve stated it tonight, and that’s what we’re going to 

endeavour to do. At the same time, I’m going to cooperate with 

these other two organizations. 

 

But I want to say to the member and the House that I agree with 

the member. We do not want to diminish our standards. But this 

legislation increases standards — I would argue — for the vast 

majority of people, in the sense that we presently have most 

people receiving psychological help from people who are not 

licensed and not regulated. That is the reality. 

 

This legislation will license and regulate everybody in the 

public interest, make people more accountable, make them 

susceptible to professional discipline, for example. And in the 

public interest, as a matter of public protection, that’s what we 

need to do. 

 

So I understand and respect the member’s views in this regard. 

But I want to assure the member that the effort being made here 

is not to diminish standards; it is to — across the piece — raise 

the standard of everybody by bringing everybody that practises 

psychology into the professional tent, if I can put it that way. 

 

And I think that that’s a vast improvement; I know the member 

agrees that that’s a vast improvement. There’s some 

disagreements about some of the parts of the legislation but I 

don’t think we’re diminishing standards or weakening the 

system. I think that we’re strengthening it in a very real way. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, I do think I understand your 

intent and I don’t question your intent. I have concerns about its 

implications. And have all of the different component parts 

been explored? The majority of the people to whom you refer 

— in other words those who are going to be brought into this 

tent of the profession of psychology — the majority of those 

individuals, sir, they work for the government. 

 

They are already in a situation whereby they have close contact 

with numerous other health professionals. These are people 

where their level of performance can be seen on a day-to-day 

basis by their own colleagues. These are people who play an 

integral role, particularly in rural Saskatchewan; everybody can 

know their name, they know who they’ve served, they know all 

these different things. We’re not talking about that. 

 

We’re talking about the fact that this kind of legislation can 

ensure that an individual trained at the master’s level, who is 

not working for government, can end up going out and saying, 

I’m a psychologist and I’m working as an independent person. 

The question raised by so many people is, if every other group 

that deals with regulation and licensing, of what they consider 

to be fully trained psychologists say that’s not good enough  

  



1188  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

without supervision if a person’s going to do that, why is it that 

we’re finding it acceptable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I would just point out to the members, 

the member knows that if somebody wants to set up a 

counselling service or a therapy service now, whether they have 

a master’s degree or maybe no degree, they can do that now. So 

this legislation — yes, we’ll say that if you have a master’s 

degree and a certain amount of training, which will be 

determined by the professionals themselves, then you can call 

yourself a psychologist. 

 

I would argue that’s a good thing, that that isn’t a dangerous 

thing. What is dangerous is the situation we have now where 

people can in effect set up shop, practise what is psychology — 

regardless of what they may call themselves — with perhaps no 

training at all, let alone a master’s degree in psychology, and we 

don’t license or regulate that practice. So that the public is 

susceptible to people counselling them who are not qualified or 

competent to do so. 

 

We’re trying to stop that, not promote it. So it’s true that if 

somebody’s licensed under this Act, they can practise 

psychology. That’s okay. The bad situation is what we have 

now, that you can in effect practice psychology without being 

licensed at all. And we have to put and end to that situation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I would agree, but you’re not going to put 

an end to that situation, Mr. Minister. Any single person in the 

province of Saskatchewan today, tomorrow, or if this is passed, 

will be able to put up a sign on their door and call themselves a 

therapist, or call themselves a counsellor, or do . . . you name it, 

they could do it. 

 

And this isn’t going to change anything at all if that’s the case. I 

mean in part, what you’re saying is that people should feel 

protected because a master’s level trained psychologist who can 

now put psychologist up on the door, that people will feel more 

secure because they are registered. And what you’ve just said is 

inaccurate. 

 

If people want, as a part of being trained as a social worker or 

someone who’s gone to Adult Children of Alcoholics for a long 

time and decides that they are now an expert — any of these 

people could put a sign up on the door and say, I’m a therapist; 

come to me. They do now, and they can tomorrow, and they’ll 

be able to do it after this legislation. So tell me in what way this 

legislation protects the public from them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well section 23 of the legislation states 

that: 

 

An authorized practice is the communication of a diagnosis 

identifying, as the cause of a person’s symptoms, a 

neuropsychologically-based psychotic, neurotic or 

personality disorder, 

 

And then the next subsection says: 

 

No person shall perform an authorized practice in the 

course of providing services to an individual unless the  

person is a practising member authorized by council. 

 

Now there’s another, actually a House amendment I’m going to 

propose  it has been agreed to by the three organizations  

dealing with what an authorized practice should be. 

 

But in any event, with respect to that — and it doesn’t deal with 

all aspects of counselling and therapy — at least you have to be 

a registered, licensed person in order to conduct that kind of 

counselling business. And I guess what I would say is the 

public will have to consider whether one is registered and 

licensed under The Psychologists Act or not. And presumably, 

hopefully, like in other professional areas, if a person isn’t 

licensed or registered, that will mean something to the public. 

 

And the profession of course, any profession in this kind of 

instance, promotes that to the public too. They try to educate the 

public that there’s a difference between somebody calling 

himself or herself a therapist or counsellor and somebody who 

is a registered, licensed member of a profession. 

 

So I think that that’s a considerable improvement over the 

situation we have now, and I think even those who don’t like 

every aspect of the legislation agree with that  that it is better 

to try to bring people within the profession, and that’s what 

we’re trying to do. There are some aspects of it that aren’t to 

everyone’s liking. But in the main, I think that main thrust that 

we’re going to regulate and license people is an improvement 

with respect to psychological services in the province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, on Friday you were posed 

questions by the member from North Battleford. And what I 

want to do is to quote the member’s question to you, and then I 

will state your response. And then I have a statement and a 

question. 

 

The member from North Battleford: 

 

May I ask the minister: obviously every profession is going 

to have the odd practitioner who is going to be a problem, 

but does our experience here or in (any) other provinces 

indicate there is more cause to be concerned with a 

master’s level practitioner versus a doctoral level 

practitioner? 

 

The hon. minister’s response: 

 

No, there hasn’t been any suggestion of that and we don’t 

have any evidence to suggest that. 

 

And that’s the part with which I have some interest here. The 

requirements that are stated in this legislation  that in written 

communication a psychologist is to list his or her post-graduate 

degree after the title “psychologist” is, I understand, considered 

an important requirement — the only part of this Act that 

allows the consumer of psychological services to distinguish 

between a master’s and doctoral trained psychologist. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, and your official. I’m sure that 

you will know already that a Ph.D. degree may be purchased for 

approximately $400 U.S. (United States) from any number  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

of mail-order degree mills in the United States and Britain. 

 

So my question is this. Does this Act prevent the following 

shameful scenario? A person with a master’s degree in 

psychology becomes duly licensed to practise psychology by 

the new college of psychology under this Act. This psychologist 

then buys a $400 mail-order Ph.D., lists the Ph.D. degree after 

his or her title, “psychologist,” and refers to him or herself as 

Doctor So-and-so. Now what in this Act prevents such a sham? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  What would prevent that kind of sham 

would be that the bylaw-making power of the governing body 

would allow it to do two things. 

 

First of all, it would allow it to decide who could be registered 

and what their qualifications would be. And obviously they 

wouldn’t accept the doctoral degree from a mail-order 

university, as no other professional organization would do that 

either. 

 

The member says, well what if somebody with a master’s was 

admitted and registered, and then they got a mail-order degree. 

Well the answer to that would be that the professional body, 

like other professional bodies, would have the power to regulate 

its members. And if any of its members tried something like 

that, I’m sure that would be considered conduct unbecoming the 

member. And the member would be disciplined and suspended 

or removed from the profession, if the member did that. 

 

(1945) 

 

So I appreciate the question, but I don’t think there’s any 

serious danger that any serious professional organization would 

tolerate that kind of behaviour. It simply wouldn’t be tolerated 

at all. If it was tolerated and a real danger, then it would occur 

in any number of professions which today license people to 

practise within them, whether they have a doctorate or not. 

 

And we see that for example with the registered nurses’ 

association, which accepts as registered nurses people with a 

degree or people with a diploma from SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) most commonly. 

Or we see it in the legal profession, where you don’t need to 

have a doctorate in law to be registered to practise. You can 

have a doctorate or a master’s or a bachelor’s degree. 

 

I think if any member of those professions tried to promote 

himself or herself with a mail-order doctorate degree, any 

responsible profession simply would not tolerate that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well how come I’m not surprised that you 

people don’t know about this? I have raised about the 

Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards earlier, 

late this afternoon, and that seemed to come as some surprise. I 

then talked about the position of the Canadian Register of 

Health Service Providers in Psychology and that came as a bit 

of a surprise. 

 

Now I’m talking about something that indeed is not just some  

pie-in-the-sky scenario, Mr. Minister, it’s a major problem 

being faced by our next door neighbours in the province of 

Alberta. This isn’t something we’ve just made up as a 

possibility, this is a downright reality that’s going on as we 

speak. 

 

This growing problem in Alberta and other provinces that 

license psychologists at the master’s level is where this is 

occurring most frequently. There are 27 such Dr. Sham cases 

right now in the province of Alberta. Now this Act, as it stands, 

provides absolutely no protection for the public against 

impostors. 

 

And I would like to ask why this Act has been introduced when 

the government obviously does not know at all about this 

particular situation and has not provided for protection against 

such impostors? And would you, Mr. Minister, refer your own 

family to members who could possibly do such a thing? I mean 

people of a group that not only have done it, they are doing it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  And they will undoubtedly be disciplined 

by their professional body or they should be. Today we 

wouldn’t have the authority to discipline people that did that 

because they’re not members of the profession. 

 

But I would refer the member to section 20 of The 

Psychologists Act, which says that the council — which will be 

the governing body, the psychologists — may register a 

member and issue a licence to a person who has a master’s or 

doctoral degree in a program that primarily consisted of 

psychology classes from an educational institution recognized 

by the council. 

 

So in other words, the profession will only grant admission to 

people from universities that are recognized by the profession. 

This is common to professional legislation; it isn’t unique to 

this legislation. 

 

In terms of the member saying that we are taken by surprise by 

reference to the organization you referred to earlier, we are well 

aware of that organization and their model statute. This is not a 

surprise. We simply do not agree with everything they say. But 

that doesn’t mean that we are not aware of them or that we’re 

surprised by what the member is saying. In terms of the danger 

of people getting doctoral degrees out of Cracker Jack boxes or 

through the mail or in any other method, we are aware of that. 

 

The legislation is drafted to take that into account and to allow 

the profession to discipline people who act in an unprofessional 

manner. And certainly anybody that gets a sham degree and 

calls himself or herself a doctor of psychology on that basis is 

acting in an unprofessional manner. And any profession . . . this 

has happened sometimes with the medical profession. It can 

happen unfortunately, but those people will be dealt with by any 

responsible professional body. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, I think you understand why, 

when we met earlier today, I was saying that we don’t want to 

use the province of Alberta as a model for what we should be 

doing as far as our own standards for licensing and certification 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Somehow this has been held  

  



1190  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

up and said, well this is a model that we can base this on. We’re 

ignoring Ontario; we’re ignoring the fact that Quebec, with the 

largest number of master’s trained psychologists, is now 

changing their standards; they’re beginning to be completely 

worried about the direction that they went in and they’re 

modifying it. 

 

Part of the concern here is to make sure that at least there’s the 

anticipation of problems that are occurring presently, and for 

people who are concerned about standards, especially those in 

SPA who have spent an inordinate amount of time dealing with 

ensuring that people adhere to ethical behaviour, that they hold 

the highest possible professional standards and so forth, these 

people are very concerned about things that they’ve seen 

happen elsewhere and they want to ensure that changes that are 

going to occur in this Act are going to at the very least 

anticipate problems. 

 

If in fact there are people unfamiliar . . . who sit on a 

transitional council and they are not aware of what has 

transpired in other provinces and in states in the United States, 

if they have not been directly involved as a regulatory body in 

the past, if they have not spent inordinate — not just hours — 

but days and months and years examining the issues of 

professional standards and ensuring that their entire profession 

is something that they can hold in the highest esteem based on 

particular kinds of standards, then there’s going to be I think, a 

longer period of time of being able to reach a consensus. And 

I’m encouraged by your saying that there will be people who 

will participate in this process who perhaps have had good 

cause and needed to be able to look at these things in the past 

because of what they were required to do just to achieve their 

own credentials. 

 

I want to reiterate before I close — I’m sure you’re going to be 

relieved to hear that — that first of all the greatest concern here 

is to ensure that the public is going to receive the best possible 

services and be safe; that they’re going to receive services from 

people who are not only well trained, but be able to be regulated 

in a way that can make them feel secure in what they are 

receiving. 

 

As a professional body, people want to ensure that standards are 

not ever lowered. And one of the things that is of great concern 

to many people in the profession is to ensure that supervision is 

part of this process. A lot of people, as I stated earlier, at the 

doctoral level continue to receive supervision. This is not a 

practice that’s engaged in nearly as often — in fact I would cite 

very infrequently — by master’s trained psychologists. It’s 

done frequently by doctoral level trained psychologists. And I 

ask you, I wonder why that is. I find that a rather curious thing. 

 

And I think that one of the things that needs to happen here is 

an encouragement on the part of the government that 

supervision be part of this transition to grandfathering or 

whatever it is we want to call it. And I think that it’s a good 

thing. It’s not only healthy for the people who are participating 

in the profession of psychology, it’s actually an exciting process 

that can make people work far better, not just as professionals 

but as a team. 

 

I’m going to be moving some amendments, and I certainly hope 

that you will give these due consideration because I think that 

they would be a very good sign for the people of Saskatchewan 

who have raised concerns about this legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I just want to say, Mr. Chair, while I think 

it’s important to involve the doctoral trained people on the 

transitional council, as we’ve discussed, I also believe that the 

master’s level people and the educational psychologists are 

competent, skilled people and they have something to bring to 

the table. They are professionals and they want to come to the 

table with the public interest in mind as well. 

 

I agree with the member that the kind of interaction that you 

can have in any profession . . . some people dealing with people 

that have more experience or training can be beneficial not only 

to the public but to the professionals concerned. And I have 

every confidence that regardless of the level of educational 

attainment of the individuals practising psychology, they will 

all have an interest in wanting to ensure that there is an 

appropriate level of training and supervision. 

 

And frankly, I was glad to hear the member say she was an 

optimist. I am an optimist too and I believe that when people 

are working together, some people will be surprised at the level 

of agreement that there really will be between the various parts 

of the profession. So I join the member in being optimistic 

about the process and I’m sure that people will give it a chance. 

And in a few years will see that it works . . . working fairly well 

as well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, I want first of all to thank 

your official with you this afternoon and this evening, Mr. 

Johnston, and thank you as well for being patient and 

entertaining the things that I’ve asked of you today. 

 

One final comment. I know that if people feel that the process is 

going to be fair, that in fact they’re going to be equal in 

representation, that they will participate in this with a great deal 

of optimism too. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, to the minister and to his official, 

a couple of questions regarding this Act, and coming back to 

the couple of comments made by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

In the second reading speech, the minister responsible at that 

time, I believe the Minister of Agriculture, talked about the fact 

that this Act is going to give the college the authority to ensure 

psychologists have proper training and practise within their area 

of expertise and in accordance with any standards of practice 

the college deems appropriate. 

 

Now I understand from one of the letters I have received, one of 

the concerns that was raised, and I think the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone raised this as well, the fact that the 

proposed Act as it presently reads, they talk about significantly 

lowering the standards. 

 

Now I’m not exactly sure whether they’re specifically talking of 

the fact that certainly there’s a difference between the  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

master’s level and the Ph.D. level as far as the number of years 

of training, but the Ph.D. level as well does have a year of 

supervision included, whereas I don’t think, if I’ve read things 

closely, that the master’s level has any supervisional time 

period before you receive your certificate or whatever to 

recognize that training. 

 

And I guess the question I have for you, Mr. Minister, is, has 

any consideration been given to a supervised period of training 

for a master’s level psychologist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It may be a good thing to require that kind 

of supervision. It’s not a decision that the government would 

make. It’s a decision that the governing body would make when 

it enacts its bylaws. And that would be true not only for The 

Psychologists Act and the psychologists council, but really any 

kind of professional body. So that for example the legal 

profession, with which I’m more familiar, requires that you 

have a year of supervision which is called articles of clerkship, 

and that’s what they do. 

 

But that’s more a requirement of the law society than the 

government, the idea being that the government will set up the 

self-governing profession, in this case the psychologists, and 

say to them, you decide how people should be educated and 

trained; we think you’re better equipped to do that than we are. 

And so they may come up with that kind of bylaw, but that 

would be entirely up to the professional group as opposed to our 

prescribing that in legislation. 

 

(2000) 

 

Because if we were going to prescribe that in legislation, for 

example, then we may as well prescribe everything else. And 

that really as a matter of self-governance of a profession is not a 

very workable model. But that doesn’t mean that the idea of 

supervision is a bad idea. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, this 

new governing body that’s going to be partly appointed and I 

believe partly elected — or is it totally appointed to start with 

and then elected — will have the authority then to set down the 

guidelines which may include, if you will, at the master’s level, 

a year of supervised training before you would receive your 

certificate as psychologist with a master’s level of training. 

 

The concern I have, Mr. Minister, is when we talk . . . and I 

think the debate we have, that’s been taking place, that certainly 

has been between our caucus, and I’m sure as well government 

members, is between two levels of expertise here, if you will. 

 

We’ve seen it with the nurses. We used to have a two-year 

diploma program for nurses, then it went to three. SUN 

(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) basically moved and forced 

everyone into a four-year degree program before you could 

receive your nurses . . . not certificate but your degree program. 

 

One of the concerns I would have is that down the road the 

doctorate level may have the opportunity to influence and force 

that full four-year plus . . . or what is it? Four years plus four 

years . . . a year’s supervised training for all psychologists in  

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think if we looked throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, the number of individuals who are currently 

practising today, some with a number of years of experience, to 

add another two or three years of training will not really 

necessarily make them better or more qualified to provide the 

service that they are providing. 

 

I personally believe that there is room for the two levels. And I 

think if I hear a number of the psychologists correctly, they 

want the public to be aware of the fact that there are two levels 

of training and that when the public comes and is looking for a 

qualified psychologist, they want to be able to know that when 

they refer to themselves, that they either have the master’s level 

of training or the Ph.D. level. 

 

And so I think it’s important that we recognize that there are 

individuals who are certainly qualified with a master’s diploma 

or degree to practice. And I’m not exactly sure, but I think the 

way this legislation is coming down, down the road it opens up 

the door for the doctoral level to take over and then to set a 

standard which basically forces everyone into that level of 

training. Isn’t that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It could be true. I guess if you use an 

analogy, one could talk about the teaching profession, in the 

sense that it used to be you could teach if you had one year of 

normal school and then there was a standard A certificate which 

involved maybe a couple years of education at university. And 

then finally you needed to have your Bachelor of Education 

degree, which is now the standard. 

 

And what they did is they said, you know, at one time, well 

we’re raising the standard, but if you’re already teaching and 

qualified with the old qualification we will — they used to say 

grandfather you, but now the politically correct term is 

grandparent you, which is fine — so we’ll grandparent you and 

you just keep teaching. But anybody new coming in has to have 

the new qualification. 

 

And so with the psychologists, it’s quite possible that what will 

eventually happen is that the psychologists governing council 

may say okay, well let’s consider the psychologists that are 

practising today with a master’s degree. I don’t think anybody 

seriously will say that they shouldn’t be able to carry on with 

their work or that they should have to go back to school or do 

something in particular to continue to work. 

 

I think most people think they should be grandparented and 

they should be members of the association and licensed and 

registered. But the faculty at the department of psychology at 

the University of Saskatchewan, which does not support this 

legislation, doesn’t want to any more train people at the 

master’s level. They only want to train them at the Ph.D. level. 

To which I reply, that’s fine. They and the other universities too 

are going to only train people at Ph.D. level as clinical 

psychologists. You’re not going to have any master’s graduates 

at some time in the future. 

 

And what I would say to them is this legislation will not stop  

  



1192  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

you from doing that. You can go ahead and do it and 

eventually, as we have more Ph.D. psychologists, which we 

don’t have enough of today, which is part of the problem we’re 

trying to deal with, they’ll come into the profession and 

eventually some day all of the psychologists practising clinical 

psychology will be Ph.D.s, and the master’s and the educational 

psychologists perhaps won’t be trained any more and won’t 

practise any more. But the ones that are there now will. 

 

So yes, you may have that kind of change in the long term, and 

that change will come about as a result of the decisions made by 

the department of psychology at the University of 

Saskatchewan, and I think they’re entitled to make that kind of 

change that they’re making and other universities are. 

 

But what we’re trying to do today is deal with the situation we 

have, which is that most of the psychologists that practise in 

Saskatchewan are not doctors, they’re master’s degree and 

educational psychologists. We want them to be able to practise, 

but we want them to be licensed and regulated. 

 

But if the profession eventually moves to some higher standard, 

that’s fine, and the legislation won’t prevent them from doing 

that. And so yes, that could happen and we think that that’s a 

matter for the profession to work out as well. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, what I see 

happening in this profession as we’ve seen it in education and 

certainly in health, is down the road as you allowed the teachers 

and the teachers basically had the requirement of a full degree 

program versus the two-year diploma, the cost when it came 

right down to it there was the dollars and cents. With a degree, 

you basically set yourself at a standard up here. It didn’t mean 

you were more qualified to do a better job in the classroom, but 

we see now the Department of Education has got fewer dollars 

to work with because they’ve got people at higher salaries. 

 

Take a look at the nurses. As soon as you move from the 

two- to the full four-year, next thing you know the Department 

of Health has problems. Your own department, there’s only so 

many because you’re looking at a higher level of salary. And I 

guess if people choose to take a two-year program and do a 

good job at that level and if that’s their choice . . . but you’re 

correct, as the college of psychologists themselves say no, 

we’re only doing the four-year program, you’ll have no 

alternative. In the meantime, it becomes a greater cost to the 

taxpayer. 

 

And there are a lot of excellent people. I just hope that at the 

end of the day, those who have chosen to and do have a 

master’s degree, are not looked down upon because that’s the 

level of training and yet they’re doing a quality job in the field. 

And I would hope that we would recognize that. Down the road, 

as the demand . . . and the fact that colleges will not recognize 

. . . and are basically just promoting the four-year training or not 

even offering the master’s, then certainly it’s going to put 

everybody into the Ph.D. level. And that’s something we don’t 

really have any control over. That’s their choice if they choose 

not to do the training. 

 

But I guess it’s important that we recognize that individuals  

who are out there right now are certainly recognized for their 

expertise and the care and the concern they are giving to the 

public. And I just think it’s important that that is recognized 

versus maybe saying to someone who’s maybe just had five 

years experience doing a quality job. 

 

But we’ve seen that in the educational field. The pressure was 

on to go back and upgrade to the Ph.D. level versus continuing, 

if you chose, to stay at that master’s level. So I think it’s 

important that people be made aware of it. I think the public 

themselves, at the end of the day, will choose. They’ll make a 

choice. And if they feel that a person with a Ph.D. level is 

serving them better, that’s where they’ll choose to go. And the 

individual down the street who’s currently sitting there with a 

master’s degree will say, well it’s obvious this is the choice of 

the public; I better upgrade myself if I intend to continue to 

practise here. So it’s just those concerns I have. 

 

The other question you had . . . or there was another issue raised 

this afternoon, Mr. Minister. And I was just . . . I’m wondering 

what you mean by the term “counsellor” when you talked about 

being recognized as a counsellor or a person being able to, say 

hang up their shingle and say that they are a counsellor. 

 

The reason I raise that is because there are many people out in 

society right now in different professions that people turn to for 

some counselling if they’ve got a problem, such as, say pastoral 

personnel throughout the province or throughout society may be 

looked to, or teachers or even principals students may go to for 

some counselling. 

 

And the question I raise, Mr. Minister, is when you used the 

term “counsellor” this afternoon, does that take away from 

individuals such as pastors or educators to still act as 

counsellors in their area or profession when people come to 

them to seek some guidance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. The simple answer is no it does not. 

The only thing this would prevent is referred to really in section 

23 of the Bill which talks about the question of authorized 

practice. It says it is: 

 

. . . the communication of a diagnosis identifying, as the 

cause of a person’s symptoms, a 

neuropsychologically-based psychotic, neurotic or 

personality disorder. 

 

So that if you were doing that, then the legislation restricts that 

to people that are licensed and registered. If you’re going 

beyond or if you’re outside of that and just doing the kind of 

counselling the member is talking about, the Act doesn’t have 

any implication. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, clause 54 talks about the minister 

as Lieutenant Governor in Council having the ability to . . . 

basically where you’re going to be appointing a number of . . . 

or appointing the positions on the council to start with, if I’m 

not mistaken. And in clause 2 you talk about the fact that there 

will be representatives from the different levels of 

Saskatchewan educational psychologists, Saskatchewan  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

Psychological Association and society of Saskatchewan. 

 

What I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, I think you indicated a 

moment ago that the council first of all will be made up of 

appointees — you will appoint them all. What I’m wondering is 

why wouldn’t it be possible to allow the three different 

organizations that are recognized here in this piece of 

legislation to bring forward names themselves and basically 

appoint or elect the two representatives that you’re listing down 

here and start off right from day one with partially elected 

coming from the representatives and then three chosen by 

yourself or are . . . Lieutenant Governor in Council rather than 

just you as the minister appointing all of these members to start 

off with, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I may have inadvertently misled the 

member in the sense that section 54 does say that the 

transitional council will be two representatives recommended 

by the Saskatchewan Psychological Association; two 

recommended by the Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists 

Association, and two recommended by the Psychological 

Society of Saskatchewan. So these people would have to be 

recommended or they couldn’t be appointed within the terms of 

this section. 

 

And then it says three public representatives chosen by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. So the cabinet could choose 

those three people on the recommendation of the Minister of 

Health. 

 

And then it goes on to say in subsection (9) of section 54 that 

those people would pass the necessary bylaws because their job 

is to make the bylaws for the organization so that they could 

have an election among their membership to once they . . . the 

first thing they have to do I suppose, is decide who the members 

will be; so they have to decide who can be admitted — licensed 

and registered. And once they do that, eventually they would 

have an election and the people would be elected. But in the 

first instance, six of them would be recommended by the 

professional organizations and three of them would be 

appointed by the cabinet. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also in subsection (9) 

of 54, I think you mentioned the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council has the ability to determine . . . or to have the bylaw 

powers like it says here: 

 

In addition to making bylaws for any of the purposes set 

out in section 15, the transitional council shall pass any 

necessary bylaws, including those mentioned in clauses 

15(1)(f and (i) for the purpose of conducting an election to 

elect members of the council . . . conduct that election on 

or before a date to be set by . . . 

 

When you’re talking of having the power to set bylaws is that 

. . . in this provision here, you’re just talking about having that 

power to set . . . are you setting the date, or are you setting the 

date in conjunction with conversing with the council to 

determine when that date should be set. Or why don’t you just 

leave the council with the ability to set a date for this election 

without having ministerial approval? 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The reason for that would be that the 

purpose of the transitional council is, you have to appreciate 

that the electorate is not defined to elect the people that will run 

the profession, because since most of the profession has been 

unregulated, you first need a transitional council that will make 

rules with respect to who gets to come in and vote. And one of 

the concerns that various members of the profession have is that 

if you don’t have a fair process to admit people in, then you can 

in effect gerrymander the election. 

 

And what we have to do as government, I think, in terms of 

setting the date, is make sure that the date is set at a time when 

all the people that should fairly have an opportunity to join the 

association and vote have been let in; so that it doesn’t occur 

too early at a time when there are people that should be allowed 

to come in and vote, and that it isn’t left too long, you know, so 

that you delay the election for too long. 

 

And because of the transitional nature of the council, because 

it’s a new profession that has to define its own constituency, if 

you will, I think it’s necessary for the government to ensure that 

everything is done in a fair manner — almost as a returning 

officer would make sure that the rules were properly in place. 

 

But having said all that, I have every confidence that the 

professionals involved on the transitional council will do things 

in a very fair and impartial manner. But it’s like everything else, 

you have to write these things in such a way that you can ensure 

that everything is done in a manner that is really above reproach 

and is fair to everybody. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, based on 

the time it’s taken to put this Act together and the talk of, or 

your recommendation for, an election, when do you perceive 

there would be an election for this position — a year down the 

road? A year and a half down the road? As the council gets up 

and running and sets in place its bylaws, what are your 

perceptions in regards to this and what would you basically as a 

minister like to see? You’ve made a comment about the fact 

you really don’t want it delayed for time and a day but you 

certainly want to see a time period, which would lead me to 

believe that there is a time frame you would hope that you’d be 

able to achieve. And what do you perceive as being a possible 

time frame for the selection process to proceed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would hope within a year and a half to 

two years the elections would take place, the bylaws would be 

in place, and the profession would proceed. But it is a situation 

where it could be earlier or later because the decision would be 

largely out of our hands; it would be determined by the people 

on the transitional council. But that would be my hope. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the minister and 

his officials for their response to the questions and if there’s any 

other concerns or questions I guess would come up, certainly 

we’ll raise them as we go through subvotes. Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

  



1194  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Given that I was in 

deep consultation with the minister of SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance), I would appreciate it if we could go 

back to clause 2. 

 

The Chair:  Before I would go back to clause 2, I would 

have to have leave of the Assembly to do so. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Colleagues, and Mr. Chair, I’d like to 

move the following amendment, and the amendment reads: 

 

Amend clause 2 of the printed Bill by: 

 

(a) renumbering the clause as subclause 2(1); and 

 

(b) by adding a new subclause (2) as follows: 

 

And that would precede where it states college. 

 

“(2) The practice of psychology is the assessment of 

behavioral and mental conditions, the diagnosis of 

neuropsychological disorders and dysfunctions and 

psychotic, neurotic and personality disorders and 

dysfunctions and the prevention and treatment of 

behavioral and mental disorders and dysfunctions and 

the maintenance and enhancement of physical, 

intellectual, emotional, social and interpersonal 

functioning.” 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 3 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’d like to move an amendment to: 

 

Amend Clause 14(1) of the printed Bill by striking out 

“may” where it appears the second time. 

 

It simply corrects a grammatical error. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 15 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to move the  

following amendment: 

 

Amend clause 20 of the printed Bill by deleting 

subclause (a) and substituting the following: 

 

“(a) either: 

 

(i) has a master’s degree in a program that primarily 

consisted of psychology classes from an educational 

institution recognized by the council and has 

successfully completed four years of supervised 

practical experience recognized by the council in 

accordance with the bylaws; or 

 

(ii) has a doctoral degree in a program that primarily 

consisted of psychology classes from an educational 

institution recognized by the council and has 

successfully completed one year of supervised 

practical experience recognized by the council in 

accordance with the bylaws.” 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 20 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 21 and 22 agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I’d like to move an amendment 

to: 

 

Strike out Clause 23(1) of the printed Bill and substitute 

the following: 

 

“(1) An authorized practice is the communication of a 

diagnosis identifying, as the cause of a person’s 

symptoms, a neuropsychological disorder or a 

psychologically-based psychotic, neurotic or personality 

disorder”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like 

to move the following amendment: 

 

Amend clause 24 of the printed Bill by deleting the 

words “use the title “psychologist”” where they occur in 

subclause (2) therein and substituting the following: 

 

“use the title “doctoral psychologist””. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, clause 24 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 24 of the printed Bill by deleting the 

words “use the title “psychologist”” where they occur in 

subclause (3) therein and substituting the following: 

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

 

 “use the title “psychological associate””. 

 

As well in clause 24: 

 

Amend clause 24 of the printed Bill by deleting 

subclause (4) and substituting the following: 

 

“(4) A member who is registered and licensed pursuant 

to section 20 or 21 and practices as an educational 

psychologist must, in written communication, use the 

title “psychological associate (educational)” followed by 

the abbreviation of the degree held by that member.” 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendments negatived. 

 

Clause 24 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 25 to 53 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2030) 

 

Clause 54 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to move the 

following amendment: 

 

Amend clause 54 of the printed Bill by deleting the 

words “two representatives recommended by the 

Saskatchewan Psychological Association” where they 

occur in subclause 2(a) therein, and substituting the 

following: 

 

“four representatives recommended by the Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association”. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 54 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 55 and 56 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I move that we report item no. 

15, Bill No. 47 with amendment. 

 

And just before I sit down, Mr. Chair, also before we vote, I’d 

like to thank the members of the opposition for their very useful 

dialogue with respect to this legislation, and also Mr. Johnston 

for assisting us here today. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I would like to thank the minister and his official for answering 

the questions in a timely fashion, and I look forward to meeting 

with him again. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47  The Psychologists Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  By leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill 

No. 47 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 28. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 28  The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  Minister, would you . . . I understand you have 

at least one new official. Would you introduce . . . No? No, I’m 

sorry. Would you introduce your officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with me 

again Betty Ann Pottruff, director of policy planning and 

evaluation of the Department of Justice; and Susan Amrud, the 

director of legislative services of the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Welcome, Mr. Minister, and welcome to your 

officials. Mr. Minister, this afternoon it would appear that the 

system that we are all here to defend and to ensure works to the 

benefit of our citizens was broken down to the extent that the 

process came off the track — off the track because the agenda 

that was set out by the government was not followed. 

 

Anyone who knows my colleague from Humboldt, and myself, 

will understand the fact that we do not necessarily believe that 

agendas make life run correctly. They just make life run like a 

train on a schedule. Well I learned, Mr. Minister, that the 

process will take precedence and it doesn’t necessarily mean 

that the process will make life better for our citizens. It just 

means life will go on. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, tonight this Bill will be passed as the process 

dictates, but my concern is that the people and more specifically 

the children of this province are not necessarily better off 

because we have chosen to deal only with the money part of 

children’s lives. Money does not make the world go around, 

Mr. Minister. They say love makes the world go around, and 

dealing with this Bill that talks only about financial 

responsibility of people and not the emotional responsibility is a 

hollow Act. We have again forgotten what is really important in 

life. 

 

We wanted . . . or what we wanted this afternoon was for the  

  



1196  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

government to address all the concerns of our children, all the 

concerns of the children whose homes may no longer have the 

family unit as we knew it back in grandpa’s days — concerns 

that dealt with money as well as the love of both parents who 

brought them into the world. 

 

For the record, Mr. Speaker — or Mr. Deputy Chair — we are 

asking that the government consider children’s rights and needs, 

as well as parents’ rights and needs, equally. The needs that will 

ensure that children of Saskatchewan will benefit to the full 

extent of the law that we have in this province. Parents in 

divorce are not arguing over a piece of property — they are 

dealing with their children. Custody and access are terms used 

in the prison system to discuss chattels and property. They are 

not terms we should be using with our children. They are terms 

used in the days of slaves. Are these the terms we want to use 

when we describe our children? 

 

Mr. Minister, our desire is to have both custodial and 

non-custodial parents treated equally. It is the government’s 

responsibility to ensure that they do have their rights. And how 

can we do that? Is it a feasible suggestion that government pay 

for the application to courts to ensure accessible rights are 

upheld and paid for by the system? Governments enforce court 

orders for a custodial parent. Why must non-custodial parents 

have to pay up to $2,500 to ensure that their rights, determined 

by the courts already, are upheld? I even question how 

non-custodial parents even know about the option of going to 

court to appeal, or whatever the term may be, to give the 

non-custodial parent the right to fight. 

 

Mr. Minister, we will be keeping our eyes on this Bill. We want 

to ensure that there are no adverse effects because of the 

legislation that causes hardship or animosity. We will then be 

urging government to amend the guidelines. 

 

Mr. Minister, I do not question your intentions or your desire to 

ensure that children in Saskatchewan are treated with the 

respect and dignity deserving of all of our citizens. I am 

questioning whether you are using all your powers to guarantee 

that our children are protected financially as well as 

emotionally. I can only trust that you and your government will 

work at full speed with the only objective in mind to protect our 

children — setting aside politics, setting aside feelings, and 

setting aside life’s mundane problems — and work to ensure 

that our children have the love and the nurturing and the caring 

of both parents. 

 

Mr. Minister, I don’t have any questions on this Bill and I don’t 

have any questions on the motives. I just question how soon 

you will enforce your department’s move on enforcing the 

access rights. And on behalf of all the non-custodial parents in 

this province, I ask you to hurry. 

 

(2045) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, may I have leave to make a brief 

response to the comments made earlier before we proceed 

through the rest of them? I can make the comments as it relates 

to clause 6, if you wish. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I very much appreciated your 

comments, especially as it relates, as you say, to the 

non-custodial parents who are caught in what they often feel 

like is a trap where many parts of the judicial machinery, if I 

can use that word, force them to pay, but they feel like they 

can’t share in their children’s lives. 

 

And I agree — and I have for many, many years — that the 

terms that we use, of custody and access, often are part of the 

problem and that when you talk about shared parenting or 

parental responsibility or joint parenting, those kinds of terms 

speak more to what people really feel when they’re involved in 

a relationship that breaks up and they’re still trying to provide 

everything for their children. 

 

And I guess all I can say is what I’ve said previously, is that we 

know that this is a concern that we have to address, and we’re 

working at it. I think I can say without any doubt that we in 

Saskatchewan, as far as the legislation goes in The Children’s 

Law Act, have some if not the most progressive legislation in 

this area in Canada. The only other province that has legislation 

with some of the provisions that we have is Newfoundland. And 

the reason they have it is that they copied what we did. 

 

So I guess what I would say is, on the legislation part, we’ve 

done some things. But that doesn’t mean that we’re going to 

give up on some of the ideas that you’ve suggested or that we 

will not work in this area to see if we can’t make sure that all 

children have the love and care of both their parents and 

extended families. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 7 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to move the Bill without 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, just before I do that, I’d like to thank 

my officials who are with me today and who have been working 

on this particular issue I know for quite a number of years. Also 

like to thank members of the opposition for their questions and 

comments, and I do encourage them to monitor everything we 

do in this area to make sure that we get the best for 

Saskatchewan people. And with those comments then, I move 

that we report this Bill without amendment. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 

And I do know that we are all working towards a common goal 

in making sure that Saskatchewan is the best place to raise our 

children. So thank you. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28  The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 9:10 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 24 - The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings 

Transfer Act/Loi sur la compétence des 

tribunaux et le renvoi des instances 

Bill No. 23 - The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements 

canadiens 

Bill No. 25 - The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 39 - The Multiculturalism Act 

Bill No. 47 - The Psychologists Act, 1997 

Bill No. 28 - The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 

1997 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 9:13 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:14 p.m. 

 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Haverstock ..................................................................................................................................................................... 1183, 1194 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1190 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

 Bill No. 28  The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1183 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 47  The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

 Bill No. 28  The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1197 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1197 

 


